SAFETY HARBOR CITY CODE SAFETY HARBOR, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 1983 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF SAFETY HARBOR, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Joe Ayoub 
Mayor-Commissioner 
____________ 
Carlos Diaz 
Scott Long 
Cliff Merz 
Andy Zodrow 
City Commission 
____________ 
Matthew Spoor 
City Manager 
____________ 
Alan S. Zimmet 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Karen Sammons, CMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Safety Harbor, Florida, of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1970 Code of Safety Harbor, as supplemented through November 5, 1979, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1970 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth the location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the decimal system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a decimal point, the figure before the decimal point representing the chapter number and the figure after the decimal point indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1.01 and the sixth section of Chapter 23 is 23.06. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material that would logically come between sections 24.01 and 24.02 is desired to be added, such new section could be numbered 24.01.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Robert L. Hoskins, III, City Attorney, John J. Downes, City Manager and Bonita Haynes, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
	Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 83-52 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SAFETY HARBOR, FLORIDA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SAFETY HARBOR, FLORIDA, AND ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING AND SUPPLEMENTING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW, AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF SAFETY HARBOR, FLORIDA, IN SESSION DULY AND REGULARLY ASSEMBLED, that: 
Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 26, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Safety Harbor City Code," which shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before March 21, 1983, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of final passage and adoption of this ordinance, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City, adopted on final passage on or before March 21, 1983, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of the Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, as provided in section 1.12 of the Code. 
Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the governing body to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. In case of amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1.12 of the Code, shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. Any ordinance adopted after March 21, 1983, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall be published in accordance with the requirements of law. 
Section 9. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its final passage and adoption. 
PASSED ON FIRST READING DECEMBER 19, 1983. 
PASSED ON SECOND READING JANUARY 3, 1984. 
PASSED ON THIRD AND FINAL READING JANUARY 16, 1984. 
	John H. Williams 
Mayor-Commissioner 
	A. Velsor Terry 
Commissioner 
	Claude Rigsby 
Commissioner 
ATTEST: 	Alton R. Dettmer 
Commissioner 
Bonita Haynes 
City Clerk 	Clementine S. McNulty 
Commissioner 
  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
We the people of the City of Safety Harbor, under the constitution and laws of the state of Florida, in order to secure the benefits of local self-government and to provide for an honest and accountable commission-manager government, do hereby adopt this Charter and confer upon the city the powers stated in this Charter, subject to the limitations provided in the charter. By adopting this Charter, we secure the benefits of home rule and affirm the values of representative democracy, professional management, strong political leadership, citizen participation, and regional cooperation. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city; amended by and adopted as passed at referendum on March 10, 2015. Prior to such amendment, the Charter consisted of those ordinances as are listed in the Charter Comparative Table within this Code; and Chapter 61-2735, Laws of Florida. History notes have been included for each section to show derivation. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the amendments as adopted March 10, 2015. Correction of grammatical or other errors are indicated in brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 1. - Creation and powers. 
The City of Safety Harbor, Florida is hereby created and shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Florida as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter and so as to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, render municipal services, and perform all proprietary functions instrumental to the exercise of municipal functions and the rendition of municipal services.  
Section 2. - Effect of this Charter on existing law. 
All laws and parts of laws relating to or affecting the City in force when this Charter shall take effect are hereby repealed and superseded to the extent that the same are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter; insofar as the provisions of this Charter are the same in terms or in substance and effect as provisions of law in force when this Charter shall take effect, relating to or affecting the City, the provisions of this Charter are not intended to be a new enactment but a continuation of such provisions of law, and this Charter shall be so construed and applied.  
Section 3. - Construction. 
The powers of the City, whether they be enumerated in this Charter, enacted by special legislation, or granted pursuant to general law, shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, limited only by the Florida Constitution, general law, and specific limitations contained herein. Future special acts pertaining to the jurisdiction and exercise of powers by this City shall be considered amendments to this Charter and, pursuant to the provisions adopted for incorporation of other Charter amendments, shall be incorporated as official amendments to the Charter.  
Section 4. - Boundaries; corporate limits. 
The boundaries and corporate limits of the City of Safety Harbor shall be as prescribed by special act and/or annexation ordinances of the City and shall be modified from time to time in accordance with law.  
Section 5. - Ordinances preserved; Charter and ordinances reviewed. 
All ordinances in effect upon the adoption of this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall remain in full force until repealed or amended as provided herein. This Charter and the ordinances enacted hereunder shall be reviewed on an automatic basis by a committee appointed by the City Commission. The comprehensive Charter review shall occur every ten (10) years in conjunction with a regular City election, and the comprehensive ordinance review shall occur every five (5) years, beginning in 1987. This provision shall not be construed to limit the power of the City Commission to alter or amend any provision of the City Charter at any time.  
Section 6. - Rights of officers and employees. 
Nothing in this Charter except as otherwise provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are City officers or employees at the time of adoption. Elected officials shall continue to hold their offices and discharge the duties thereof until their successors are elected.  
Section 7. - Pending matters. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings involving the City shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter.  
Section 8. - Jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction and powers of the City of Safety Harbor shall extend over all streets, alleys, sewers, parks and all lands within the corporate limits thereof, whether platted or unplatted, and in the air above same; and to and over all waters, waterways, streams, bays, bayous, submerged lands, water bottoms and wharves; and to and over all persons, firms and corporations, property and property rights, occupations, businesses and professions whatsoever, within said corporate limits; and over all property owned, leased or operated by the City outside the corporate limits. The title to and jurisdiction over all streets, thoroughfares, parks, alleys, public lots, sewers, within the City, and all property and municipal plants of the City now owned, possessed or operated by it, and all property of every kind and character, which the City may hereafter acquire within or outside the City, or which may vest in it, or be dedicated to it, for its use or for the public use, shall be vested in the City of Safety Harbor, as created under this Charter.  
Section 9. - Gender neutrality. 
In this Charter, the words "he" or "his" shall include the female gender.  
Section 10. - No simultaneous annexation and zoning of property. 
The City of Safety Harbor, Florida shall not both annex and zone the same property at the same meeting of the Commission.  
Section 11. - Ethics and conflict of interest. 
The state legislature has adopted a comprehensive code of ethics for public officers and employees, found in Chapter 112, Part III, Florida Statutes, which applies to the City.  
[Sections 12—14. - Reserved.]  
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT AND LEGISLATIVE FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Section 15. - Commissioner—Manager plan. 
The form of government of the City of Safety Harbor, provided for under this Charter, shall be known as the "Commissioner—Manager Plan." There shall be a City Manager who shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City. The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Commission for the administration of all City affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. Subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution, the laws of this State and this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elected Commission, herein referred to as "The City Commission," or "The Commission." All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner provided by this Charter, or if the manner be not so provided, then in such manner as may be set forth by ordinance.  
Section 16. - City commission powers; composition; selection. 
There is hereby created a Commission with all legislative powers of the City vested therein consisting of one (1) Mayor-Commissioner and four (4) Commissioners, who shall be elected at large to numbered seats.  
Section 17. - Powers vested in commission; limitations. 
All powers of the City except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by the Constitution of the State of Florida, are hereby vested in the Commission; and except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by the Constitution of the State of Florida, the Commission may by ordinance or resolution prescribe the manner in which any powers of the City shall be exercised.  
Section 18. - Duties of the charter officers. 
The Mayor-Commissioner, the City Manager and the City Attorney shall severally perform the following duties: 
(1)  The Mayor-Commissioner and the City Clerk shall sign all bonds issued by the City. 
(2)  All contracts, agreements, leases and other instruments to which the City is a party and under which the City assumes any liability shall be executed in the name of the City by the Mayor-Commissioner and the City Manager, attested by the City Clerk, and the form of such instrument shall be approved by the City Attorney, or Assistant City Attorney, if any, unless directed otherwise by the City Commission. Provided, however, that where by ordinance, rule, or regulation, the execution of short-term leases or other instruments is delegated to another person, such instrument may be executed in the manner provided by such ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(3)  All checks for the payment of money by the City shall be signed by both the Mayor-Commissioner and the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be responsible for any and all signature plates.  
Section 19. - Vacancy. 
(a)  If by reason of death, resignation, forfeiture of office, removal or inability to serve as Commissioner, a vacancy shall exist on the Commission, the remaining Commissioners shall appoint by majority vote a person otherwise qualified to be a Commissioner, and the person so appointed shall serve as an interim Commissioner until his successor is elected and qualified at the next regular municipal election or a special election called in accordance with subsection (c) below. 
(b)  If the Commission does not appoint a person to fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days after the first regular Commission meeting held after the vacancy has occurred, the Governor shall appoint an interim Commissioner who shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified at the next regular municipal election or a special election called in accordance with subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Special election. 
(1)  If there is more than one year remaining in the Commissioner's term at the time an appointee, appointed under subsections (a) or (b) above, takes office, the Commission shall call a special election. The special election shall be held fifteen (15) days or more prior to the expiration of one year from the date the appointee took office. Any person elected at such a special election shall serve the unexpired portion of the entire term. 
(2)  If there is one year or less remaining in the Commissioner's term at the time an appointee, appointed under subparagraphs (a) or (b) above, takes office, the appointee shall serve until the next regular municipal election. At the next regular municipal election, a person shall be elected to serve in accordance with Section 50 of this Charter.  
Section 20. - Qualifications and disqualifications of commissioners. 
(a)  Each member of the Commission, including the Mayor-Commissioner, shall have been a continuous resident of the City, or any area which has been annexed by the City, for a period of one (1) year immediately preceding the date of the election and shall be a registered elector of the City. Candidates for election for the office of Commissioner or Mayor-Commissioner shall comply with all the rules and regulations set forth in this Charter, and ordinances enacted by authority thereof, as to their conduct. 
(b)  A member of the Commission, including the Mayor-Commissioner, shall forfeit that office if the Commissioner or Mayor-Commissioner: 
(1)  lacks, at any time during the term of office for which elected, any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law; 
(2)  violates any express prohibition of this charter; 
(3)  is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(4)  fails to attend two (2) consecutive regular meetings of the Commission or a total of four (4) regular meetings of the Commission during any twelve (12) month period without being excused by the Commission. After the Mayor-Commissioner or any Commissioner has incurred such absences, the City Manager shall agenda the matter for consideration by the City Commission so that a majority of the remaining Commission members may determine whether said absences were excusable.  
Section 21. - Organization meeting; appointment of vice-mayor. 
At the first regular meeting following certification of the results of a regular election, the Commission shall meet at the usual place for holding meetings of the Commission, at which time the newly elected Commissioners shall assume the duties of their respective offices. At such meeting the Mayor-Commissioner shall appoint one (1) of the four (4) Commissioners as vice-mayor who shall serve a one-year term or until his successor is appointed and who shall serve in the absence of the Mayor-Commissioner.  
Section 22. - Not to dictate appointment, termination or suspension of employees. 
Neither the Commission nor any of the members thereof shall dictate the appointment, termination, or suspension of any City administrative officer or employee appointed by the City Manager, or in any manner prevent the City Manager from using his own judgment in selecting those officers and employees whom he is entitled to appoint or select under the provisions of this Charter. However, the appointment of the department heads shall be brought to the attention of the City Commission by the City Manager through written notice. No former elected City official shall hold any compensated appointive City office or employment until two (2) years after the expiration of the term for which he was elected or appointed. Except for the purposes of inquiry, the Commission and the members thereof shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the Commission nor any of the members thereof shall give orders to subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. The foregoing shall not be construed as prohibiting individual members from closely scrutinizing by questions and personal observation of all aspects of the City government. Nothing herein contained shall restrict the power of the Commission at regular or special meetings by formal motion, resolution, or ordinance from establishing policies and requiring compliance therewith by all personnel in the service of the City.  
Section 23. - Salary; compensation; expenses. 
The City Commission shall determine the annual salary of the Mayor-Commissioner and Commissioners by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary shall become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of the Mayor-Commissioner or Commissioners elected at the next regular election. Each fiscal year, the City Commission shall set the limit on the actual and necessary expenses the Mayor-Commissioner and the Commissioners may receive.  
Section 24. - Regular meetings. 
The Commission shall meet regularly at such time as may be specified by resolution, except that it shall meet regularly not less than once each month.  
Section 25. - Special meetings. 
The Mayor-Commissioner, or the City Manager, or any two (2) Commissioners at any Commission meeting may call Special Meetings of the Commission upon at least twenty-four (24) hours['] written notice, served personally or left at the usual places of residence, to each Commissioner, the City Manager, the City Clerk, and the City Attorney; provided that this requirement for twenty-four (24) hours['] notice may be waived in the case of an emergency.  
Section 26. - Meeting places, rules, and regulations. 
All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the usual place of holding meetings of the Commission; provided, however, meetings may be held elsewhere in north Pinellas County under authority of a Resolution previously adopted authorizing such meeting. The Commission shall prescribe its own rules, regulations, and order of business.  
Section 27. - Quorum. 
A majority of all the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum without the presence of any other officer or employee of the City being required. However, a lesser number of the Commissioners may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Section 28. - Motions, ordinances and resolutions. 
The City Commission shall act only by motion, ordinance or resolution.  
Section 29. - Minimum votes necessary to pass motions, ordinances or resolutions. 
The affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Commission shall be necessary to pass any motion, to pass any ordinance on a reading, or to adopt any resolutions. The passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by roll call and entered upon the minutes. The passage of motions shall be by voice vote.  
Section 30. - Initiative and referendum. 
(a)  Initiative. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the Commission and, if the Commission fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a City election. 
(b)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the Commission of any intended sale or lease of public property, or the adoption of any ordinance, and if the Commission fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a City election.  
Section 31. - Commencement of proceedings. 
(a)  Any five (5) qualified voters, which shall not include the Mayor-Commissioner or any Commissioner, may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the City Clerk or other City official designated by the Commission in an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioner's committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
(b)  Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission may, at the committee's request, issue the appropriate blanks to the petitioners' committee at the committee's expense.  
Section 32. - Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petition must be signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten (10%) percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular City election. 
(b)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Affidavit of circulator. The number of circulators shall be unlimited. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signature of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Request for deletion of name. Within two (2) business days of filing of the petition any signer shall have a right to file with the City Clerk a demand in writing that his name be deleted and stricken from the petition, and upon the filing of such demand, the name of such signer shall be stricken by the Clerk and not counted in the total of the qualified voters signing the petition. 
(e)  Time for filing referendum petition. Referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the Commission of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered, or within thirty (30) days after the City Commission votes to sell or lease public property.  
Section 33. - Procedure for filing. 
(a)  Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the initiative petition is filed and five (5) days for a referendum petition, the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. Grounds for insufficiency are only those specified in Section 32. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission within two (2) days after receiving the copy of the certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections "b" and "c" of Section 32, and within five (5) days after it is filed the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request Commission review under subsection "b" of this section within the time required, the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission shall promptly present his certificate to the Commission and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  Commission review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if any amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the Commission. The Commission shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the Commission's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition.  
Section 34. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
(a)  When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission, the ordinance or sale of public property sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or 
(3)  The Commission repeals the ordinance, or cancels the sale of public property; or 
(4)  After a vote of the City on the ordinance or sale of public property has been certified. 
(b)  When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission, the lease of public property shall terminate when: 
(1)  The Commission terminates the lease; or 
(2)  After a vote of the City on the lease of public property has been certified.  
Section 35. - Action on petition. 
(a)  Action by commission. When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Commission shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance utilizing the procedures prescribed under the subheading, "Motions, Ordinances and Resolutions", of this Charter, or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Commission fails to adopt a proposed initiative without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City. 
(b)  Submission to voters. The vote of the City on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held at the next regularly scheduled election, or on a date when the Supervisor of Elections is able to support an election. Notice of the election shall be published at least two (2) times in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, in accordance with state statute. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinances shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Withdrawal of petitions. An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth (15) day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the City by filing with the City Clerk or other official designated by the Commission a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon filing of such request and approval by the Commission, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated.  
Section 36. - Results of election. 
(a)  Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Commission. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail as to the conflicting provisions. Within one (1) year of its enactment, an initiated ordinance shall only be repealed or amended by another initiated ordinance dealing with the same subject matter; thereafter, it may be repealed or amended by the City Commission. 
(b)  Referendum. 
(1)  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. The Commission may not readopt the ordinance within one year of the date of the certification of the election result without approval of the qualified electors voting in a referendum election on the ordinance. 
(2)  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred sale or lease of public property vote against it, the sale or lease shall be considered terminated upon certification of the election results. The lessee or purchaser of public property shall be presumed to have notice of this provision and the City shall have no liability to the lessee or purchaser if the lease or sale is terminated in accordance with this Article.  
Section 37. - Recall petition. 
The qualified voters of the City shall have the power to recall and to remove from office any elected official of the City as provided by general law.  
[Sections 38, 39. - Reserved.]  
ARTICLE III. - CITY OFFICERS 
 
Section 40. - Mayor-Commissioner—Functions and duties. 
The Mayor-Commissioner, or in his absence or disqualification, the Vice Mayor, shall perform the following functions and duties: 
(1)  He shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and maintain order and decorum. He shall have the right to limit the time a person shall be permitted to speak upon a given subject; provided that if there is a public hearing, every person shall be permitted to speak on a given subject. He shall have the right to follow an order of business by written agenda, if desired. He shall have the right to expel or take the appropriate legal action against any person who refuses to obey the order of the Mayor-Commissioner in relation to preserving order and decorum at the meeting. 
(2)  He shall have a voice and vote in the proceedings of the commission, but no veto power. He shall vote last upon the roll call of Commissioners. He may offer motions, resolutions and ordinances. 
(3)  He shall be recognized as the head of City government for all ceremonial purposes, by the Governor for purposes of military law and for service of process. The Vice Mayor shall act as the Mayor-Commissioner during the absence or disability of the Mayor-Commissioner. In the event that Mayor-Commissioner and regular Vice Mayor should be absent at any meeting of the Commission, any Commissioner may be designated Vice Mayor for such meeting by the remaining Commissioners. 
(4)  He shall exercise all of the powers and duties of the Mayor-Commissioner as may be conferred upon him by the Commission in pursuance of the provisions of this Charter and general law and no others.  
Section 41. - City Manager—Appointment; compensation; qualifications; removal. 
(a)  The Commission shall appoint a City Manager by resolution or contract for an indefinite term. The compensation of the City Manager shall be fixed by the Commission. He shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualification, without regard to his political beliefs. He shall be over the age of twenty-one (21) years and he need not be a resident of the City or State at the time of his appointment. The City Manager shall reside in the City within one (1) year of the date he takes office, but may reside outside the City only with the approval of the Commission. This residency requirement shall not apply to a city manager appointed prior to March 10, 2015. 
(b)  The City Manager may be removed by the Commission with or without cause at any time by the passage of a resolution designating such removal and such resolution shall require three (3) affirmative votes. There shall be no appeal by the City Manager from the Commission's action and the action of the Commission shall be final and conclusive and the City Manager is deemed to have knowledge of this provision of the Charter at the time of his employment and such provision shall be construed as part of his contract for employment.  
Section 42. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the Commission, the City Manager shall designate a qualified City administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the City Manager during his temporary absence or disability. After an absence or disability of greater than thirty (30) days, the Commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the City to serve until the City Manager shall return or his disability shall cease.  
Section 43. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
The City Manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint, and when he deems it necessary for the good of the City, to suspend or remove all City employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(2)  Fix the compensation of all officers and employees of the City, except the City Manager and City Attorney and except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general law; 
(3)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Attend all Commission meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion, but shall not vote; 
(5)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Commission, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(6)  Prepare and submit the annual budget, budget message, and capital program to the Commission in a form provided by ordinance; 
(7)  Submit to the Commission and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(8)  Make such other reports as the Commission may require concerning the operations of City departments, offices and agencies, subject to his direction and supervision; 
(9)  Keep the Commission fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Commission concerning the affairs of the City as he deems desirable; 
(10)  Make purchases and expenditures and execute contracts on behalf of the City without the approval of the City Commission if such contracts or expenditures or purchases do not exceed an amount set by the City Commission from time to time by resolution. Items, articles, services or property customarily purchased in a unit or together shall not be contracted for in sections, divisions, or parts nor purchased in installments or increments in order to avoid this provision; 
(11)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed; and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the Commission; and 
(12)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the Commission.  
Section 44. - City clerk—appointment and qualifications. 
The City Clerk shall be hired by the City Manager subject to the approval of the City Commission, and may be fired by the City Manager subject to the approval of the City Commission.  
Section 45. - Power and duties of the city clerk. 
The City Clerk shall be the head of the department of records and shall coordinate these with the City Manager. In addition, the City Clerk shall: 
(1)  Give notice of Commission meetings to its members and the public and shall keep the record of its proceedings which shall be a public record; 
(2)  Be the custodian of all records, documents and papers of the City; 
(3)  Attest all contracts and agreements to which the City is a party and all resolutions and ordinances; 
(4)  Be the custodian of the seal of the City and is authorized to fix the same to such instruments of writing as necessary; 
(5)  Supervise the City elections; 
(6)  Be responsible for the supervision of all the City Clerk Department personnel; 
(7)  Administer oaths as necessary; 
(8)  Attend all meetings of the City Commission, and keep a true and correct record of all such proceedings; 
(9)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the City Commission as well as other duties as required by the laws of Florida, and further, the City Clerk shall comply with administrative regulations.  
Section 46. - City attorney—Appointment; duties; qualification; removal. 
The Commission shall appoint by resolution the City Attorney, who shall advise the City in all legal matters and who shall perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter or by the general law or by the City Commission; the City Attorney shall be an attorney admitted to the Bar and having the authority to practice in all courts of this State. The Commission shall fix the compensation of the City Attorney by resolution. The Commission may remove the City Attorney, by resolution, with or without cause, and said resolution shall require three (3) affirmative votes.  
[Sections 47—49. - Reserved.]  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 50. - Elections. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the regular election of the Mayor-Commissioner and the Commissioners shall be held on the second Tuesday of March of each year and shall be for a three-year term. Elected Commissioners shall take office at the next regular or special meeting of the Commission following the certification of the results of their election, whichever occurs first, and shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. The Mayor-Commissioner and one (1) Commissioner shall be elected one year and the three (3) additional Commissioners shall be elected the following year. 
(b)  The City Commission shall by ordinance make all regulations which it considers necessary or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or general law, for the conduct of municipal elections and for the prevention of fraud therein. Inspectors and the clerks of the election shall be appointed by the City Commission. The City Commission may provide for any municipal election to be held in conjunction with a county-wide election.  
Section 51. - Electors. 
All persons qualified to vote as electors of this State, under the Constitution and statutes of the State of Florida, who reside within the corporate boundaries of the City of Safety Harbor, and who are duly registered on the registration books of Pinellas County, shall be qualified electors of the City of Safety Harbor in all elections except as otherwise provided by general law.  
Section 52. - General elections prescribed by state law or ordinance. 
All elections shall be called by resolution or ordinance of the Commission, and except as herein specifically provided, shall be conducted substantially as prescribed by the general election laws of the State of Florida or as the City Commission by ordinance may prescribe. All nominations and elections for the City Commission shall be conducted without regard for or designation of political party affiliations.  
Section 53. - Determination of qualifications of candidates; canvass of returns; certificate of elections. 
It is the responsibility of the City Commission in office at the time of the election to determine the qualifications of candidates, canvass the votes and certify the election as provided by ordinance. However, the County Canvassing Board may canvass the votes of a municipal election when approved by the City Commission.  
Section 54. - Qualifying statement. 
(a)  Each candidate for election to the City Commission as Commissioner or Mayor-Commissioner shall file with the City Clerk a qualifying statement in substantially the following form: 
"I am a candidate for the seat on the City Commission as (Commissioner) (Mayor-Commissioner)* in the election of _______ and I agree to serve if I am elected. I am a qualified elector of the City of Safety Harbor and meet all the qualifications for election to the City Commission as Commissioner or Mayor-Commissioner. 
/s/ 
Signature of Candidate 
(b)  Such qualifying statement shall not be filed sooner than noon on the seventy-fourth day prior to the election, but not later than noon of the sixty-third day prior to the date of the election or as mandated by Florida Statute and shall be accompanied by such qualifying fees as may be set by ordinance. Each candidate for Commissioner and Mayor-Commissioner shall file with the City Clerk a petition signed by one hundred (100) registered voters within the City of Safety Harbor, supporting his or her candidacy for Mayor-Commissioner or Commissioner before qualifications.  
Section 55. - Judge of election and qualification of commissioners. 
Subject to review by the Courts, the Commission shall be the judge of all municipal elections and referendums and of the qualifications of Commissioners, and for such purposes shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records. At the time that the Commission or County Canvassing Board meets to canvass the results of any election, any elector of the City shall be entitled to file with the Commission or County Canvassing Board an affidavit setting out the facts showing that a candidate has violated the provisions of this Charter as to the manner of his election, or is otherwise unqualified to hold office, and the Commission or County Canvassing Board shall take proof at such meeting and declare the results.  
[Sections 56—59. - Reserved.]  
ARTICLE V. - ADVISORY AND QUASI-JUDICIAL BOARDS 
 
Section 60. - Planning and zoning board and zoning board of appeal. 
A City Planning and Zoning Board and a Zoning Board of Appeal are hereby created and established. The City Commission shall by ordinance make all powers and duties which it considers necessary or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or general law, for the establishment, membership, conduct, duties and authority of the Planning and Zoning Board and the Zoning Board of Appeal.  
Section 61. - General power to create advisory boards. 
The Commission may at any time, by ordinance or resolution, create other boards to act in an advisory or quasi-judicial capacity. The ordinance or resolution creating such board shall specify the powers and duties of such board, and the number, appointment and qualification of its members. The Commission may at any time, by ordinance or resolution, abolish any existing board and transfer the duties of same to any other board, an employee or Department. All members of all advisory and Quasi-Judicial Boards unless otherwise specified, shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission, and without compensation. The City Manager shall be an ex-official member of all Advisory Boards, without power to vote. All boards may adopt their own rules and regulations.  
Section 62. - Personnel system. 
(a)  All appointments and promotions of City officers and employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence. There shall be a personnel officer, appointed by the City Manager, who shall administer the personnel system of the City. 
(b)  The City Commission shall create a Personnel Review Board and shall provide by ordinance for the membership and powers and duties of the Personnel Review Board. 
(c)  The City Commission shall adopt, with or without amendment, personnel rules and regulations drafted by the personnel officer and approved by the City Manager. These rules shall provide for the classification of all City positions, a pay plan for all City positions, methods of determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment or promotion, policies and procedures regulating discipline of employees and reductions in force, including procedures for the hearing of grievances by the Personnel Review Board, and other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of the City's personnel system.  
[Sections 63, 64. - Reserved.]  
ARTICLE VI. - FRANCHISES 
 
Section 65. - Granting franchises. 
The Commission may by ordinance, after public notice and public hearing, grant a franchise to any individual, company, firm or corporation to exercise proprietary functions in the City and to construct and operate any and all public utilities in the City and in, under or over the streets and public places of the City, and to use such public property in connection therewith; but no such grant or franchise or renewal thereof shall be for a longer period than thirty (30) years. No such grant or franchise shall be exclusive, and shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the Commission shall impose. Such franchise or grant shall be evidenced by an agreement in writing, executed in duplicate, with a copy recorded in the public records of the City. All such individuals or corporations performing functions under such franchises shall be liable for damages occasioned by the acts, negligence or injuries to the rights of others, and the City shall not be liable therefore. Franchises may be amended by mutual consent with the same formality.  
Section 66. - Rates to be charged. 
Where the rates to be charged by any public utility company are regulated by a state or federal agency, the Commission shall have no power to fix such rate, but when not so regulated, the grant, agreement or franchise shall provide that the rates to be charged at all times shall be under the supervision, direction and control of the Commission, and no rate shall be in effect unless same is approved by the Commission; provided the rate allowed shall be sufficient to insure a reasonable return on the investment.  
Section 67. - Conditions of grant or franchise. 
The Commission shall, in the written franchise agreement or in the ordinance granting or renewing any franchise to construct and operate a public utility or to use public property, prescribe the amount of money, fees, percentage of gross income and consideration which shall be paid for such franchise, kind and quality of use, service or product to be furnished, the manner in which public streets and public places shall be used and occupied, and other terms and conditions conducive to the public interest. All such grants and renewals thereof shall reserve to the City the right to terminate the same upon purchase by the City of the property and property rights of the utility and the extensions thereof within and without the City, used in or useful in or connected with such utility and including all contracts for service or motive power fairly and reasonably made in good faith by the utility, at a price either fixed in the ordinance or agreement or to be fixed in the manner provided in the ordinance making the grant or renewal of the grant. Nothing in such ordinance shall prevent the City from acquiring said property of any such utility by condemnation proceedings, or in any other lawful manner; and all such methods of acquisition shall be alternative to the power to purchase reserved in the grant or renewal thereof as herein provided. Upon the acquisition by the City of the property of any utility by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, all franchises, grants or renewals shall at once terminate.  
Section 68. - Assignment of grants. 
No such grant or franchise, or renewals thereof, shall be leased, assigned, or otherwise alienated, except with the consent of the Commission expressed by resolution, and evidenced by a written assignment and consent to same.  
Section 69. - Right of regulation. 
All grants shall be subject to the rights of the City, whether in terms reserved or not, to control at all times distribution of any space in, over, across or under all streets, alleys, public grounds or other public places, occupied by public utility fixtures, and when, in the opinion of the Commission, the public interest so requires to cause such fixtures to be reconstructed, relocated, altered or discontinued at the expense of the holder of the franchise; and said City shall at all times have the power to pass all regulatory ordinances affecting utilities which, in the opinion of the Commission, are required in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or accommodation.  
[Sections 70—74. - Reserved.]  
ARTICLE VII. - ANNUAL BUDGET AND TAX LEVY 
 
Section 75. - Adoption of budget and millage rate. 
The City Commission shall adopt the budget and millage rate in accordance with the procedures set forth in state statute.  
Section 76. - Reserved.  
Section 77. - Effective date of budget; certification; copies made available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the Clerk. The budget shall be made available for inspection or copying in accordance with the Public Records Law. From the effective date of the budget the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.  
Section 78. - Property taxable. 
All property, in the City, unless exempted in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida, shall be subject to taxation by the City.  
Section 79. - Capital projects program. 
The budget process shall include a five year capital projects program. The capital projects program shall include a list of all capital improvements and other capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each.  
Section 80. - Transfer of funds during current year. 
The Commission, by motion duly recorded in the minutes, shall have authority to transfer appropriated budgeted amounts from one department, division, fund or project to another municipal department, division, fund or project, under the following conditions and limitations: 
(1)  There shall be no transfer of specially pledged funds until the purpose for which the pledge has been fulfilled or abandoned. Specially pledged funds are those funds that are specifically promised or allocated towards the repayment of a debt. 
(2)  Whenever it is apparent that the full amount of any appropriation made to any office, department or project is not needed or necessary for the purpose for which appropriated during the current year, the surplus amount may be appropriated to other projects, offices or departments. 
(3)  The Commission may establish a contingency account within the General Fund to meet unexpected contingencies.  
Section 81. - Unencumbered balance at end of fiscal year. 
At the close of the fiscal year, the unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall be re-appropriated by the Commission in the next annual budget, except that specially pledged funds shall remain intact, and monies on hand in such specially pledged funds shall be carried over into the new budget for the ensuing year, to the credit of such funds, provided however, this shall not prohibit the establishment of sinking funds or contingency accounts from surplus funds.  
[Sections 82—84. - Reserved.]  
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Section 85. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.  
Section 86. - Conflicting laws. 
All City ordinances, resolutions, orders, and regulations which are in force when this Charter becomes fully effective are repealed to the extent and only to the extent that they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.  
ARTICLE IX. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE 
 
Section 87. - Transition schedule. 
The amended provisions of this Charter shall be effective upon referendum approval and certification of the results of the referendum. The City Commission elected in the future shall serve their terms and be governed by Article IV.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Charter of the various ordinances therein. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adoption 
  Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
81-50 	 1- 4-82 	 1 	3 
		 2 	5 
		 3 	6 
		 4 	1.06 
			7 
			Pt. I, App. B 
		 5 	8 
		 6 	9 
		 7 	10 
		11 	13 
		12 	14 
		13 	16 
		14 	17 
		15 	18 
		16 	19 
		17 	20 
		18 	21 
		19 	22 
		20 	23 
		21 	24 
		22 	25 
		23 	26 
		24 	27 
		25 	28 
		26 	29 
		27 	30 
		28 	31 
		29 	32 
		30 	33 
		31 	34 
		32 	35 
		33 	36 
		34 	37 
		35 	38 
		36 	39 
		42 	40 
		43 	41 
		44 	42 
		45 	43 
		46 	44 
		47 	45 
		48 	46 
		49 	47 
		50 	48 
		55 	50 
		56 	51 
		57 	52 
		58 	53 
		59 	54 
		62 	56 
		66 	104 
		67 	105 
		68 	111 
		72 	139 
		73 	140 
85-78 	 1-20-86 	1 	45(9) 
85-79 	 1-20-86 	1 	54(b) 
85-80 	 1-20-86 	1 	14 
85-81 	 1-20-86 	1 	20 
85-82 	 1-20-86 	2       Rpld 	12(3), (4), 
			(19), (31), 
			(34)—(37), 
			(41), (46), 
			27, 28, 30 
			31, 56—103, 
			112, 113 
87-48 	12-21-87 	1 	54(b) 
92-36 	12-21-92 	1 	1—11, 
			15—37, 
			40—47, 
			50—55, 
			60, 61 
			65—69, 
			75—81, 
			85—87 
92-37 	12-21-92 	1 	50 
2004-27 	12- 6-2004 	1 	2 
		2 	5 
		3 	20 
		4 	32(a) 
		5 	41(a) 
		6 	44 
		7       Rpld 	47 
		8 	66 
		9 	68 
		10 	75 
		11       Rpld 	76 
		12 	78 
		13 	87 
2008-15 	 9- 3-2008 	1 	50 
		2, 3 	53, 54 
Amend. of 	 3-10-2015 	      Dltd 	1—87 
		      Added 	1—87 
  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LAWS OF FLORIDA 
 The table shows the location of the Laws of Florida included herein. 
Laws of Fla. 
Chapter 	Section 	Section  
this Charter 
61-2735 		Pt. I(note) 
		Pt. I, 5 
		Pt. I, App. B 
	1 	Pt. I, 1 
	2 	Pt. I, 2 
	3 	Pt. I, 4 
	14 	Pt. I, 11 
	18 	Pt. I, 12(50) 
	22 	Pt. I, 55 
	24 	Pt. I, 15 
	59 	Pt. I, 49 
	128 	Pt. I, 106 
	129 	Pt. I, 107 
	130 	Pt. I, 108 
	131 	Pt. I, 109 
	132 	Pt. I, 110 
	135 	Pt. I, 112 
	136 	Pt. I, 113 
	142 	Pt. I, 114 
	143 	Pt. I, 115 
	144 	Pt. I, 116 
	145 	Pt. I, 117 
	146 	Pt. I, 118 
	150 	Pt. I, 119 
	151 	Pt. I, 120 
	152 	Pt. I, 121 
	153 	Pt. I, 122 
	154 	Pt. I, 123 
	155 	Pt. I, 124 
	156 	Pt. I, 125 
	157 	Pt. I, 126 
	158 	Pt. I, 127 
	163 	Pt. I, 128 
	164 	Pt. I, 129 
	165 	Pt. I, 130 
	166 	Pt. I, 131 
	167 	Pt. I, 132 
	168 	Pt. I, 133 
	169 	Pt. I, 134 
	171 	Pt. I, 57 
	172 	Pt. I, 58 
	173 	Pt. I, 59 
	174 	Pt. I, 60 
	175 	Pt. I, 61 
	176 	Pt. I, 62 
	177 	Pt. I, 63 
	178 	Pt. I, 64 
	179 	Pt. I, 65 
	180 	Pt. I, 66 
	181 	Pt. I, 67 
	182 	Pt. I, 68 
	183 	Pt. I, 69 
	184 	Pt. I, 70 
	185 	Pt. I, 71 
	186 	Pt. I, 72 
	187 	Pt. I, 73 
	188 	Pt. I, 74 
	189 	Pt. I, 75 
	190 	Pt. I, 76 
	191 	Pt. I, 77 
	192 	Pt. I, 78 
	193 	Pt. I, 79 
	194 	Pt. I, 80 
	195 	Pt. I, 81 
	196 	Pt. I, 82 
	197 	Pt. I, 83 
	198 	Pt. I, 84 
	199 	Pt. I, 85 
	200 	Pt. I, 86 
	201 	Pt. I, 87 
	202 	Pt. I, 88 
	203 	Pt. I, 89 
	204 	Pt. I, 90 
	205 	Pt. I, 91 
	206 	Pt. I, 92 
	207 	Pt. I, 93 
	208 	Pt. I, 94 
	209 	Pt. I, 95 
	211 	Pt. I, 97 
	212 	Pt. I, 98 
	213 	Pt. I, 99 
	214 	Pt. I, 100 
	215 	Pt. I, 101 
	216 	Pt. I, 102 
	217 	Pt. I, 103 
	239 	Pt. I, 135 
	240 	Pt. I, 136 
	255 	Pt. I, 137 
	256 	Pt. I, 138 
	Art. XII 	Pt. I, 56 
	Art. XIII 	Pt. I, 56 
73-129 		Pt. I, 96 
75-489 		Pt. I, 12(40) 
77-644 		Pt. I, App. A 
78-594 		Pt. I, 12(40) 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1.01. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles, divisions and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Safety Harbor City Code," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1970, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1.02. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city commission, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Safety Harbor as adopted by the electors on February 9, 1982, and any amendments thereto, a copy of which is printed in part I of this volume. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the municipal corporation of Safety Harbor, Florida. 
City Commission. The words "city commission" or "the commission" shall mean the City Commission of the City of Safety Harbor, Pinellas County, Florida. 
Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean The Safety Harbor City Code as designated in section 1.01. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by the Code the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions—Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, F.S. § 1.090(a). 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Pinellas County, Florida. 
State Law reference— Boundaries of Pinellas County, F.S. § 7.52. 
F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number may include the plural and any word importing the plural number may include the singular, if the context so allows. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the word "person," as applied to partnerships or associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present, if the context so allows. 
Time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
(Code 1970, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of Florida Statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1.03. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1970, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1.04. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1.05. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of "The Safety Harbor City Code" adopted by Ordinance No. 268 or of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1.06. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed, or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any administrative ordinances; 
(3)  Any right or franchise permit or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(4)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions and setting salaries of city officers and employees; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the city; 
(7)  Any personnel regulations; 
(8)  Any land use or zoning ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the city; 
(10)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the city, the zoning map or any amendments thereof; 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking regulations for specific streets and locations; 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(16)  Any provisions of Chapter 61-2735, Special Acts of 1961, Florida Legislature, as amended by special law or otherwise, which have been converted to ordinances by Charter adopted by Ord. No. 81-50, Section 4, and have not been superseded or repealed; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 1.07. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1970, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1.08. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 98-06, adopted April 20, 1998, repealed § 1.08 in its entirety. Formerly, § 1.08 pertained to amendments to the Code, effect of new ordinances, and amendatory language and derived from § 1-7 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 1.09. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference— Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 1.10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1970, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1.11. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1970, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Falsely making or altering a public record, F.S. §§ 831.01 and 839.13.  
Sec. 1.12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1970, § 1-8)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of the city, § 12; government and legislative form of government, Art. II; Charter officers, Art. III; elections, Art. IV; boards and commissions, Art. VI. 
Cross reference— Building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; elections, Ch. 6; finance, Ch. 7; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 8; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; junked, abandoned or wrecked property, Ch. 12; local business tax receipts, Ch. 14; parks and recreation advisory board, Ch. 16, Art. II; pensions and retirement, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. Ch. 166. 
 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public meetings, F.S. § 286.011; public records, F.S. § 119.01 et seq.; procedure for adoption of ordinances, F.S. § 166.041. 
 
Sec. 2.01. - City employees as candidates for city offices to take leave of absence. 
Any person holding any position, whether voluntary or for compensation, in the municipal government where such position is under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of the city manager, shall, at the time of filing qualifying statement as a candidate for election to the office of mayor-commissioner or commissioners, take a leave of absence from the position which is under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of the city manager. The leave of absence to be in effect until such time as the candidate's status as mayor-commissioner or commissioner shall have been determined by the certification of the voting at the election. 
(Code 1970, § 2-2)  
Sec. 2.02. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city commission shall meet in regular session at 7:00 p.m. on the first and third Mondays of each and every month. 
(b)  All meetings of the commission shall be held at the city hall; provided that meetings may be held at other times or places in the city when deemed proper or feasible by the commission. 
(Code 1970, § 2-3; Ord. No. 2017-19, § 2, 6-8-2017) 
State Law reference— All meetings … at which official acts are to be taken, are declared to be public meetings open to the public at all times, F.S. § 286.011.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public meetings, F.S. § 286.011; public records, F.S. § 119.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 2. - ADVISORY BOARDS AND COMMITTEES 
 
Sec. 2.03. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall apply to all advisory boards or committees created by the city commission, with the exception of the personnel review board and the fire pension board, unless specifically exempted by this Code or an ordinance or resolution adopted by the city commission, and except as otherwise provided for by state statute. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), the code of conduct contained in section 2.09 of this division shall apply to the personnel review board in addition to all other advisory boards and committees created by the city commission governed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 2.04. - Residency requirement. 
All advisory board or committee members governed by this division must be a resident of the city at the time of their appointment, and shall remain a resident for the entire appointed term. If at any time an advisory board or committee member is no longer a resident of the city, a vacancy shall be created and may be filled in the manner provided for the filling of vacancies on said advisory board or committee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 2.05. - Term limits. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no person shall be eligible to hold a position on an advisory board or committee governed by this division for more than three (3) consecutive full terms. Thereafter, no such person may be reappointed to the same advisory board or committee for a period of one (1) year from the date of the expiration of their third consecutive term. 
(b)  In the event there are no qualified applications timely filed to fill the position of the term-limited member, the city commission may reappoint the term-limited member. 
(c)  The term limits set forth in subsection (a) above shall apply only to appointments made after June 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 2.06. - Attendance. 
All advisory board or committee members governed by this division shall regularly attend all meetings of their respective board or committee. Board members who miss three (3) meetings within any twelve (12) month period shall automatically forfeit such appointment and the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the procedure applicable to the board or committee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 2.07. - Removal. 
Each advisory board or committee member of a board or committee governed by this division is appointed and shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission. The city commission may remove any advisory board or committee member at any time without cause. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 2.08. - Compensation. 
All advisory board or committee members shall serve as volunteers without compensation of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 2.09. - Code of conduct. 
The following code of conduct is hereby adopted for all advisory boards or committees governed by this division: 
(1)  No member of an advisory board or committee shall represent themselves, a client or his/her employer, or act on behalf of an organization of which they are an officer, board member, or director, to advocate for, on behalf of, or in opposition to any matter before the board or committee. 
(2)  No member of an advisory board or committee shall make any representations, either implicitly or overtly, to any citizen, outside of a properly noticed meeting of the member's respective board or committee, regarding what action their respective board may or may not take in the future. No member shall make any promises to any individual that their respective board will take any action on a given subject. 
(3)  No member of an advisory board or committee shall represent to the public that the member has the authority to act individually or independently on behalf of an advisory board or committee or the city, unless such authority has been specifically granted to the member. 
(4)  No member of an advisory board or committee shall represent themselves as a member of an advisory board or committee in a threatening, antagonistic, or otherwise hostile manner towards the public. No member shall represent to the public that they have any powers beyond those specifically granted to the member by virtue of their appointment to an advisory board or committee. 
(5)  All members of boards or committees which sit in a quasi-judicial capacity and have final decision making authority, including but not limited to the code enforcement board and board of appeals, shall remain impartial on matters which may come before their board or committee and avoid the appearance of impropriety on all matters which come before their board or committee. Members shall avoid creating the appearance of impropriety by refraining from engaging in public and private discussions about specific agenda items, specific applicants or parties to a proceeding before their board or committee, or items which may come before their board or committee. Members should further refrain from participating in any proceeding in which their impartiality may be reasonably questioned. A member whose personal, employment, or business relationship with a person or entity that is the subject of a matter which may come before the board or committee should disclose such relationship to the city commission. The provisions of F.S. ch. 112, the code of ethics for public officers and employees, shall govern conflict of interest situations and determinations. 
(6)  Nothing contained in this section 2.09 shall be construed to alter the provisions of section 2.07, to change that all members of every board or committee serve at the pleasure of the city commission, or to require that the city commission find a violation of this code of conduct to remove any member of any board or committee at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 5-18-2015; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 2, 2-20-2017)  
Sec. 2.10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1987, enacted provisions creating the Safety Harbor Municipal Code Enforcement Board to be included as a new Ch. 27. For purposes of facilitating reference and indexing and keeping related Code provisions together, such provisions have been codified as Art. III, Div. 3, §§ 2.10.01—2.10.11 of this chapter at the discretion of the editor. 
Charter reference— Jurisdiction of city, Art. I, § 11; general powers of city, Art. I, § 12; powers of city commission, Art. II, § 15; establishment of boards, Art. VI, § 105. 
Cross reference— Building code, § 5.01; electrical code, § 5.07; plumbing code, § 5.11; housing code, § 5.14; unsafe building code, § 5.15; fire codes, § 8.01; local business tax receipts, Ch. 14; sign regulations, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks, etc., Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 2.10.01. - Creation, membership. 
(a)  There is hereby created within the city the city code enforcement board, which shall be composed of seven (7) regular members and one (1) alternate member, all of whom shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  The alternate member of the board shall serve a three-year term. If there is one (1) regular board member absent from a code enforcement board meeting, the alternate will sit as a voting member. If there are no regular board members absent at a meeting, the alternate member will sit as a nonvoting member, but will be allowed to participate in the discussion of the board. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 93-18, § 1, 7-19-93; Ord. No. 96-07, § 1, 2-19-96)  
Sec. 2.10.02. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
City commission: The legislative body of the City of Safety Harbor, Florida. 
Code inspector or enforcement officer: Any authorized agent or employee of the city, whose duty is to ensure code compliance with the city's codes and ordinances including but not limited to the City Code, land development code, and other technical codes, including but not limited to fire and building codes, which are subject to this division, or any law enforcement officer or other individual authorized by Florida law to enforce the city's codes and ordinances. 
Enforcement board: The City of Safety Harbor code enforcement board created pursuant hereto. 
Repeat violation: A violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person whom the enforcement board has previously found to have violated the same provision within five (5) years prior to the violation. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 91-04, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 2017-36, § 1, 11-20-2017)  
Sec. 2.10.03. - Functions, appointment, term of office. 
(a)  The code enforcement board shall have the purpose of conducting hearings relating to the enforcement of the business tax receipts, fire, building, zoning, sign, subdivision, regulations, Land Development Code regulations, the City Code, and other related technical codes presently in force in the city; to issue findings of fact and to issue orders affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted by this division and in accordance with Chapter 162, Florida Statutes (1994), as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Appointment to the code enforcement board shall be made by the city commission, in the sole discretion of the city commission, and appointment of a majority of the membership shall be made on the basis of experience or interest in the fields of zoning, building, and development control. Whenever possible, the board shall include an architect, a businessperson, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor and a real estate agent. 
(c)  The initial terms of members of the board shall me as follows: 
(1)  Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year; 
(2)  Three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; and 
(3)  Two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. 
(d)  Thereafter, appointment shall be for a term of three (3) years. Members may be reappointed upon the concurrence of the city commission. Appointment to fill any vacancy on the board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 94-29, § 1, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 2-20-95; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 2.10.04. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-14, § 2, adopted May 18, 2015, repealed § 2.10.04, which pertained to attendance; removal from office and derived from Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1987; and Ord. No. 95-07, § 2, adopted Feb. 20, 1995.  
Sec. 2.10.05. - Organization and expenses. 
(a)  At the first meeting of the board, the members may elect one (1) of the members to be chairman. The person so elected shall function as chairman for a one-year term. 
(b)  Four (4) or more members of the board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum in order for the board to conduct its business. Members of the board shall serve without compensation but may be entitled to be reimbursed for such mileage expenses as the city commission shall authorize by ordinance. 
(c)  The city attorney shall act as counsel for the city, and either he or his assistant shall be present at all meetings of the board. The city manager may obtain independent counsel to advise the board. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 94-29, § 1, 10-3-94)  
Sec. 2.10.06. - Enforcement procedure. 
Except where the inspector charged with enforcing a particular technical code identified herein has reason to believe that a code violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the code enforcement procedure under this division shall be as follows: 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings with respect to each technical code. 
(2)  Where a code inspector finds or is made aware of a code violation, the code inspector shall notify the violator, and such notice of violation shall provide a time within which to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified in the correction notice, then the code inspector shall notify the code enforcement board and request a hearing pursuant to sections 2.10.07 and 2.10.08 of this division. Notice of such hearing request shall be provided to the violator in the manner provided by section 2.10.11 of the Safety Harbor Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or condition causing a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the board and request a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 90-17, § 1, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 94-29, § 1, 10-3-94)  
Sec. 2.10.07. - Hearing procedures. 
(a)  The chairman of the code enforcement board may call enforcement board hearings, and such hearings may also be called by a written notice signed by three (3) members of the board. The code enforcement board may at any hearing set a future hearing date. 
(b)  The board shall attempt to convene at least once every month, but may convene more often as the case demand dictates. 
(c)  Minutes shall be kept of all hearings held by the enforcement board, and all such hearings shall be open to the public. 
(d)  The city commission shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be required to assist the board in the proper performance of its duties. 
(e)  Each case before the enforcement board shall be presented by a member of the city staff. If the city prevails in prosecuting a case before the board, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case before the board. 
(f)  Cases scheduled for a particular day shall be heard. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The board shall take testimony from the code inspector, the violator and any other person familiar with the case or having knowledge about the case. The board shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence; however, it shall act to ensure fundamental due process in each of its hearing cases. 
(g)  At the conclusion of each hearing, the enforcement board shall issue findings of fact based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and it shall issue an order providing relief consistent with this division. Each finding and order shall be by motion approved by a majority of those present and voting, except that at least four (4) members of the board must vote in order for the action to be official. 
The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed and, under the conditions specified in subsection 2.10.09(a), the costs of repairs may be included along with the fine if the order is not complied with by such date. A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the enforcement board shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 91-04, § 2, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 94-29, § 1, 10-3-94)  
Sec. 2.10.08. - Powers of the code enforcement board. 
The Safety Harbor code enforcement board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings; 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Such subpoenas shall be served by the sheriff's department; 
(3)  Subpoena evidence; 
(4)  Take testimony under oath; 
(5)  Issue orders which shall have the force of law and which shall set forth the steps necessary to be accomplished in order to bring a violation into compliance with the code that has been violated. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87)  
Sec. 2.10.09. - Fines, costs of repair, liens and foreclosure. 
(a)  Upon being notified by the code inspector that a previous order of the code enforcement board is not being complied with within the time established in such order, or upon finding that the same violation has been repeated by the same violator, the code enforcement board may order the violator to pay a fine to the city not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day that the violation continues past the date set for compliance for a first violation, and not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the code inspector. In addition, if the violation is a violation described in subsection 2.10.06(3), the board shall notify the city, which may make all reasonable repairs which are required to being the property into compliance and charge the violator with the reasonable costs of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Any fine imposed pursuant to this section may include all such costs of repairs. 
(b)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records of Pinellas County, Florida, and thereafter, such order shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists or, if the violator does not own the land, upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. 
(c)  The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriff, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. 
(d)  After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the enforcement board may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on such lien in the manner provided by statute for the foreclosure of other municipal liens, except that the lien may not be foreclosed on real property which is homestead under Section 4, Article I of the Florida Constitution. 
(e)  A fine imposed pursuant to this division shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. 
(f)  A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the city and the city may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Any lien or fine imposed pursuant to this section may only be reduced or waived by the city commission. The city commission may adopt by resolution a procedure and establish criteria for considering applications for reduction of code enforcement. 
(h)  The prevailing party in any action to foreclose a lien imposed pursuant to this section shall be entitled to recover all costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred in the foreclosure action. 
(i)  The city shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. 
(j)  No lien provided under this division shall continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on a lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of a foreclosure action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 90-17, §§ 2—4, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 91-04, § 3, 2-4-91; Ord. No. § 1, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 2010-18, § 1, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 2.10.10. - Appeal. 
Any aggrieved party may appeal a ruling or order of the Safety Harbor code enforcement board by certiorari to the circuit court of Pinellas County, in accordance with Florida Statute 162.11 (1986). The appeal provided for herein shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87)  
Sec. 2.10.11. - Notices. 
All notices to be provided by this division shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, or when mail would not be effective, by hand delivery by the code inspector or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice, or as otherwise provided for in accordance with Florida Statute 162.12, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 87-46, § 1, 12-7-87; Ord. No. 90-17, § 5, 8-6-90; Ord. No. 91-04, § 4, 2-4-91)  
Sec. 2.10.12. - Supplemental code enforcement procedures, civil citations. 
(a)  Supplemental authority. The provisions of this section are supplemental means of obtaining compliance with the city's codes and ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other means. 
(b)  Authorization. Pursuant to F.S. § 162.21, as may be amended from time to time, city code inspectors are authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the code inspector has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance. The county court will hear such charge(s). Each violation of the city's codes or ordinances shall be a separate civil infraction, and each day the violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Notice. Prior to issuing a citation, the code inspector shall provide notice to the person in that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days, or as otherwise provided in F.S. § 162.21. If, upon personal investigation, a code inspector finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a code inspector may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. A code inspector does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if a repeat violation is found or if the code inspector has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(d)  Form of citation. A citation issued by a code inspector shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance; 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued; 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed; 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause for the violation; 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated; 
(6)  The name and authority of the code inspector; 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation; 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation; 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation; and 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the person shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(e)  Deposit of citation with county court. After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code inspector shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the county court. The alleged violator may contest the citation in county court. 
(f)  Civil infractions. A violation of the city's codes or ordinances is a civil infraction, subject to the maximum civil penalty of $500.00. If the person who has committed the civil infraction does not contest the citation, a civil penalty of less than the maximum civil penalty may be imposed pursuant to subsection (i) below. 
(g)  Refusal to sign and accept citation a misdemeanor. Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code inspector shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 and 775.083. 
(h)  Non-applicability of article provisions in certain instances. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to F.S. § 553.79 and 553.80 of the Florida Building Code adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73, as applied to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. 
(i)  No contest of citation; schedule of civil penalties. A person who receives a citation from a code inspector for the violation of this Code or a city ordinance and who elects not to contest the citation shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with the schedule of fines and penalties established by the Sixth Judicial Circuit Court Administrative Order No. 2012-028 PA-CTY, as may be amended from time to time. 
(j)  Waiver of right to contest citation. Any person who fails to pay the appropriate civil penalty within the time allowed, or who fails to appear in county court to contest the citation, shall be deemed to have waived his/her right to contest the citation, and judgment may be entered against the person for an amount not to exceed the maximum civil penalty of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 2, 11-20-2017)  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 97-14, adopted August 18, 1997, repealed §§ 2.10.12—2.10.17 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to the downtown redevelopment board and derived from Ord. No. 89-23, § 1, adopted July 17, 1989; Ord. No. 92-25, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1992; Ord. No. 93-19, § 1, adopted July 19, 1993; Ord. No. 95-08, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 20, 1995; and Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 1996. 
 
Secs. 2.10.13—2.10.19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Charter officers, Art. III. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2.10.20. - Defense, indemnification of mayor-commissioner, commissioners, officers and employees; scope of coverage. 
(a)  The city shall defend any civil action brought against the mayor-commissioner, any commissioner, officers or employees of the city for acts or omissions arising out of and in the scope of their employment or function, unless, in the case of a tort action, such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee acted outside the course and scope of his employment, in bad faith, with malicious purpose or in a manner exhibiting wanton and wilful disregard of human rights, safety or property. Defense of such civil actions shall include, but not be limited to, any civil rights lawsuits seeking relief personally against such mayor-commissioner, any commissioner, officers or employees for acts or omissions under color of state law, custom or usage wherein it is alleged that such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee has deprived another person of rights secured under the Federal Constitution or laws, unless such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee acted in bad faith, with malicious purpose, outside the course and scope of his or her employment or in a manner exhibiting wanton and wilful disregard of human rights, safety or property. 
(b)  In an action for which the city shall provide a defense under paragraph (a), the city will do or cause to be done the following: 
(1)  Defend such person in the lawsuit by the city attorney, by an attorney selected by the city commission or by the city's insurer for this purpose; obtain and present such available evidence as would be necessary or proper and reasonably procurable under the circumstances for the proper defense of such person in such action; and pay the necessary court costs in and incident to such lawsuit. 
(2)  Pay or settle any judgment or damages against such person obtained as the proximate result of such lawsuit. 
(3)  Reimburse such person for any personal expense he has reasonably and necessarily sustained in such litigation and judgment. 
(4)  Do whatever else is necessary or proper, in the sole discretion of the city commission, to protect the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee under the facts and circumstances of the particular case. 
(c)  This protection and reimbursement shall cover only situations where the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee of the city has been determined to have been acting or failing to act as the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee of the city within the scope of duties or responsibilities of his or her particular office or employment and as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 95-13, § 1, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.10.21. - Conditions of coverage. 
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless as prescribed by section 2.10.20 shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  The mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee providing his or her full cooperation to the city in the defense of any action and in the prosecution of any appeal. This shall include, but not be limited to, providing a statement and all evidence to the city's attorney promptly upon request. 
(2)  The mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee shall not give any statements or otherwise give evidence against his or the city's interest to anyone, other than the city or its representative without the city's consent. 
(3)  The mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee shall tender to the city attorney the complaint, summons, process or other pleading within five (5) days after the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee is served with such documents. 
(4)  The city shall, in its sole discretion, select the counsel for such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee, who shall be the city attorney unless a conflict of interest exists, or an attorney selected by the city's insurer. 
(5)  The city shall have full right to compromise all claims, and the city retains the right to settle any claim against any mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee, for which the city will defend or indemnify the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employer under section 2.10.20, without the mayor-commissioner's, commissioner's, officer's or employee's consent. 
(6)  In the event of damages arising from a counterclaim against any aggrieved party, the city shall be entitled to all damages from such party. 
(7)  All funds received by any affected mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee from a collateral source shall be deducted from any amount which the city shall become obligated to indemnify such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee. Such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee shall subrogate all rights to the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, § 2, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 95-13, § 2, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.10.22. - Exclusions from coverage. 
There shall be no coverage, indemnification or reimbursement under section 2.10.20: 
(1)  If the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee of the city has been guilty of intentional misconduct or of intentional omission of duty or where it is determined that he or she acted in bad faith, with malicious or in a manner exhibiting wanton and wilful disregard of human or civil rights, safety or property. This shall include, but not be limited to, actions for fund, libel and slander. 
(2)  For criminal charges where there is a finding of guilty. 
(3)  For any act or omission that was taken outside the scope of employment or duties of the office of the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee. 
(4)  The city shall not in any way become liable to the plaintiff or any other aggrieved party. 
(5)  For punitive or exemplary damage awards. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, § 3, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 2.10.23. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all actions and proceedings pending upon or instituted after the effective date of these provisions. As used herein, an action shall be construed to be pending where the action has not been tried or, if tried, where the judgment has not become final by reason of the completion of any appellate proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, § 4, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 2.10.24. - Reservation of rights and immunities. 
(a)  The city may undertake the defense of its mayor commissioner, any commissioner, officer or employee, as indicated in this article, but reserves its right to seek indemnification and/or recovery for any judgment or settlement paid, all court costs incurred and all attorney's fees incurred in the defense of the mayor-commissioner, any commissioner, officer or employee from such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee [where it is determined that such] acted or failed to act because of fraud, corruption or malice; where it is determined that such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee acted in bad faith, with malicious purpose or in a manner exhibiting wanton and wilful disregard of human or civil rights, safety or property; where it is determined that the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee was not entitled to protection under this article or state law or where such mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee fails [failed] to cooperate in good faith in the defense of the claim, as described in section 2.10.21. Nothing contained herein shall require the city to provide a defense under this article under a reservation of rights. The city may elect not to provide a defense if at any time it determines that the mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee is not entitled to protection under this article or state law. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer or insured under any policy of insurance. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver by the city or any mayor-commissioner, commissioner, officer or employee of any claim of immunity including sovereign immunity, applicable to any action. 
(Ord. No. 90-33, § 5, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 95-13, § 3, 4-3-95)  
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Civil service, § 12(45). 
State Law reference— Civil service system, Art. III, § 14, State Constitution; merit or civil service system; applicability, F.S. § 447.601. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2.11. - Personnel policy declared. 
It is hereby the declared personnel policy of the city that: 
(1)  Employment in the city government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal and political considerations. 
(2)  Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the city government. 
(3)  The employees of the city shall be productive employees who perform a useful city purpose. 
(4)  Tenure of employees covered by this article shall be subject to good behavior, the satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the performance of work, and the availability of funds. 
(5)  High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this article, and by every consideration of the rights and interest of the public and the city. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-2)  
Sec. 2.12. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the below listed terms shall have the meanings as shown unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Appointing authority shall mean the city manager who, by Charter, is authorized to appoint, assign, or remove employees over which he has jurisdiction, subject to the provisions of this article and the personnel rules. 
Board shall mean the personnel review board as provided for herein. 
City service shall mean all persons employed by and under the jurisdiction of the commission as members of the classified service or members of the exempt service. 
Classified service shall mean the persons employed by the city who are subject to the coverage and regulations of this article and to the personnel rules provided for herein. 
Exempt service shall mean the persons employed by the city who are not subject to the coverage and regulations of this article, nor to the personnel rules provided for herein. 
Personnel shall mean a personnel program based upon merit principles which attempts to provide an objective and impartial career and public service system. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-3; Ord. No. 95-14, § 2, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.13. - Personnel department established. 
There is hereby established a personnel department and a personnel director in charge thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-4)  
Sec. 2.14. - Appointment, qualifications and duties of director. 
(a)  The personnel program established by this article shall be administered by the personnel director who shall be appointed by, and serve at the will of, the city manager. 
(b)  The personnel director shall be experienced in the field of personnel administration, and knowledgeable of the application of merit principles in public employment. With the consent of the commission, the city manager may serve as personnel director. 
(c)  The personnel director shall: 
(1)  Apply and carry out the personnel rules as adopted; 
(2)  Foster and develop, in cooperation with the city manager, heads of the various departments, elected officials, and other interested parties, programs for the improvement of employee effectiveness and morale; 
(3)  Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration within the several departments of the city and to make available the facilities of the personnel department for this purpose: 
(4)  Establish and maintain a roster of all classified service employees which shall set forth, as to each employee, the class title, rate of pay, status, and related data; 
(5)  Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the personnel rules: 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the personnel review board and may serve as its executive secretary; 
(7)  Perform any other lawful acts necessary or desirable to carry out the purpose and provisions of this article and the personnel rules. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-5; Ord. No. 95-14, §§ 3—6, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.15. - Classified and exempt service. 
All offices and positions of the city are divided into the classified service and the exempt service. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-6)  
Sec. 2.16. - Exempt service. 
The exempt service shall include the following: 
(1)  All elected officials and members of boards and commissions appointed by the commission; 
(2)  Department heads and assistant department heads appointed by the commission or city manager; 
(3)  Volunteer and temporary personnel; 
(4)  Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service, or persons employed under limited term contractual agreements to perform specialist or technical services for the city; 
(5)  Such other additional positions as the commission may include because of the professional, unique, specialized nature of the position. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-7)  
Sec. 2.17. - Classified service. 
The classified service shall include all other positions in the city service that are not specifically placed in the exempt service by this article. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-8)  
Sec. 2.18. - Probationary period. 
All employees occupying positions in the classified service for six (6) consecutive months or more immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be deemed to have satisfactorily completed their probationary period of service and shall automatically be considered permanent status employees. Those employees who have occupied their positions in the classified service for less than six (6) consecutive months immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall automatically be considered probationary status employees, and shall be required to serve a probationary period until they have satisfactorily completed six (6) consecutive months of service. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-9; Ord. No. 95-14, § 7, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.19. - Assistance in carrying out legislative intent. 
All officials and employees of the city shall assist in carrying out the intent of this article and the personnel rules. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-10; Ord. No. 95-14, § 8, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.20. - Personnel rules. 
(a)  The personnel director shall draft, in consultation with the city manager, such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. Following a public hearing conducted by the board, the rules recommended by the city manager, containing any revisions agreed upon as a result of the public hearing, shall be submitted to the commission by the city manager for adoption by resolution of the commission. If not adopted, amended, or rejected by the commission within sixty (60) calendar days after submission to it, they shall automatically become effective. The personnel rules shall have the force and effect of law when placed into effect. Amendments to the rules shall be made in accordance with the above procedure. 
(b)  The personnel rules shall provide, among other things: 
(1)  For open competitive examinations which shall determine the relative fitness and abilities of applicants meeting announced requirements for the respective, competitive positions in the classified service. Job opportunities shall be announced publicly with a fixed date for closing the filing of applications. Notice for promotional examinations shall be posted in conspicuous places where they may be seen by employees eligible to compete. Nothing shall prevent the personnel director from continuing to receive applications, conduct examinations, and certify candidates following announced filing or examination dates long enough to assure a sufficient number of eligibles to meet the needs of the city. 
(2)  For unassembled examinations for classes of employment where, in the opinion of the personnel director, written examinations would not be practical or feasible. 
(3)  For establishment of eligible registers, if appropriate, for initial appointment and promotion, upon which lists shall appear the names of successful candidates in order of their relative performance or ranking in the respective examinations. Such registers shall be valid for use normally for one (1) year from the date of certification. 
(4)  For the rejection of candidates who fail to comply with announced job requirements in regard to such factors as conduct, character, education and experience, or who have attempted any deception or fraud with respect to an application or examination. 
(5)  For a probationary period of six (6) months from the date of initial employment or promotion, or longer if extended by the city manager, during which time a new appointee may be discharged, demoted, or suspended without right of appeal, and a promotional probationer who has served more than one (1) full continuous year, including promotional time, may be demoted without the right of appeal. Promotional probationers who have served less than one (1) full continuous year, including promotional time, may be discharged, demoted, or suspended without right of appeal. 
(6)  For provisional employment without competitive examination where there is no appropriate eligible register available. 
(7)  For temporary employment with or without examination for not more than six (6) months. 
(8)  For keeping of records of performance of all employees in the classified service. 
(9)  For the development and operation of programs to improve the effectiveness and morale of employees in the classified service which may include training, safety, health, welfare, recreation, and other related areas. 
(10)  For disciplinary actions of discharge, demotion, or suspension without pay, only for just cause. All employees who are awarded such disciplinary actions shall be presented with a written notice stating the specific reasons for the disciplinary action, and whenever it is practical and possible, such written notice shall be personally presented to the affected employee on or before the effective date of such action, or shall be sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the employee's last known address. A copy of the disciplinary action shall be filed with the personnel director. 
(11)  For procedures governing layoff, re-employment, disciplinary actions, and grievances. 
(12)  For hours of work, holidays, overtime pay, vacation, sick, and other leaves, with or without pay. 
(13)  For general prohibitions relating to political activity. 
(14)  For other rules not inconsistent with this article, and which shall aid in its effectiveness. 
(c)  All personnel rules of the city in effect at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall remain in full force and effect until repealed or amended by the commission. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-11; Ord. No. 95-14, §§ 9—15, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.21. - Appropriations to carry out chapter. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be appropriated each year by the commission to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-12)  
Sec. 2.22. - Amendments. 
This article may be amended by the commission without referendum. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-14)  
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL REVIEW BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officers, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public meetings, F.S. § 286.011; public records, F.S. § 119.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2.23. - Created; membership. 
(a)  There is hereby created a personnel review board, consisting of three (3) members. 
(1)  One member shall be appointed by the commission on the recommendation of the city manager. 
(2)  One member shall be elected by a simple majority vote (fifty (50) percent plus one) of all classified service employees voting in the election. 
(3)  The third member shall be appointed by the other two (2) members thus selected. 
(b)  Members of the board shall select from their own membership a chairman and a vice-chairman to serve at the pleasure of the board. 
(Code 1970, §§ 5½-20, 5½-25; Ord. No. 95-14, § 17, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.24. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. However, they shall be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-28)  
Sec. 2.25. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The members of the board shall be persons in sympathy with the application of merit principles to public employment and public personnel administration. 
(b)  No member of the board shall be employed by or be an official of the city, nor shall they be a member of any local, state, or national committee of a political party or an official or a member of a committee in any partisan political club or organization nor shall they hold or be a candidate for any elective office. 
(c)  Each member of the board shall be over twenty-one (21) years of age, of good moral character, of good reputation in the community, a citizen of the United States, and must have been a resident of the city for two (2) years immediately prior to appointment. 
(d)  No member of the board shall be the husband, wife, or near relative of a member of the city service. 
(e)  No person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for service on the personnel review board. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-21; Ord. No. 95-14, § 18, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.26. - Terms. 
Each board member selected shall serve a three (3) year term except that after the initial formation of the board, board members shall, by the drawing of lots, select one (1) member to serve a one (1) year term, one (1) member to serve a two (2) year term, and one (1) member to serve a three (3) year term. On the expiration of the term of membership for those initially selected, their successors shall be selected for a full three (3) year term. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-22)  
Sec. 2.27. - Removal, vacancies. 
Members of the board may be removed by the commission for incompetency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in office, or for other just cause. In the event of resignation or death or removal from office of a board member, the successor shall be selected without delay in accordance with the procedures hereinabove set forth to serve the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-23)  
Sec. 2.28. - Quorum. 
Two (2) members of the board shall constitute a quorum necessary for the conduct of the business of the board. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-24)  
Sec. 2.29. - Meetings. 
(a)  The board shall meet at the call of the chairman, or in his absence, the vice-chairman, or at the call of the personnel director. 
(b)  Meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1970, §§ 5½-26, 5½-27)  
DIVISION 3. - HEARINGS 
 
Sec. 2.30. - Procedure. 
(a)  If an employee affected by disciplinary actions of discharge, demotion, or suspension without pay has the right of appeal, the employee shall be allowed ten (10) working days to reply thereto in writing and request a hearing before the personnel review board. 
(b)  A copy of the appeal for hearing shall be filed with the personnel director. 
(c)  The personnel review board shall begin such hearing within thirty (30) calendar days following the receipt of the request for hearing by the employee. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-35; Ord. No. 95-14, §§ 19, 20, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 2.31. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  In a hearing, the board shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence, but shall use reasonable grounds and discretion to secure a fair and complete hearing of the facts of the case. 
(b)  The employee and the appointing authority who awarded the disciplinary action may be represented by counsel if desired; however, the appointing authority shall only be provided such counsel if the employee first elects to so do. The board may also have advice of counsel at such hearings. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-36)  
Sec. 2.32. - Administering oaths; issuing subpoenas. 
Each member of the board shall have the power to administer oaths and the board is authorized to compel, by subpoena, the attendance and testimony of witnesses, the production of papers, books and other documents relative to such hearing, the subpoenas to be served by the law enforcement officers of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-38)  
Sec. 2.33. - Witness fees. 
All witnesses demanding witness fees for attendance shall be entitled to a per diem of one dollar ($1.00) to be paid by the city, but no employee of the city subpoenaed to appear before the board shall be entitled to any compensation, nor suffer any loss of pay for such attendance. No employees requesting hearings may, without the consent of the city, summon more than four (4) witnesses before the board at the expense of the city, but may summon any number of witnesses in excess of four (4) at his own expense. 
(Code 1970, § 5½-40)  
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASE AND SALE OF REAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2.34. - Procedure for conveyance of city property. 
(a)  The commission is expressly authorized to sell and convey any real property belonging to the city whenever the commission determines that it is in the best interest of the city to do so to the highest and best bidder for the bid use the commission determines to be the highest and best. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no sale of any real property shall be made unless notice thereof is published once a week for at least two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county, calling for bids for the purchase of real estate so advertised to be sold. 
(c)  The bid of the highest bidder in the case of a sale complying with the terms and conditions set forth in such notice shall be accepted unless the commission rejects all bids because they are too low. The commission may require a deposit to be made or a surety bond to be given in such form or in such amount as the commission may determine with each bid submitted. 
(Ord. No. 82-06, § 1, 4-19-82)  
Sec. 2.35. - Exception. 
(a)  When the commission finds that the value of a parcel of real property is two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less or when, due to the size, shape, location and value of the parcel, it is determined by the commission that the parcel is of use to one (1) or more adjacent property owners, the commission may effect a private sale of the parcel. The commission may, after sending notice of its intended action to owners of adjacent property by certified mail, effect a sale and conveyance of the parcel at private sale without receiving bids or publishing notice. 
(b)  However, if within ten (10) days after receiving such mailed notice, two (2) or more owners of adjacent property notify the commission of their desire to purchase the parcel, the commission shall accept sealed bids for the parcel from such property owners and may convey such parcel to the highest bidder or reject all offers. 
(Ord. No. 82-06, § 1, 4-19-82) 
(c)  An exception to section 2.34 for the provision of low to moderate income affordable housing shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  The city may convey for such price, whether nominal or otherwise, as the city commission may fix, to the United States or any department or agency thereof, the state, county, corporation or not-for-profit organization, surplus real property for the purpose of providing affordable housing; 
(2)  The city commission shall have the sole discretion to determine what real property is surplus and suitable for conveyance, the entity that receives the property, and the conditions to be attached to the conveyance which will ensure that the property is used for its intended purpose; 
(3)  Affordable housing, as used in this subsection, shall have the same meaning ascribed to that term by the county community development department. 
(d)  [As] an exception to section 2.34 for the disposal of property in a community redevelopment area, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 163.380, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 82-06, § 1, 4-19-82; Ord. No. 93-09, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 96-11, § 1, 3-18-96)  
Secs. 2.36—2.40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-34, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed §§ 2.36—2.40 of the City Code. Formerly, such sections pertained to citizen participation in the comprehensive planning process and derived from Ord. No. 88-21, §§ 1—5, adopted July 18, 1988.  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; prohibited on Safety Harbor Municipal Pier, § 16.02; prohibited in parks, § 16.03; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Municipal license tax prohibited, F.S. § 561.342(3). 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Compliance with chapter. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of selling, bartering, exchanging or in anywise dealing in liquors, wines, beers and/or other beverages containing more than one (1) percent of alcohol by weight, within the city, without a state license and except under and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 3-2)  
Sec. 3.02. - Definitions. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages means any beer, wine, or liquor as defined by the state beverage law. 
(b)  Business establishment means and includes any place of business, whether or not licensed under the state beverage law, of any vendor, club, organization, corporation, firm, person, partnership or similar entity which dispenses alcoholic beverages. This shall include any establishment commonly known as a bottle club which may permit persons to carry alcoholic beverages onto the premises of such establishment with the knowledge, actual or implied, that such beverages will be consumed thereon. 
(c)  Dispense or dispensing means the storing, handling, preparation, distribution, serving, sale, or gift of any alcoholic beverage. For the purpose of this definition, permitting or allowing any person to carry alcoholic beverages onto the premises of a business establishment with such beverages to be consumed thereon shall be deemed as dispensing such beverages. This definition includes the dispensing of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and for off-premises consumption. 
(d)  State beverage law means F.S. Chapters 561, 562, 563, 564 and 565, including subsequent amendments or successors thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2003-15, § 1, 10-20-2003) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2003-15, adopted Oct. 20, 2003 created § 3.02. Formerly, Ord. No. 92-34, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed § 3.02 of the City Code. Formerly, such section pertained to location of business selling alcoholic beverages to public school or church and derived from § 3-9 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 3.03. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-34, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed § 3.03 of the City Code. Formerly, such section pertained to waivers for distance restrictions regarding restaurants selling alcoholic beverages and derived from Ord. No. 81-54, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 1982; and Ord. No. 83-23, § 1, adopted June 6, 1983.  
Sec. 3.04. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-34, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed § 3.04 of the City Code. Formerly, such section pertained to waiver application fees and derived from Ord. No. 82-03, § 1, adopted Mar. 1, 1982.  
Sec. 3.05. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  All business establishments in the city, licensed or unlicensed, dispensing alcoholic beverages, public or private, directly or indirectly, shall remain closed from the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on each day of the week except Saturday and Sunday. 
(b)  All business establishments in the city, licensed or unlicensed, dispensing alcoholic beverages, public or private, directly or indirectly, shall remain closed from the hours of 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Drug stores or prescription shops dealing only in medicines and drugs dispensed for medical purposes shall not be within the prohibitions of this section. 
(2)  Business establishments that dispense alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption are specifically included in the provisions of this section, with the exception that such business establishments shall not dispense alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m., each day. 
All business establishments which are engaged in a business primarily outside the purview of this section but which maintain a separate department or section within such establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall close that department or section in conformance with this chapter. 
(3)  A special event that is granted a special event permit by the city shall comply with the provisions of this chapter with regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages and shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages during the hours provided in this section that are applicable to business establishments selling alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption 
(Code 1970, § 3-14; Ord. No. 95-51, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 2003-15, § 2, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 1, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Uniform closing hours for Pinellas County except municipalities may enact shorter opening hours, Chapter 63-1790, Laws of Florida, 1973, as amended by Chapters 76-474 and 80-586, Laws of Florida.  
Sec. 3.06. - Maintenance of premises; persons to whom beverages sold restricted. 
(a)  No licensee herein shall permit any portion of the premises occupied by or used in connection with the business licensed to be kept in an unsanitary condition nor shall such licensee engage in or permit any disorderly conduct on such premises nor in any way operate or permit the operation of the business in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage, packaged or otherwise, shall be sold, given or served to any person who is intoxicated at the time or who is forbidden by any law of the state or ordinance of the city from entering such place of business or consuming such beverage. 
(Code 1970, § 3-15) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate sanitary conditions, F.S. § 562.45(2); furnishing of alcoholic beverages to habitual drunkard, F.S. § 562.50.  
Sec. 3.07. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 95-51, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 3.07 in its entirety. Formerly, § 3.07 pertained to transporting of illicit whiskey products and derived from § 3-22 of the 1970 Code.  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals prohibited on Safety Harbor municipal pier, § 16.02; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; licenses, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, F.S. § 828.02 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Bird sanctuary. 
What is commonly known as a bird sanctuary is hereby established within all of the territory of the city, as is now or will be in the future, embraced by the city limits. 
(Code 1970, § 4-5)  
Sec. 4.02. - Restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal of a bovine or equine species, as well as sheep, goats, swine, fowl or poultry on a parcel of land having an area of less than one and one-quarter (1¼) acres, except as provided for in the land development code and except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  However, the keeping of the swine referred to as miniature Vietnamese, pot-bellied pigs solely as household pets is exempted from these restrictions subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The number of such pigs shall be limited to one (1) per any residence or premises. 
(2)  The breeding of such pigs is specifically prohibited. 
(3)  Male pigs four (4) weeks of age or older shall be neutered. 
(4)  The maximum weight of such pigs shall not exceed one hundred (100) pounds. 
(5)  Such pigs shall be controlled by a leash, tether or adequate enclosure at any time said animals are outside the residence of the owner or other person harboring, keeping or maintaining said pig. An adequate enclosure must meet the setback requirements for accessory structures provided in the city's land development regulations. "Adequate enclosure" for the purposes of this section shall not include a fence or other similar structure surrounding the entire rear, side or front yard. 
(6)  A certification from a veterinarian licensed in the state that all necessary and appropriate vaccinations have been administered. Such certification must be provided on a yearly basis. 
(7)  The area where the pigs are kept must be cleaned of feces and urine and sanitized daily. 
(c)  The keeping of chickens solely as household pets is exempt from the restrictions of section 4.02(a) subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The number of chickens shall be limited to four (4) per any detached single-family residence; 
(2)  The breeding of chickens is specifically prohibited and the keeping of roosters is not allowed; 
(3)  No person shall slaughter any chickens; 
(4)  The chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure (i.e., henhouse/coop) and must be kept in the covered enclosure or a fenced enclosure at all times. Chickens must be secured within a henhouse/coop during non-daylight hours; 
(5)  The yard area accessible to the chickens must be fenced with fencing adequate to contain the chickens to the property on which they are kept (the property). The henhouse/coop and the yard area available to the chickens for foraging shall be screened from view with opaque fencing; 
(6)  The space per chicken in the henhouse/coop shall not be less than four (4) square feet per chicken; 
(7)  The covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be located in the rear yard or a side yard of a corner lot; 
(8)  The property must be maintained so that odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken related substances are not to be detectable at the property's boundaries; 
(9)  All enclosures for the keeping of chickens shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent rodents or other pests from being harbored underneath or within the enclosure. The henhouse/coop must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators, including dogs and cats. Enclosures shall be kept in neat condition, including provision of clean, dry bedding materials and regular removal of waste materials. All manure not used for composting or fertilizer shall be removed promptly; 
(10)  All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rodents or other pests shall be kept in secure containers or otherwise protected against access by rodents and other pests; 
(11)  The sale of eggs or any other chicken products derived from the keeping of chickens is prohibited. 
(Code 1970, § 4-2; Ord. No. 92-04, § 1, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 95-21, § 1, 4-3-95; Ord. No. 2017-12, §§ 1, 2, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 4.03. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1, adopted Apr. 27, 2003, repealed § 4.03, which pertained to maintenance of places where kept and derived from Code 1970, § 4-3.  
Sec. 4.04. - Traps prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person (other than authorized personnel of the Game and Fresh Water Commission of the State of Florida) to set or contrive, at any time, any trap, snare or other device or instrument which would constitute a hazard endangering the life or limb of any person, wild or domesticated animal or fowl, within the city, other than in the yard or enclosure of the residence of such person. 
(Code 1970, § 4-4)  
Sec. 4.05. - Destruction of fowl or animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot or in any manner to kill any birds or animals, or to attempt to do so, or to disturb the nests, eggs or young of birds. 
(Code 1970, § 4-6)  
Sec. 4.06. - Potentially rabid animals. 
(a)  The owner or any other person having knowledge shall immediately report to the county animal control any dog, cat or other animal, whether vaccinated or not, which: 
(1)  Has been bitten by another animal, which animal exhibits symptoms of, or is suspected of, having rabies; 
(2)  Which has bitten any person; or 
(3)  Which exhibits symptoms of rabies. 
(b)  Such dogs, cats, or other animals shall be kept under such observation as required by the county animal control. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person who has reasonable notice that a dog, cat, or other animal is rabid to fail to notify the county animal control or to dispose of any dog, cat, or other animal inconsistent with this article. 
(d)  If any dog, cat, or other animal showing symptoms of rabies or suspected of having rabies cannot safely be taken, enclosed or kept impounded according to the provisions hereof, the county animal control may order same destroyed, at the expense of the owner. 
(Code 1970, § 4-22; Ord. No. 95-21, § 2, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 4.07. - Retail sale of cats and dogs. 
(a)  Prohibited sales. No retail establishment shall display, sell, barter, or offer for sale any cat or dog within the city. For purposes of this section, "retail establishment" shall have the same meaning as "retail sales" establishment defined in section 271.00 of the Safety Harbor Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following organizations are exempt from the prohibitions of this section: 
(1)  Publicly operated animal shelters or publicly operated animal control facilities; 
(2)  Duly incorporated nonprofit organizations operated for the purpose of rescuing and securing adoptions for stray, abandoned, or surrendered animals, and which do not breed animals; 
(3)  A retail establishment providing space for adoption of cats or dogs from either organizations described in subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above; and/or 
(4)  A person or entity that causes or allows the home breeding or studding of a cat or dog resulting in no more than two (2) litters per adult animal per calendar year, provided such activity is not conducted from a retail establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-24, § 2, 11-7-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1, adopted Apr. 27, 2003, repealed § 4.07, which pertained to certain animals running at large prohibited and derived from Code 1970, § 4-1.  
Sec. 4.08. - Impounding of animals running at large. 
If any dog, cat, or other animal is found running at large, it shall be taken up and impounded by the county animal control in accordance with their regulations. 
(Code 1970, § 4-23; Ord. No. 95-21, § 3, 4-3-95)  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Damage by dogs, F.S. Ch. 767. 
 
Sec. 4.09. - Public nuisance animals. 
The owner of any public nuisance animal, as defined by the county animal control ordinance, as amended, shall be deemed to be in violation of this article, regardless of the knowledge, intent or culpability of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § 4, 4-3-95) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 95-21, adopted Apr. 3, 1995, amended § 4.09 to read as set out herein. Formerly, § 4.09 pertained to definitions and derived from § 4-17 of the 1970 Code.  
Secs. 4.10, 4.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 5 and 6 of Ord. No. 95-21, adopted Apr. 3, 1995, repealed §§ 4.10 and 4.11 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to control and restraint of dogs and vaccinations, respectively, and derived from §§ 4-18 and 4-20 of the 1970 Code.  
Chapter 5 - BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, adopted Feb. 7, 2011, repealed ch. 5, §§ 5.01—5.18, and enacted a new ch. 5, §§ 5.01—5.28, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete derivation of the former provisions see the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Building regulations, § 12(40). 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; code enforcement board, § 2.10.01 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; finance, Ch. 7; public safety building construction, § 8.18 et seq.; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; licenses, Ch. 14; sign regulations, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; public service tax, Art. II, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Minimum standards—building codes, F.S. § 553.73; inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq.; thermal efficiency code, F.S. § 553.900, et seq.; Pinellas County countywide building regulation act, Ch. 75-489, as amended by Ch. 78-594, Laws of Florida. 
 
ARTICLE I. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Establishing the Florida Building Code as the building code of the city. 
(a)  Building code established. The Florida Building Code, as promulgated by the Florida Building Commission, as amended by the Pinellas County Construction Licensing Board and/or the Florida Building Commission, is established as the minimum building code of the city pursuant to F.S. § 553.70 et seq. and includes, but is not limited to, the following volumes: the Florida Accessibility Code, Florida Energy Code, Building, Plumbing, Electrical, and Mechanical Codes, Gas Code, and Swimming Pool Code. 
(b)  Scope. The Florida Building Code shall be viewed as minimum requirements for the purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures in the city. 
(c)  Appeals. Appeals of decisions and interpretations of the technical codes by the building official shall be considered and decided by the Pinellas County Construction Licensing Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Notices of appeal of decisions and interpretations of the building code shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official and the Pinellas County Construction Licensing Board. 
(d)  Permits required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any required impact-resistant coverings, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. The building official shall not issue a permit for any property within the jurisdiction to an owner or authorized agent who has an expired permit, performed work for which a permit is required without first obtaining a permit, or otherwise violated this chapter until the said violation has been corrected. 
(e)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs or installation of replacement parts may be made without a permit, provided the repairs do not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or loadbearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements. Ordinary minor repairs also does not include addition to, alteration of replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring systems or mechanical equipment or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(f)  Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a written application on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose. Each application shall be inscribed with the date of application, and the Florida Building Code in effect as of that date. 
(g)  Expiration. Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the time the work is commenced. Failure to obtain an approved inspection within one hundred eighty (180) days of the previous approved inspection shall constitute suspension or abandonment. The building official is authorized to grant in writing, one (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than ninety (90) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Permits issued for the demolition of a structure shall expire sixty (60) days from the date of issuance. For a justifiable cause, one (1) extension of time for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days may be allowed. Such request shall be in writing to the building official. 
(h)  Fees. A schedule of permit fees for required permits shall be adopted by resolution of the city commission and provided with the building permit application form. 
(i)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of the building code or any other provision stated in this chapter shall be subject to all penalties and remedies available under state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.02. - Duties and powers of the building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of articles I, II and III of this chapter. The building official shall have the authority to render code interpretations and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of relevant provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Building official qualifications. The building official shall be licensed as a building code administrator in the State of Florida. 
(c)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a building official to perform an act or duty, it is to be construed to authorize the building official to designate, delegate and authorize professional level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(d)  Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with applicable code provisions. 
(e)  Revocation of permits. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any code provision. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Stop work order. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(h)  Inspections. The building official shall make all required inspections, or shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspection shall be in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion, as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that may arise, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(i)  Right-of-entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the building regulations provided in this chapter, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this Code. If such building, structure, or premises is occupied, the building official shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(j)  Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of the duties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.03. - Notices and orders. 
(a)  Notice to person responsible. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a building code or building maintenance violation, or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official shall direct the code inspector to prepare and issue a notice directed to the owner(s) and any mortgage holder when condemnation is being pursued in a manner prescribed in this subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  Form. Notices and orders shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(3)  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
(4)  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the subject property into code compliance. 
(5)  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
(6)  Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to each person at the address as it appears on the official public records. 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 5.04. - In general. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and constitute minimum requirements and standards for structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; and for the occupancy of existing structures and premises. 
(b)  Intent. This article shall be constructed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety, and welfare in so far as they are affected by continued occupancy and maintenance of structures. Existing structures that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.05. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. The provisions of this article shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures as set forth in section 5.04. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this article specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(b)  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this article, or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. 
(c)  Applicability of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Florida Building Code as established in section 5.01. 
(d)  Historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe. 
(e)  Requirements not covered. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the requirements of this article, shall be determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.06. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions provided below: 
Abandoned property. The word "abandoned" is hereby defined as voluntarily relinquished by the owner for an apparently indefinite period of time. As applied to motor vehicles or other articles of property, the term includes, but is not limited to, any motor vehicle or other article of personal property which is left upon the public or private property without the consent of the public entity, owner, lessee, or occupant thereof for longer than two (2) hours. 
Abandoned structure. An "abandoned structure" is hereby defined as any structure that is in a partially dismantled state or which remains uninhabitable for more than twelve (12) consecutive months and there is no active building permit for work to the structure or which remains uninhabitable for more than eighteen (18) months, even if there is an active building permit for work to the structure. 
Acceptable indoor air quality. Air in which there are no known contaminants at harmful concentrations. 
Addition. An extension or increase to floor area or height of a building or structure. 
Alter or alteration. Any change or modification in construction or occupancy. 
Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Guard. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
Habitable space. A space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, screen enclosures, sunrooms, storage or utility space and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
Housekeeping unit. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, cooking, sleeping and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
Imminent danger. A condition that could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
Inoperative vehicle. The word "inoperative" is hereby defined as not in working condition as designed, or incapable of being operated lawfully. For example, without limiting the meaning of the term, a motor vehicle designed to be operated upon the public streets shall be deemed inoperative if a tag with a current registration (also known as a license plate) of a kind required under Florida law as a condition of operation upon the public streets is not affixed thereto, or if one (1) or more parts which are required for the operation of the vehicle are missing or not attached to the vehicle as designed; provided, however, that the following shall not be considered inoperative: 
a.  A motor vehicle not in working condition or incapable of being operated lawfully kept on residentially zoned property or the property of a residential use for not more than thirty (30) days, unless kept in a garage, under a carport, or in a driveway, and covered by a cover designed and manufactured to cover said vehicle and said cover is maintained in a clean and reasonable manner, and not causing a health, safety or fire hazard and may not be parked in any other part of the lot, yard, or landscaped area; 
b.  A motor vehicle not in working condition or incapable of being operated lawfully kept on residentially zoned property is not permitted to be parked on a vacant lot; 
c.  A motor vehicle not in working condition or incapable of being operated lawfully, kept in a garage, under a carport, or in a driveway and covered by a cover designed and manufactured to cover said vehicle and said cover is maintained in a clean and reasonable manner, and not causing a health, safety or fire hazard; 
d.  A motor vehicle not in working condition or incapable of being operated lawfully kept upon nonresidential property where the owner or tenant is authorized by the city for the service or storage of motor vehicles; 
e.  Only one (1) such vehicle, which meets the above exceptions, excluding nonresidential properties licensed for the service or storage of motor vehicles, may be permitted per address or property. 
Labeled. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that's maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. 
Nuisance. Any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
a.  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
b.  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; 
c.  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
d.  Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Openable area. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner. The owner of fee title to the property in question. 
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
Rooming house. A building arranged or occupied for lodging with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
Sleeping unit. A room or space in which people sleep which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units. 
Structure. A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. 
Tenant. A person who rents, leases or subleases, through either a written or oral agreement, real property form another for a fixed time. 
Toilet room. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from any space. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2019-08, §§ 2, 3, 8-5-2019)  
Sec. 5.07. - Handrails and guardrails. 
(a)  General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four (4) risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than thirty (30) inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than thirty-four (34) inches high or more than thirty-eight (38) inches high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than thirty-six (36) inches high for residential and forty-two (42) inches high for commercial for landings, balconies, porches, decks or ramps or other walking surfaces. Balusters shall not be spaced more than four (4) inches apart. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.08. - Light, ventilation, and occupancy limitations. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of a structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Light standards. 
(1)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) window facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such windows shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. Provided, however, where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet. The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
(2)  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times. In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, and stairways shall be illuminated at floors and landings at all times that the building space served by the means of egress is occupied. 
(3)  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures as determined by the building official. 
(d)  Ventilation standards. 
(1)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum glazed area required in subsection 5.08(c)(1). Provided, however, where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet. The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
(2)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by subsection 5.08(d)(1), except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
(3)  Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit. Provided, however, devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances. 
(4)  Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent of the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
(5)  Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(e)  Occupancy limitations. 
(1)  Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven (7) feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three (3) feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
(2)  Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet, except: 
a.  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four (4) feet on center and projecting not more than six (6) inches below the required ceiling height of seven (7) feet are permitted. 
b.  In basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, a ceiling height of not less than six (6) feet, eight (8) inches with not less than six (6) feet, four (4) inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions shall be permitted. 
c.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area, shall be permitted. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five (5) feet or more shall be included. 
(3)  Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Room area. Every bedroom shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet. 
b.  Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable space and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces. 
c.  Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
d.  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
e.  Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width; plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities; heating facilities and electrical receptacles requirements; smoke detector and emergency escape requirements. 
(4)  Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the building official, endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants. 
(5)  Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements. 
a.  A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet. A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections b. and c. below. 
b.  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this section shall be provided. 
c.  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
d.  The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3). 
(6)  Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.09. - Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(d)  Rooming houses. At least one (1) water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units. 
(e)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants. 
(f)  Employee's facilities. A minimum of one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
(g)  Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.10. - Toilet rooms. 
(a)  Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
(b)  Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units shall have access by traversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
(c)  Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employee's working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located no more than one (1) story above or below the employee's working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of five hundred (500) feet. Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. Provided, however, facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of five hundred (500) feet from the employee's regular working area to the facilities. 
(d)  Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.11. - Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
(a)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks, defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(b)  Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
(c)  Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, back-siphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the building official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.12. - Water system. 
(a)  General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water. 
(b)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(c)  Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(d)  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of hot and cold water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees. A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.13. - Sanitary drainage system. 
(a)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewer disposal system. 
(b)  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.14. - Storm drainage. 
(a)  General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that adversely impacts neighboring property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.15. - Mechanical and electrical requirements. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided by existing buildings. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. The owner and/or operator shall not for any reason remove any mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment which has been supplied by the owner and/or operator except for replacement or repair. 
(c)  Heating facilities. 
(1)  Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
(2)  Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of seventy (70) degrees in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one (1) or more dwelling units or sleeping units, shall supply heat to the occupants and maintain a temperature of not less than seventy (70) degrees in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
(4)  Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat and maintain a temperature of not less than seventy (70) degrees during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(5)  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions are exempt from the provisions of this subsection. 
(d)  Mechanical equipment. 
(1)  Mechanical appliances. All mechanical equipment furnished by the owner or operator including, but not limited to, fireplaces, dishwashers, garbage disposals, cooking appliances, air conditioning and heating systems and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition and shall be capable of performing the intended function. Adequate maintenance shall be provided on all mechanical equipment, including ductwork which is supplied by the owner and/or operator. 
(2)  Removal of combustion products. All fuel burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. Provided, however, that fuel burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation, shall not be required to be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
(3)  Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall comply with the applicable Florida codes. 
(4)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(5)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(6)  Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outside or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved by the building official. 
(7)  General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function. 
(e)  Electrical facilities. 
(1)  Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and subsection 5.15(f). 
(2)  Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the building code established under section 5.01. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single phase electrical service having a rating of not less than sixty (60) amperes. 
(3)  Electrical system hazards. When it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the building official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(f)  Electrical equipment. 
(1)  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
(2)  Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one (1) grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one (1) receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
(3)  Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one (1) electric luminaire. 
(g)  Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
(1)  General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certification of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. 
(2)  Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. Provided, however, buildings equipped with only one (1) elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.16. - Fire safety requirements. 
(a)  Scope. The Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided by existing buildings. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Means of egress. 
(1)  General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and/or Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and/or Florida Building Code shall be unobstructed. 
(3)  Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys. 
(4)  Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction and the following requirements: 
a.  Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. 
b.  Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(d)  Fire-resistance ratings. 
(1)  Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
(2)  Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smoke stop doors shall be maintained in an operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
(e)  Fire protection systems. 
(1)  General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in a operable condition at all times in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(2)  Smoke alarms. Single or multi-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in all residential and institutional occupancies at all of the following locations: 
a.  At the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
b.  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
c.  In each story within a dwelling unit but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one (1) full story below the upper level. 
d.  Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(3)  Power source. In residential and institutional occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than is required for over-current protection. Provided, however, smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
(4)  Interconnection. Where more than one (1) smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in residential occupancies or institutional occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one (1) alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. Provided, however, that: 
a.  Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind. 
b.  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.17. - Exterior structure maintenance. 
(a)  General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, soffits, fascia, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted when said condition is evident on an exterior surface. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust and corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. 
(c)  Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half-inch. Multi-unit residential structures or non-residential structures containing multiple units which do not individually face the street, shall be permitted to have only one (1) number for the structure. 
(d)  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(e)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. 
(f)  Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(g)  Roof's drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that adversely impacts adjacent property. 
(h)  Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall faces and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(i)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust. 
(j)  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(k)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, porch, deck and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(l)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(m)  Window, skylights and door frames. Every window, skylight, and door frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. 
(n)  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(o)  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(p)  Insect screens. Dwelling units that are rented or leased shall have screens on all exterior openable windows and doors used or required for ventilation. Said screens shall be stretched and fitted and maintained without open rips or tears. 
(q)  Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwellings units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with subsection 5.16(c)(3) of article II, chapter 5, of this Code. 
(r)  Building security. Doors and windows for dwelling units, room units or housing units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
(s)  Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than one (1) inch. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. 
(t)  Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six (6) feet above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a locking device. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 4, 8-5-2019)  
Sec. 5.18. - Interior structure maintenance. 
(a)  General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
(b)  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(d)  Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, deck, porch or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(e)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(f)  Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
(g)  Extermination. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by a licensed contractor in a manner that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. Responsibility for complying with this provision shall be assigned as follows: 
(1)  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
(2)  Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant, non-residential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(3)  Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a non-residential structure shall be responsible for the extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination. 
(4)  Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. Provided, however, that where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.19. - Vacant structures. 
(a)  All vacant structures shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health, welfare or safety. No vacant structure may be boarded up for a period of time exceeding sixty (60) days unless the building official grants a waiver for extenuating circumstances beyond the property owner's control. The following are minimum vacant property standards to be adhered to when temporary board and seal is used. Compliance with these standards does not constitute repair of an unsafe or abandoned structure. 
(1)  Clear-Vue polycarbonate or similar product shall be used to fully cover all windows, doors, or other openings which may allow access to the interior of the building and facing a front yard or secondary front yard. For the purposes of this section, the front yard of a corner lot shall be the side of the property from which the property is addressed. The other side facing a street shall be considered a secondary front yard. 
(2)  Exterior grade sheathing plywood of three-eighths of an inch thickness or greater or Clear-Vue polycarbonate or similar product shall be used to fully cover all windows, doors and other openings along the side or rear walls which may allow access to the interior of the building. 
a.  Plywood covers shall be nailed, screwed or bolted firmly over each opening. 
b.  Plywood covers or other protective material must be painted to match the building colors. 
(3)  All doors shall be operable and locked with operable locks. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 5, 8-5-2019)  
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 5.20. - Unsafe structures and equipment abatement. 
(a)  General. All structures or equipment that are or hereafter become dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or uninhabitable shall be made safe, sanitary and/or inhabitable by corrective action, including, but not limited to, demolition, removal, or repair in accordance with this chapter or other applicable law, code, ordinance or regulations. 
(b)  Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to life, health, or property by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
(c)  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, or property. 
(d)  Structures unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the building official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this chapter, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
(e)  Closing of vacant structures. If a structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the building official is authorized to post a placard or condemnation on the premises and to order the structure closed up as to not be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the building official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the costs thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any available legal resource. 
(f)  Notice. Whenever the building official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be provided in accordance with subsection 5.22(b) of this article. 
(g)  Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the building official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word "CONDEMNED" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. 
(h)  Placard removal. The building official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. 
(i)  Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the building official shall be vacated as ordered by the building official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premise or who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premise or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.21. - Emergency measures. 
(a)  Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupancy of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice to read as follows: "THIS STRUCTURE IS UNSAFE AND ITS OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or demolishing the same structure. 
(b)  Temporary safeguards. Whenever in the opinion of the building official there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(c)  Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the building official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(d)  Emergency repairs. For the purpose of this section, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(e)  Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the Safety Harbor Code Enforcement Board, be afforded a hearing pursuant to the provisions of chapter 2, article III, division 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.22. - Demolition. 
(a)  General. The building official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the building official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two (2) years, to demolish and remove such structure. 
(b)  Notices and orders of unsafe building. The building official shall prepare and issue a notice of unsafe building directed to the owner(s) and any mortgage holder. The notice shall be served either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each person at the address as it appears on the official public records. The failure of any person to receive notice, other than the owner, shall not invalidate any proceedings under this section. The notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The street address and legal description of the building, structure, or premises. 
(2)  A statement indicating the building or structure has been declared unsafe by the building official, and a detailed report documenting the conditions determined to have rendered the building or structure unsafe under the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  A statement advising that if the required action as determined by the building official is not commenced or completed by the time specified, the building will be ordered vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed and the building official may cause the work to be done and all costs incurred charged against the property or owner of record. 
(4)  A statement advising that any person or mortgage holder having any legal interest in the property may appeal the notice by the building official to the code enforcement board; and that such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice and that failure to appeal in the time specified will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing. 
a.  If the building or structure is to be repaired, the notice shall require that all necessary permits be secured and the work commenced within sixty (60) days and continued to completion within such time as the building official determines. 
b.  If the building or structure is to be vacated, the notice shall indicate the time within which vacation is to be completed. 
c.  If the building or structure is to be demolished, the notice shall require that the premises be vacated within sixty (60) days, that all required permits be secured and that the demolition be completed within such time as determined reasonable by the building official. 
(c)  Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the building official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the costs of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 5.23. - Findings of fact. 
The city commission finds and determines that it is necessary to establish the minimum standards contained herein for the maintenance, upkeep, and appearance of improved or unimproved real property; and to provide a just, equitable and practicable method to preclude: 
(1)  Diminished property values; 
(2)  Detraction from the appropriate aesthetics of the city; and 
(3)  Creation of nuisance and other undesirable and unhealthy conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.24. - Nuisances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain, or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance as defined in section 5.06 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.25. - Nuisances. 
Every abandoned structure, abandoned property and inoperative vehicle as defined in section 5.06 of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.26. - Care of premises. 
All exterior property shall be maintained in accordance with the following minimum standards so as not to create a nuisance: 
(1)  Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a safe and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials or any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin to remain in a front yard or open area owned, occupied or in the possession of such person for a period of more than five (5) days. Garbage and refuse shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of chapter 10 of this Code. 
(2)  Grading and drainage. All premises with the exception of approved retention areas and reservoirs shall be graded and maintained to prevent erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
(3)  Walkways and driveways. All walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(4)  Maintenance of public rights-of-way. All tenants or occupants of any real property abutting any local street or alley in the city, or if no tenant or occupant, then the owner thereof, shall be required to keep that part of the street between such property lines and the curb, including the gutter of the street on which such property abuts, or up to the median point of an alley, improved or unimproved, in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. Said area shall be kept free from trash of all kinds except household waste that is being properly disposed. Grass, weeds, or other groundcover shall not exceed twelve (12) inches. Sidewalks shall be kept free from sand, leaves, algae growth, vegetation and slippery conditions. 
(5)  Yard maintenance. Improved lots or parcels shall be maintained free from weeds or untended plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches in height. Vacant lots or parcels that are adjacent to an improved property shall be maintained free from weeds or untended plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches in height a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from the property line adjoining the improved property and twenty-five (25) feet from the property line adjoining a public or private street. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees and shrubs, provided however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and individual or community gardens. 
(6)  Rodent harborage. All exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation. 
(7)  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
(8)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including, but not limited to, detached garages, fences and walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(9)  Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(10)  Swimming pools. Private swimming pools containing water more than twenty-four (24) inches in depth shall meet the following standards: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, lessee, tenant, occupant, or business entity (hereinafter collectively "person") to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit a swimming pool where the water quality deteriorates to such a poor level as to prevent clear visibility from the water's surface to the pool bottom or as to create a breeding ground for mosquitoes or other insects or the water is stagnant allowing algae to grow. 
b.  All pools built after 2000, which are subject to the regulations of F.S. ch. 515, shall be required to maintain such safety feature that was used to pass inspection, as required by F.S. § 515.27, in an operable and safe condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.27. - Enforcing authority. 
The code inspector, as defined under section 2.10.02 of this Code, shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this article. The code inspector may enforce the provisions of this article pursuant to the abatement procedure provided under section 5.28 or the provisions of chapter 2, article III, division 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 5.28. - Abatement procedure. 
(a)  Notice to abate. Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city, or wherein it is found that conditions exist which, if allowed to continue, will create a nuisance, the code inspector shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance or condition likely to create a nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(b)  Contents of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this article shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk requesting a hearing before the code enforcement board within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances and shall not be less than ten (10) days, except in the case of an abandoned or inoperable vehicle located on city property or any right-of-way which shall not be less than three (3) days, or except in case of an emergency; 
(2)  The location of the nuisance; 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance, if known; 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the city will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person, or the property upon which it is located; 
(6)  If a written notice of appeal is timely filed with the city clerk, the city clerk shall notify the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date and time when the owner or his/her agent or representative shall appear before the code enforcement board to show the board that the condition described in the notice of violation did not exist at the time the notice was issued, or to show good cause why the condition should not be remedied by the city at the expense of the owner. The notice by the city clerk shall also state that if the owner fails to appear before the code enforcement board at the designated time, in person or by representation, and has failed to take action to remedy the condition before the date specified by the code inspector for compliance, the code inspector may enter the property and take such action as is necessary to remedy the condition, without further notice to the owner, at cost to the owner, including the administrative costs which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(7)  If the nuisance is abandoned property or an inoperative vehicle, the notice to abate shall be in substantially the following form: 
a.  "NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is (unlawfully upon public property) or (improperly stored and is in violation of section 5.25 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Safety Harbor, Florida) and must be removed within ten (10) days, from the date of this notice; otherwise, it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order of the City of Safety Harbor. The owner will be liable for the costs of removal and destruction. 
b.  DATED THIS: (setting forth the date of posting of notice) 
c.  SIGNED: (Setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of the enforcement officer)." 
d.  Such notice shall not be less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements for a period of ten (10) days. 
(c)  Service of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance under this article shall be mailed by regular U.S. mail to the property owner's last known address as shown on the latest tax roll and also posted on the property containing the nuisance. 
(d)  Abatement by city generally. Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance is served pursuant to the provisions of this article to abate the same, the code inspector shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. 
(1)  The charge for removal or abatement of any nuisance shall be reasonably computed to include the actual cost of abatement and administrative costs such as, but not limited to, inspection and notice and in recognition of the minimum administrative time involved shall be a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)  If the property is a motor vehicle, the salvage value of such motor vehicle may be retained by the city to be applied to the cost of removal, destruction, storage and other similar costs thereof. The code enforcement officer is designated to administer the provisions of F.S. ch. 705, which pertain to lost or abandoned property. 
(3)  If the owner, agent, or person in control of any unsafe building or structure shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove such building or structure or portion thereof within the stated time limit, the city shall be authorized to abate the public nuisance through demolition in accordance with the provisions of the article III of chapter 5 of this Code as amended and as adopted by the city, or any other appropriate means. 
(4)  Cost incurred by the city under subsection (e), including reasonable attorney fees, court costs and the cost of demolition shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and if not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of invoice, shall become a lien upon the property from which unsafe building was removed and shall bear legal interest as set by the city manager from the date when the same became due and payable until paid. 
(e)  City's cost declared lien; collection as taxes. Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien against the real property upon which said nuisance existed and the city clerk may file a statement of lien for such costs with the clerk of the circuit court of Pinellas County, which lien shall be superior to any and all liens of mortgagees, mechanic's liens and all other liens of whatever type or nature and shall be of equal dignity to the lien of ad valorem taxes. This statement of lien claim shall contain the legal description of the premises on which such nuisance existed and the amount of the costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the nuisance. All such liens shall accrue legal interest as set by the city manager on the unpaid balance if not paid within thirty (30) days of mailing the invoice therefore. The owner or party in interest whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such costs by first class mail at the address shown on the latest tax roll. If such owner or party in interest fails to pay the same within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the notice of the amount thereof, the city shall be entitled to foreclose such lien. Such foreclosure shall be as provided by law, in the name of the city. In addition to all outstanding charges and interest, the city shall be entitled to collect and obtain judgment for the cost of the foreclosure suit including a reasonable attorney's fee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2011-14, §§ 1, 2, 11-7-2011)  
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-34, §§ 1—26, adopted Jan. 7, 1991, amended this chapter in its entirety, in effect repealing former §§ 6.01—6.03, relative to elections, and enacting similar new provisions as Arts. I—VII, §§ 6.01—6.26. Formerly, this chapter derived from §§ 6-1 and 6-2 of the city's 1970 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 86-41, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1986, and Ord. No. 90-23, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 1990. 
Charter reference— Government and legislative form of government, Art. II; elections, Art. IV. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
Ballot or official ballot when used in reference to: 
(1)  Voting machines, except when reference is made to write-in ballots, means that portion of the printed strips of cardboard, paper, or other material that is within the ballot frames containing the names of candidates, or a statement of a proposed constitutional amendment or other question or proposition submitted to the electorate at any election. 
(2)  Paper ballots means that printed sheet of paper containing the names of candidates, or a statement of proposed constitutional amendments or other questions or propositions submitted to the electorate at any election, on which sheet of paper an elector casts his or her vote. 
(3)  Electronic or electromechanical devices means a ballot which is voted by the process of punching or marking with a marking device for tabulation by automatic tabulating equipment or data processing equipment. 
Candidate means any person to whom any one (1) or more of the following applies: 
(1)  Any person who receives contributions or make expenditures, or gives his or her consent for any other person to receive contributions or make expenditures, with a view to bringing about his or her election to, or retention in, public office. 
(2)  Any person who appoints a treasurer and designates a primary depository. 
(3)  Any person who meets the requirements of Article IV, City Charter, and sections 6.04, 6.05 and 6.06 of this Code. 
Election means any city election, be it to choose elected officials or consider issues, including regular elections, issue elections and special elections. 
Election board means the clerk and inspectors appointed to conduct an election. 
Elector is synonymous with the word "voter" or "qualified elector or voter" and means a qualified resident of the city on the day of the election, properly registered in accordance with F.S. § § 97.041 through 97.105. 
Issue means a proposed amendment to the City Charter; an ordinance proposed by initiative pursuant to section 30, City Charter; a proposed repeal of an ordinance by referendum pursuant to section 30, City Charter; the recall of an elected official; an authorization to issue bonds or other forms of indebtedness; a proposed annexation of territory into the city; straw ballot; or any other public question to be voted upon by the electors of the city pursuant to state law, City Charter, local ordinance or call of the city commission. 
Issue election means an election called for the purpose of approving or disapproving an issue. 
Newspaper of general circulation means a newspaper printed in the language most commonly spoken in the area within which it circulates and which is readily available for purchase by all inhabitants in the area of circulation, but does not include a newspaper intended primarily for members of a particular professional or occupational group, a newspaper the primary function of which is to carry legal notices, or a newspaper that is given away primarily to distribute advertising. 
Nonpartisan office means an office for which a candidate is prohibited from campaigning or qualifying as a candidate for election or retention in office based on party affiliation. 
Office or city office means a city position filled by the electors at an election. 
Persons with disabilities means individuals who have a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
Polling place is the building which contains the polling room where ballots are cast. 
Polling room means the actual room in which ballots are cast. 
Precinct means that geographic area designated by the board of county commissioners upon recommendation of the county supervisor of elections. 
Qualifying means the procedure pursuant to Article IV, City Charter, and sections 6.04, 6.05 and 6.06 of this Code, whereby an individual causes his or her name to be placed on the next city election as a candidate for city office. 
Special election means an election called for the purpose of filling a vacancy in elected city office or to approve or disapprove an issue. 
Supervisor means the Supervisor of Elections of Pinellas County, Florida. 
Voting booth or booth means that booth or enclosure wherein an elector casts his or her ballot, be it a paper ballot, a voting machine ballot, or a ballot cast for tabulation by an electronic or electromechanical device. 
Voting machine means that electromechanical or electronic equipment or device approved or certified by the secretary of state pursuant to Sections 101.28, 101.294 or 101.5605, Florida Statutes, used to cast ballots in an election and owned or provided by the supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 95-16, § 1, 4-3-95; Ord. No. 96-25, § 1, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 99-20, § 1, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1, 4-7-2003)  
Sec. 6.02. - Duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk shall see that all city elections are conducted in a proper and legal manner. Subject to the approval of the city commission, the clerk may delegate any or all of the responsibilities for administering the election to the supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 2, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.03. - Voter registration. 
(a)  The city does hereby recognize and adopt the permanent single registration system for the registration of electors established by Section 97.105, Florida Statutes. Individuals residing within the corporate limits of the city otherwise qualified and registered to vote in accordance with Sections 97.041 through 97.105, Florida Statutes, are the electors of the city. 
(b)  No individual residing within the corporate limits of the city registering to vote less than thirty (30) days prior to any election shall be permitted to vote in that election. 
(c)  Any registered elector of the city may be removed from the registration records pursuant to Section 98.081, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 3, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 96-25, § 2, 7-15-96)  
Sec. 6.03.1. - Applicability of state election code. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all provisions of the state election code, Chapters 97 through 106, Florida Statutes, that do not expressly apply to municipal elections shall not govern city elections. 
(Ord. No. 96-25, § 7, 7-15-96) 
Editor's note— Section 7 of Ord. No. 96-25, adopted July 15, 1996, amended the Code by adding § 6.27. For purposes of classification, such provisions have been codified herein as § 6.03.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
ARTICLE II. - CANDIDATES 
 
Sec. 6.04. - Restrictions on qualification. 
(a)  Section 99.012, Florida Statutes, is adopted, and no individual may qualify as a candidate for city office unless he or she has complied with Section 99.012, Florida Statutes. 
(b)  No individual serving on an appointed city board other than the personnel review board or committee without salary shall be required to resign from that position in order to qualify as a candidate for city office. However, a resignation is required prior to that individual assuming elected city office. Any individual serving on the personnel review board must meet the requirements of section 2.25 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 2, 4-7-2003)  
Sec. 6.05. - Notice of qualifying period; method of qualifying. 
The city clerk shall cause a notice of election candidate qualifying period to be published on the city's official website one (1) time at least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of the qualifying period. The notice shall be styled "City of Safety Harbor Notice of Election Candidate Qualifying Period" and shall state the date of the election, the dates of the qualifying period, and what offices are to be filled. The city clerk may, but is not required to, publish such notice on other digital platforms. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 5, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 2019-17, § 2, 8-5-2019)  
Sec. 6.06. - Qualifying fees for candidates. 
The candidate qualifying fees are hereby established at sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for a candidate for mayor-commissioner and forty dollars ($40.00) for a candidate for commissioner. In addition, all candidates must pay an assessment in accordance with Section 99.093(1), Florida Statutes. There shall be a charge of one (.01) cent for petition cards in excess of one hundred fifty (150) and a charge for verification of ten (.10) cents per card in excess of one hundred fifty (150). 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 6, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.07. - Vacancy in candidacy. 
(a)  Withdrawal. If the withdrawal of a qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in only one (1) candidate remaining on the ballot for that office, the remaining candidate shall be declared elected and no election for that office shall be required. 
(b)  Death or removal; one candidate remaining. 
(1)  If the death or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in only one (1) candidate remaining for that office, a special election shall be scheduled by the city commission not less than sixty (60) days nor more than one-hundred twenty (120) days after the vacancy in the candidacy has occurred. 
(2)  If a special election is called pursuant to subsection (b)(1) above, a supplemental qualifying period shall be established beginning on the day the vacancy in the candidacy has occurred and ending at noon on the forty-sixth day prior to the date of the special election. Any candidate wishing to qualify during this supplemental qualifying period shall file the qualifying statement and petition required by the City Charter, accompanied by such qualifying fees as set by the City Code, prior to the end of the supplemental qualifying period. 
(3)  The remaining candidate for that office shall not be required to requalify for election or pay a second qualifying fee. The remaining candidate shall not be declared an unopposed candidate under Chapter 106, Florida Statutes, unless no additional candidate qualifies for election during the supplemental qualifying period. The remaining candidate may continue to accept contributions until he is declared unopposed. If he is declared unopposed pursuant to this section, he shall be declared elected and the special election shall be canceled. 
(4)  The filing of campaign expense statements pursuant to Chapter 106, Florida Statutes, by candidates in a special election called under subsection (b)(1), including the remaining candidate, shall not be later than such dates as fixed by the city clerk. In fixing such dates, the city clerk shall take into consideration and be governed by the practical time limitations and the dates established for such statements in a regular city election. 
(5)  If a special election is called pursuant to subsection (b)(1) and other candidates qualify for election during the supplemental qualifying period, supplemental absentee ballots for the special election shall be mailed by the city clerk to any absentee voter who was mailed an absentee ballot for the regular election. If an absentee voter returns the initial ballot he was mailed, his vote for that office for which the special election was called will be null and void, but his votes on all other offices and issues shall be counted. 
(c)  Death, withdrawal or removal; no candidate remaining. 
(1)  If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in no candidates for an office, and more than twenty-one (21) days remain prior to the date of the election, qualifying shall be reopened to allow candidates to qualify for the election to that office in accordance with the City Charter and Code. Any candidate wishing to qualify shall file the qualifying statement and petition required by the City Charter, accompanied by such qualifying fees as set by the City Code, no later than noon of the twenty-first day prior to the date of the election. 
(2)  If less than twenty-one (21) days remain to the election date after the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of the lone qualified candidate for an office, and if a vacancy shall result on the city commission, the remaining commissioners shall appoint by majority vote a person otherwise qualified to be a commissioner, and the person so appointed shall serve as commissioner for the entire term. If the commission does not appoint a person to fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days after the first regular commission meeting held after the vacancy has occurred, a special election shall be held in order to fill the vacancy for the unexpired portion of the entire term. The special election shall be held not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days after the initial thirty-day period has expired. 
(3)  If the qualifying period is reopened pursuant to section 6.07(c)(1), supplemental absentee ballots reflecting the new candidates who have qualified for that office only shall be mailed by the city clerk as soon as possible to any absentee voter who was mailed an absentee ballot. If an absentee voter returns the initial ballot he was mailed, his vote for the office for which qualification was reopened will be null and void, but his votes on all other offices and issues shall be counted. 
(d)  Removal of name from ballot. The name of any qualified candidate who has withdrawn, died or been removed from the ballot shall not be printed on the ballot. If the ballot cannot be changed, any votes for that candidate shall be null and void. 
(e)  Refund of qualifying fee. A candidate withdrawing or being removed from the ballot after having qualified and paid the qualification fee shall not receive a refund of the qualifying fee. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 7, 1-7-91)  
ARTICLE III. - ISSUE ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 6.08. - Campaign finance. 
(a)  Any individual, person, partnership, committee, association, corporation or other combination of individuals having collective capacity seeking to influence the outcome of any issue election, including any efforts to have the election called, by the receipt of contributions in an aggregate amount in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or making of expenditures in an aggregate amount in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall report such contributions and expenditures in the manner provided in Section 106.07, Florida Statutes, in the case of a political committee and Section 106.071, Florida Statutes, in the case of any individual making independent expenditures. 
(b)  A committee circulating petitions seeking a recall election of an elected official pursuant to Section 100.361, Florida Statutes, a petitioners' committee proposing an initiative pursuant to section 30, City Charter, a petitioners' committee proposing the repeal of an ordinance by the referendum provisions of section 30, City Charter, and any individual, group, association or corporation seeking to influence the results of a bond referendum shall constitute a political committee under Chapter 106, Florida Statutes, and shall register as provided in Section 106.03, Florida Statutes, prior to soliciting and collecting any petition signatures and shall file campaign finance reports as required by Section 106.07, Florida Statutes, provided such committee anticipates receiving or does receive contributions in the aggregate in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and anticipates making or does make expenditures in the aggregate in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  The city commission may appropriate funds for the purpose of providing informational materials to the public in connection with any issue election, except for a recall election. The city commission shall not be considered a political committee as defined in Section 106.011(1), Florida Statutes, and shall not be required to file reports of any such informational expenditures pursuant to Section 106.07, Florida Statutes. 
(d)  Any suspected or alleged violations of Chapter 106, Florida Statutes, in connection with any issue election shall be transmitted to the division of elections of the Florida Department of State pursuant to the enforcement provisions of Chapter 106. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 8, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 95-16, § 2, 4-3-95; Ord. No. 96-25, § 3, 7-15-96)  
Sec. 6.09. - Initiative and referendum elections. 
(a)  The petitioners' committee shall pay the supervisor the fee for verification as required by Section 99.097(4), Florida Statutes. 
(b)  If the city commission is considering an ordinance proposed under section 30, City Charter, at the time of its withdrawal under section 35, City Charter, it may, in its discretion, continue such consideration. If an election has been called prior to the petition's withdrawal, the city clerk shall, upon receipt of the request, transmit a notice thereof to the city commission and the supervisor, and the city commission shall cancel the election. 
(c)  If at any time prior to the election the city commission adopts the proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance or repeals an adopted ordinance that is the subject of a referendum petition, and an election has been called for the electors to vote on that ordinance, the city commission shall cancel that election. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 9, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 95-16, § 3, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 6.10. - Bond authorization; involuntary annexation. 
(a)  An election required by the City Charter to approve the issuance of bonds or other forms of indebtedness shall be called and conducted pursuant to Sections 100.291 through 100.342, Florida Statutes, and this chapter. 
(b)  A referendum on the involuntary annexation of land adjacent to the corporate limits shall be held and conducted pursuant to Section 171.0413, Florida Statutes, and the provisions of this chapter to the extent not inconsistent with the statute. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 10, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.11. - Straw ballots. 
(a)  The city commission may at any time, by resolution, call an election for the purpose of having the electors of the city vote on an issue in a nonbinding referendum. The resolution shall call the election, set the date therefor and prescribe the ballot language. The city clerk shall cause a notice of election to be published in accordance with section 6.14. 
(b)  The election may be held in conjuncture with a regularly scheduled state, county or city election or at such other time as provided by the city commission and shall be conducted in accordance with this chapter and the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 11, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.12. - Election code; violations, penalties. 
The provisions of Chapter 104, Florida Statutes, are hereby adopted and made fully applicable to all city elections. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 12, 1-7-91)  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTION ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 6.13. - Precincts. 
(a)  Those precincts approved by the board of county commissioners situated within the corporate limits of the city are hereby designated as the city precincts to be used in any and all city elections. 
(b)  The city clerk shall see that a certified copy of any annexation ordinance approved by the city commission is sent to the supervisor. Precinct boundaries may be altered to conform to the municipal boundaries as changed due to annexation. 
(c)  In the event a precinct boundary is unable to be altered to conform to annexation by the date of a city election, any qualified elector residing within the area annexed shall be eligible to vote in the city election. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 13, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 96-25, § 4, 7-15-96)  
Sec. 6.14. - Notice of election. 
(a)  The city clerk shall cause a notice of election to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least once during the fifth week and once in the third week preceding the week in which the election is held. 
(b)  The notice shall be styled "City of Safety Harbor Notice of Election" and shall state the date of the election, what offices are to be filled and any issue to be voted upon. The ballot language of any issue shall be included in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 14, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.15. - Polling places. 
(a)  Whenever possible, those polling places designated and used by the supervisor for federal, state and county elections shall be used for city elections. 
(b)  Each polling place shall be accessible to the handicapped and comply with the standards of accessibility set forth in Section 101.715(1), Florida Statutes. 
(c)  The polling place shall be arranged in the manner prescribed in Section 101.37, Florida Statutes. 
(d)  No one except the inspectors of the elections shall be allowed to speak to the voter while in the polling place casting his or her vote, and no inspector shall speak or interfere with any voter concerning the manner of his or her voting or any ballot he or she may vote, other than to perform his or her duties as such inspector specified herein. Provided, however, that an elector may seek and receive assistance in accordance with Section 101.051, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 15, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 95-16, § 4, 4-3-95)  
Sec. 6.16. - Voting machines. 
(a)  Voting machines shall be used in each city election. The machines shall be owned by the county and supplied by the supervisor. 
(b)  The number of voting machines in each precinct for city elections shall be determined by the city clerk. In making such determination, the city clerk shall consider the traditional voting patterns and turnout in each precinct for a city election and furnish the number of machines necessary to handle efficiently the anticipated number of voters in that precinct. The clerk also shall follow the requirements of Section 101.33, Florida Statutes, in determining the number of voting machines to be used. 
(c)  The voting machines to be used in a city election shall be prepared by the supervisor in accordance with Chapter 101, Florida Statutes, and with the approval of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 16, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 96-25, § 5, 7-15-96)  
Sec. 6.17. - Ballots. 
(a)  The form of the ballot in elections for city commissioner shall be in substantially the same form as the form of the ballot for the state general election as prescribed in Section 101.151, Florida Statutes. Ballots shall be prepared by the supervisor in accordance with state law and this chapter and with the approval of the city clerk. 
(b)  Candidates shall be grouped together on the ballot by seat and for each seat in alphabetical order by the last name of each candidate. Any issue on a ballot also having candidates for elective office shall be placed in a position on the ballot so that it is separate and distinct from that portion of the ballot containing candidates' names and shall be placed on the ballot either after or to the right of the candidates' position on the ballot. 
(c)  The name of a candidate shall be printed on the ballot in the same form as the name appears on the candidate's request to be placed on the ballot. No title or evidence of incumbency shall be printed. 
(d)  The city clerk shall publish a sample ballot in a newspaper of general circulation prior to the day of the election but no more than ten (10) days prior to the election. However, the city clerk shall not be required to publish a sample ballot if the supervisor has or will publish a sample ballot that includes the city's election. Such publication shall be conspicuous and not be included within the legal notices and advertisements being published per Chapter 50, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 17, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 3, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 2012-18, § 1, 11-19-2012)  
Sec. 6.18. - Poll workers. 
(a)  The clerk shall determine and select the necessary number of poll workers for any city election with the approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Poll workers shall conduct the election in the manner provided in Chapters 101 and 102, Florida Statutes, to the extent not inconsistent with this chapter and report the results in the manner directed by the city clerk. Electors shall cast their votes in the manner provided in Chapter 101, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 18, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.19. - Absentee voting. 
(a)  An elector may request an absentee ballot and cast an absentee vote in any city election. 
(b)  An absentee ballot may be requested from the supervisor of elections for the county in the manner provided in Section 101.62, Florida Statutes, and voted in accordance with Sections 101.64 through 101.67, Florida Statutes, and returned to the office of the supervisor of elections. 
(c)  Absentee ballots for any city election must be requested from and returned to the supervisor of elections for the county and shall be received and kept in the same manner as provided in Section 101.67, Florida Statutes. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Absentee ballots shall be canvassed by the canvassing board in the manner provided in Section 101.68, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 19, 1-7-91; Ord. No. 96-25, § 6, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 98-08, §§ 1, 2, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 4, 4-7-2003)  
Sec. 6.19.1. - Early voting. 
The City of Safety Harbor intends to exercise its right to exempt itself from the provisions of Section 101.657, Florida Statutes, and, therefore, shall contract with the Pinellas County Supervisor of Elections to provide facilities and services for early voting. Voters who wish to participate in early voting may do so at the offices of the Pinellas County Supervisor of Elections. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 12-6-2004)  
ARTICLE V. - CANVASSING, PROTESTS AND CONTESTS 
 
Sec. 6.20. - Canvassing board. 
(a)  The city commission shall meet as a canvassing board and shall canvass the returns of each city election. In the event that any commissioner is the subject of a recall election in the election being canvassed or is a candidate with opposition in the election being canvassed, he or she shall be replaced by a qualified elector of the city appointed by the city commission. Anyone so appointed shall not be a candidate with opposition in the election being canvassed or an active participant in the campaign of any candidate in the election being canvassed. However, any such appointments shall only be required to ensure that there are at least three (3) voting members of the board. Any qualified elector so appointed shall serve on the board only for purposes of the regular or special election being canvassed, and his term shall terminate upon the completion of the canvassing of said election. The city clerk and city attorney shall serve as ex officio members of the board. The board shall ensure that the ballots cast for any election are fairly and accurately counted and shall certify the results of each election. 
(b)  The board shall canvass the returns in accordance with Section 102.141(3), Florida Statutes, and shall canvass absentee ballots in accordance with Section 101.68, Florida Statutes. 
(c)  At such time as the board has canvassed the returns, disposed of any challenges thereto, and ascertained and certified the results, the city clerk shall issue a certificate of election to each candidate elected and shall issue a certificate of each issue. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 20, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.21. - Recounts. 
(a)  If the returns for any office reflect that a candidate was defeated by one-half (½) of a percent or less of the votes cast for such office, that a commissioner subject to recall was retained or not retained by one-half (½) of a percent or less of the votes cast on the question of recall, or that an issue appearing on the ballot was approved or rejected by one-half (½) of a percent or less of the votes cast on such measure, the canvassing board shall order a recount of the votes cast with respect to such office, recall or issue. A recount need not be ordered with respect to the returns for any office, however, if the candidate or candidates defeated or recalled for such office by one-half (½) of a percent or less of the votes cast for such office or their designated representatives request that a recount not be made. The canvassing board shall examine the counters on the machines or the tabulation of the ballots cast in each precinct in which the office or issue appeared on the ballot and determine whether the returns correctly reflect the votes cast. If there is a discrepancy between the returns and the counters of the machines or the tabulation of the ballots cast, the counters of such machines or the tabulation of the ballots cast shall be presumed correct and such votes shall be canvassed accordingly. 
(b)  If a machine recount ordered in accordance with subsection (a) of this section reflects a margin of one-half (½) of one (1) percent or less in an election for an office, a manual recount shall be ordered upon the request of the losing candidate or his designated representative. 
(c)  Upon request of any board member, candidate or elector for good cause shown, the canvassing board may, prior to the final certification of results, order a machine recount in whole or in part of the election in which that candidate participated or of any issue election. 
(d)  The procedures for any manual recount shall be as follows: 
(1)  A counting team of at least two (2) electors and the clerk or his/her designee or the supervisor or his/her designee shall be appointed by the canvassing board to count no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) ballots. A counting team shall have, when possible, a representative of each candidate, who may be the two (2) electors appointed by the canvassing board. The board may appoint one (1) of its members to each counting team. 
(2)  A counting team shall count the votes of one (1) precinct at a time. The absentee ballots shall be counted at one (1) time as if a separate precinct. Each team shall record the number of votes for each position on the ballot, the number of no votes for said office or issue, the number of void ballots, and the totals for those categories for each precinct it counts. 
(3)  If a counting team is unable to determine a voter's intent in casting a ballot, the ballot shall be presented to the canvassing board for the board to determine the voter's intent. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 21, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.22. - Tie elections. 
If in any election the returns, as certified by the canvassing board, result in a tie vote, the election shall be decided by lot, which shall mean that the name of each candidate who has tied shall be placed on a piece of paper, which shall be placed in a container so that the candidates' names are not visible. A member of the canvassing board designated by the board shall then select one (1) piece of paper from the container. The candidate whose name appears on that piece of paper shall be declared elected. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 22, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.23. - Protests and contests. 
The provisions of Sections 102.166 through and including 102.169, Florida Statutes, are hereby adopted for all city elections. All protests and contests challenging the returns of any election shall be filed in accordance with these state statutes, except that the city canvassing board shall be substituted for the county canvassing board. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 23, 1-7-91)  
ARTICLE VI. - CAMPAIGN PRACTICE 
 
Sec. 6.24. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that all elections shall be conducted in a proper, orderly and fair manner so as to permit the will of the electorate to be determined. Likewise, issue elections shall be conducted in a manner so as to permit the free and robust exchange of ideas and opinions, yet avoiding unfair and improper campaign tactics which abuse the open debate so vital to our democratic concept of government. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 24, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 6.25. - Unfair campaign practice. 
(a)  It shall be an unfair campaign practice for a candidate to elective city office, or an agent or authorized representative thereof on behalf of such candidate, to: 
(1)  Campaign by way of announcements, publications or other forms of political advertising as a registered member of any political party; 
(2)  Campaign by way of announcements, publications or other forms of political advertising in such a manner as to indicate that such candidate is not a registered member of a particular political party; 
(3)  Solicit or accept contributions or open assistance or support from any partisan political club or association affiliated with any political party or from any political party; or 
(4)  Participate in any partisan political party function; provided, however, that such candidate or agent thereof may register and vote as a member of a political party, and may attend and speak at a political party function or event provided all candidates for city office have been invited and permitted to participate in the same manner and to the same extent. 
(b)  Any person committing an act prohibited by this section shall be guilty of an unfair campaign practice and a municipal ordinance violation punishable as provided in section 1.12 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 25, 1-7-91)  
ARTICLE VII. - CAMPAIGN FINANCES 
 
Sec. 6.26. - Application of state law. 
(a)  Any candidate for elective city office, including an elected officer sought to be recalled, is subject to and shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 106, Florida Statutes. 
(b)  Any group, club, association or other combination of persons having a collective capacity, receiving contributions or making expenditures in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), seeking to influence the results of a city election, constitutes a political committee within the definition of Section 106.011(1), Florida Statutes, and shall register and report as such pursuant to and be subject to Chapter 106, Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Any individual making independent expenditures in a city election as defined in Section 106.011(5), Florida Statutes, in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more shall be subject to and comply with Section 106.071, Florida Statutes. 
(d)  Violation of Chapter 106, Florida Statutes, shall be enforced in the manner provided in Sections 106.25 through 106.28, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 26, 1-7-91)  
Chapter 7 - FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Annual budget and tax levy, Art. X. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; public safety building construction fee, Ch. 8, Art. IV; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; land clearance, Ch. 13; local business tax receipts, Ch. 14; pensions and retirement, Ch. 18; signs, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; taxation, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 24; yacht basin, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. Ch. 166; financial matters pertaining to political subdivisions, F.S. Ch. 218; determination of millage, F.S. Ch. 200; local occupational license taxes, F.S. Ch. 205; return of gas tax paid by municipalities, F.S. § 206.625. 
 
ARTICLE II. - BUDGETS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Annual budget and tax levy, Art. X. 
State Law reference— Method of fixing millage; budget adoption, F.S. § 200.065. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise provided: 
Budget year shall mean the fiscal year for which a budget is made. 
Current year shall mean the fiscal year in which a budget is prepared and adopted, i.e., the fiscal year immediately preceding the budget year. 
Previous year shall mean the last complete fiscal year before the current year. 
Budget officer shall mean the city manager or a person designated by the city manager for presentation of the budget to the commission. 
Chief financial officer shall mean the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§§ 30-1.1—30.1-5), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.02. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to adopt general rules governing the commission in its proceedings for administering the financial affairs of the city by: 
(1)  Establishing a standard procedure for the preparation and administration of budgets; 
(2)  Placing responsibility for the tasks related to the budget preparation and administration; 
(3)  Determining the amount of taxes and other revenues in such manner that budgets may be balanced on the basis of actual revenues and obligations within the budget period; 
(4)  Establishing appropriations, the payment of debt and the control of other expenditures. 
(b)  The provisions are to enable the commission to make financial plans for both current and capital expenditures, to insure that the executive staff administer their respective functions in accordance with these plans, and to permit taxpayers and investors to form intelligent opinions based on sufficient information as to the financial policies and administration of the city. 
(c)  For the accomplishment of this purpose, the provisions of this article shall be liberally construed, and shall be in effect until repealed or amended. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-2.1), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.03. - Powers and duties. 
Within the provisions and for the purpose of this article, officers and employees shall have the power and be subject to the duties expressly stated or necessarily implied. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-2.2), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.04. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October of each year and end on the last day of September of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-2.3), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.05. - Accounting continuity. 
All budget practices not covered by this article shall be in accordance with GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Practices) and in accordance with GAAFR (Government Accounting, Auditing and Financial Reporting) rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-8.1), 5-5-82)  
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 7.06. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
(a)  The budget officer shall submit to the commission a budget and an explanatory budget message in the form and with the contents provided by this article at least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. 
(b)  Not less than sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, the budget officer shall obtain from the head of each office, department, or agency, an estimate of its revenues and expenditures. These estimates shall include a minimum of the following: 
(1)  Estimated revenues to be produced; 
(2)  Expenditures classified by: 
a.  Personal services; 
b.  Contractual services; 
c.  Material and supplies; 
d.  Capital outlay; and 
e.  Debt service. 
(3)  A list of all new programs and capital projects pending or which such department head believes should be undertaken within the budget year or within the next succeeding five years; and 
(4)  Such other supporting data as may be requested. 
(c)  The budget officer shall review the estimates with department heads and may, at his discretion, revise the estimates. The budget officer shall also obtain from the responsible officer estimates of anticipated state and federal grants and required matching funds where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.1), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.07. - Public record. 
The proposed budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be public records and shall be kept in the office of the city clerk, open to public inspection during normal working hours. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.2), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.08. - Public hearings on budget. 
Federal revenue sharing regulations and/or state statute requirements shall be followed for public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.3), 5-5-82) 
State Law reference— Method of fixing millage; budget adoption procedure, F.S. § 200.065; financial matters, F.S. Ch. 218.  
Sec. 7.09. - Further consideration of budget. 
After public hearings, the commission may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except those items in proposed expenditures fixed by law or prescribed in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of section 7.22 of this article, but in any event, the commission shall set the ad valorem tax millage at such a rate that total anticipated revenues shall at least equal total proposed expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.4), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.10. - Adoption. 
The budget shall be adopted by a majority of all the members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.5), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.11. - Date of final adoption; failure to adopt. 
The budget shall be finally adopted not later than September twenty-seventh of each year. Should the governing body take no final action on the budget prior to such date, the budget of the previous year shall continue until adoption of the new budget. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.6), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.12. - Effective date and certification of copies. 
The budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be certified by the budget officer and filed in the office of the chief financial officer. A copy of the budget so certified shall be kept in the office of the city clerk for inspection by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.7), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.13. - Appropriations. 
Adoption of the budget shall be authorization for the chief financial officer to make appropriations from surplus funds or from revenues as they are received. No appropriations may be made by the chief financial officer in excess of that authorized by the commission except as provided for in section 7.27 of this article. Outstanding encumbrances of authorized appropriations on September thirtieth of the previous budget year shall be automatically reappropriated on October first of the new budget year without any further action by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-3.8), 5-5-82)  
DIVISION 3. - SCOPE AND CONTENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local financial management and reporting, F.S. Ch. 218, Part III. 
 
Sec. 7.14. - Budget message; current operations. 
The budget message submitted by the budget officer to the commission shall be explanatory of the budget; shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies for the fiscal year; and shall describe in connection therewith the important features of the budget plan. It shall set forth the reasons for important or significant changes from the current year in appropriation and revenue items and shall explain any major changes in the financial policy of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.1), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.15. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  As part of the budget message, the budget officer shall include a statement of pending capital projects and proposed capital projects, including the amounts to be appropriated from: 
(1)  Estimated revenues for the budget year; 
(2)  The issuance of bonds; 
(3)  State or federal grants; and 
(4)  Loans or other sources. 
(b)  The budget message shall include a capital program of proposed capital projects for each of the five (5) fiscal years next succeeding the budget year, together with estimated costs. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.2), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.16. - Supporting schedules. 
The budget officer shall attach to the budget message such supporting schedules, exhibits and other explanatory material, with respect to both current operations and capital improvements, as the budget officer shall believe useful to the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.3), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.17. - Financial plan. 
(a)  The budget shall provide a complete program and financial plan for the appropriation for expenditures of all funds for the budget year and shall contain for each fund: 
(1)  A general summary; 
(2)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues applicable to proposed expenditures; and 
(3)  All proposed expenditures. 
(b)  The total of such anticipated revenues shall equal the total of such proposed expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.4), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.18. - Anticipated revenues—Sources. 
Anticipated revenues shall include revenue from all sources, including grants and loans and shall be classified in accordance with the chart of accounts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.5), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.19. - Same—Comparison with other years. 
In parallel columns, opposite the several items of anticipated revenue, there shall be placed: 
(1)  The amount of each item actually received during the previous year; 
(2)  The total of the amount of each item actually received to the time of preparing the budget, plus estimated receipts for the remainder of the current year; and 
(3)  The estimated amount of each item anticipated to be received during the budget year. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.6), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.20. - Fund balance. 
The fund balance available for appropriation shall be limited to the amount by which liquid or current assets are estimated to exceed liabilities at the beginning of the budget year. This estimate shall be reviewed by the budget officer as soon as practical after the end of the current fiscal year when the actual "fund balance" is determined. At this time, the estimates of revenue and authorized appropriations shall be revised if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.7), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.21. - Anticipated surplus from municipal utility or other public service enterprise. 
The anticipated revenue and proposed expenditures of each utility or other public service enterprise owned or operated by the city shall be stated in a separate section of the budget. Any anticipated surplus in excess of bond requirements, if legally available for general purposes and to the extent such surplus is to be used to support general budget operations, shall be stated as an item of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.8), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.22. - Proposed expenditures. 
The proposed expenditures shall be itemized as set out in section 7.06 and each item numbered in accordance with the classification system of the state uniform accounting system for local government units. Separate provision shall be included in the budget for at least: 
(1)  Interest, amortization, and redemption charges on bonds outstanding; 
(2)  Other statutory expenditures; 
(3)  Any budget deficit of current year; 
(4)  Administration, operation, and maintenance of each office, department, and service, function or activity; 
(5)  Contingent expense in an amount not more than five (5) percent of the total amount stated pursuant to subsection (4) of this section; and 
(6)  Expenditures proposed for capital projects. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.9), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.23. - Same—Comparison with other years. 
In parallel columns, opposite the items of proposed expenditures, there shall be: 
(1)  The amount of such item expended during the previous year; 
(2)  The total of the amount expended to the time of preparing the budget plus the expenditures for the remainder of the current year; and 
(3)  The amount of each item to be appropriated for the budget year. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.10), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.24. - Summary. 
The budget officer shall prepare and present the budget with a summary of the budget, which need not be itemized further than by principal sources of anticipated revenue, stating separately the amount to be raised by property tax, and by departments and kinds of expenditures, in such a manner as to present to taxpayers a simple and clear summary of the detailed estimates of the budget. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-4.11), 5-5-82)  
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 7.25. - Approval of expenditures. 
The chief financial officer shall administer the financial affairs of the city under the direction of the city manager and to that end shall supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all monies and have control over all expenditures to insure that appropriations are not exceeded. He shall exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department, and agency and shall cause separate accounts to be kept for the items of appropriation contained in the budget, each of which account shall show the amount of the appropriation the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it, and the unencumbered balance. The same classification and numbering system used in the budget and required by section 7.22 shall be used. Unless he shall certify that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance available, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-5.1), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.26. - Work programs; allotments. 
(a)  Before the beginning of the budget year, the head of each office, department, or agency shall submit to the budget officer, a work program for the year. The program shall show the requested allotments of appropriations for such office, department, or agency, by quarterly periods, for the entire budget year. The budget officer shall review the requested allotments and the work program, and may revise, alter, or change such allotments. The aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriation to the office, department, or agency for the budget year. 
(b)  The budget officer shall certify a copy of the allotments approved to the chief financial officer who shall authorize all expenditures for the offices, departments, and agencies to be made from the appropriations on the basis of approved allotments. The approved allotment may be revised during the budget year in the same manner as the original allotment was made. 
(c)  If, at any time during the budget year, the budget officer shall ascertain that the available income, plus balances, for the year will be less than the total appropriations, he shall avoid the making of expenditures in excess of the income. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-5.2), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.27. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The budget officer may, at any time, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within a department, and service, function or activity. At the request of the budget officer, the commission by resolution may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof, or from contingency, from one office, department, or agency to another. No transfers may be made from appropriations required by subsections (1), (2), and (3) of section 7.22 of this article or from any other appropriation restricted by law. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-5.3), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.28. - Certain contracts and expenditures prohibited. 
(a)  No office, department, or agency shall, during any budget year, expend or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involve the expenditure of money in excess of the amounts appropriated for the general classification of expenditures pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this article shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-5.4), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.29. - Appropriations at end of year. 
All appropriations that have not been expended or lawfully encumbered shall lapse upon the adoption of a new budget. (Refer to section 7.13) 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-5.5), 5-5-82)  
DIVISION 5. - EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS AND BORROWING 
 
Sec. 7.30. - Emergency appropriations. 
At any time in any budget year, the commission may, by resolution, make emergency appropriations to meet a pressing need for public expenditure, for other than a regular or recurring requirement, to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. The total amount of emergency appropriations made in any budget year shall not exceed the amount of unanticipated actual revenue received in excess of the budget estimates, plus transfers from other appropriations. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-6.1), 5-5-82)  
Sec. 7.31. - Borrowing in anticipation of taxes. 
The city commission may, by resolution, borrow money and issue negotiable notes of the city in anticipation of the collection of revenues for the budget year, but not in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of such revenue then uncollected. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-6.2), 5-5-82)  
DIVISION 6. - REPORTS 
 
Sec. 7.32. - Financial reports. 
The budget officer shall, within forty-five (45) days after the end of each quarter, report to the commission on the status of the various programs authorized. The report shall include a tabular statement comparing the receipts to date by source with the revenue estimate and a tabular statement indicating for each appropriation the amount appropriated, the amount expended or encumbered to date, and the available balance. 
(Ord. No. 82-10, § 1(§ 30-7.1), 5-5-82; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 4-20-98)  
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7.33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-34, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed § 7.33 of the City Code. Formerly, such section pertained to planning and zoning fees and derived from Ord. No. 80-42, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 1980.  
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENT FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING 
 
Sec. 7.34. - Assessment of additional court costs for law enforcement educational expenditures fund. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed by the city, in compliance with Section 943.25(8), Florida Statutes, an additional two dollars ($2.00) as court cost against every person convicted for violation of a state penal or criminal statute or convicted for violation of a municipal or county ordinance in any proceedings, except for violations relating to parking of vehicles. In addition, two dollars ($2.00) shall be deducted from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to such penal statutes or penal ordinances for any offense, except that relating to parking of vehicles. 
(b)  The funds as levied and assessed as additional court costs or taken from the bonds shall be used exclusively for law enforcement educational expenditures for the law enforcement force which has jurisdiction for the city. 
(Code 1970, § 1-9; Ord. No. 85-12, § 1, 5-20-85)  
DIVISION 3. - USER FEE FOR INFORMATION ON MUNICIPAL CHARGES 
 
Sec. 7.35. - User fee imposed. 
(a)  When it is necessary for the city clerk or designee to furnish or verify to any individual, entity or title company the present existence or nonexistence of charges due the city for water, sewer, garbage or any other municipal service, the obligation of which is not recorded in the public records, there shall be a user charge imposed for the providing of this information. 
(b)  If the individual, entity or title company requires the information within twenty-four (24) hours of the request or less, a twenty-dollar charge will be imposed for providing this service. If, however, the individual, entity or title company requesting the information does not require the information within twenty-four (24) hours, the charge for providing the service will be five dollars ($5.00). In either case, there shall be an additional charge of two dollars ($2.00) when a response by facsimile machine is requested. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any justiciable dispute between a property owner and the city as to information provided to establish the amount or existence of an outstanding charge. 
(Code 1970, § 2-4; Ord. No. 90-27, § 1, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 93-28, § 1, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 98-09, § 2, 4-20-98)  
DIVISION 4. - LIBRARY IMPACT FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-05, §§ 1—8, adopted Apr. 2, 1990, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as Div. 4, §§ 7.36—7.43, of this article at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 7.36. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the "City of Safety Harbor Fair Share Library Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 1, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 7.37. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The city commission of the city has determined and recognized that the growth rate the city will experience through the year 2000 will necessitate a significant expansion of the city's capital library facilities and resources in order to provide adequate quality of library opportunities for city residents. 
(b)  In order to finance the capital and resource improvements necessary to comply with Florida Library Association standards, several combined methods of financing will be necessary, one (1) of which will require all residential land development in the city to pay a "fair share library fee." 
(c)  Implementing such regulatory and financing program is the responsibility of Safety Harbor in order to carry out the legislative intent of the 1985 Florida Growth Management Act as contained in Chapter 163, Part II, Title XI, Volume 1, Florida Statutes, 1989, and is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  It is the purpose of this division to establish a regulatory system to assist in providing funding for the expansion of the city's capital library facilities and resources caused by the city's new growth. Pursuant to this division, residential land development will be required to pay a fair share library fee which does not exceed a proportionate share of the reasonable anticipated costs for the expansion of the city's capital library facilities and resources caused by new growth. 
(e)  It is not the purpose of this division to collect any money from any new residential development in excess of the actual amount necessary to offset the demand for expansion placed on the city's capital library facilities and resources. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 2, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 7.38. - Time of payment. 
No building permit shall be issued for the development of any residential unit until the applicable fair share library fee is paid or determined to be unnecessary pursuant to the provisions of section 7.39(b) below. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 3, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 7.39. - Fair share library fee to be imposed on new residential land development activity. 
(a)  Payment of fair share fee prior to issuance of building permit. Any person who shall receive a building permit for any new residential land development activity that places an increased demand on the city's library capital facilities and resources shall pay a fair share library fee as follows: 
Land Use Type     Fee  
Residential unit ..... $383.00 
(b)  Individual assessment of fiscal impact of land development activity on library capital facilities and resources; the library impact analysis. 
(1)  Any person who shall initiate any land development activity that places a demand on the city's library capital facilities and resources may choose to provide an individual assessment of the demand the proposed land development activity will place on the city's library facilities in order to show the capital and resource expansion costs necessitated by the proposed land development activity are less than the fair share fee established above. 
(2)  The individual assessment shall be undertaken through the submission of a library facilities analysis which shall include the following information: 
a.  The projected use of library facilities by the proposed land development activity. This projection shall be based upon either local empirical surveys or state or national information; 
b.  An assessment of the capital and resource expansion of the city's library facilities necessitated by the proposed land development, if those facilities are to be maintained at standards established by the Florida Library Association. Standard practices and methodological procedures in impact analysis shall be used to determine the capital and resource expansion of the city's library facilities necessitated by the proposed land development activity; 
c.  An assessment of the costs for providing the capital and resource expansion necessitated by the proposed land development activity. The cost figures used shall be based upon recent empirical information of the costs in Safety Harbor for acceptable library capital facilities and resources and shall include the construction costs for library space, and the planning, design and engineering costs for the necessary capital improvements; 
d.  An assessment of the projected tax revenues that will be derived from the proposed land development activity that can be reasonably determined to be available to pay for new capital and resource improvements to the city's library facilities; and 
e.  The amount of any shortfall between the projected tax revenues and the capital and resource expansion costs for the library facilities necessitated by the new land development activity. Any shortfall shall be considered the proposed fair share library fee. 
(3)  The library facilities impact analysis shall be prepared by qualified professionals in the fields of community impact analysis, economics and library capital facility and resource standards and shall be submitted to the city manager. 
(4)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a library facilities impact analysis, the city manager, after consulting the appropriate staff members, shall determine if it is complete. If the city manager determines the application is not complete, he shall send a written statement specifying the deficiencies by mail to the person submitting the application. Unless the deficiencies are corrected within ten (10) days of receipt of notice, the city manager shall take no further action on the library facilities impact analysis. 
(5)  When the city manager determines the library facilities impact analysis is complete, he shall review it within thirty (30) days and, after consulting the appropriate staff members, shall approve the proposed fee, if it is determined that the methodology used to determine the proposed fair share library fee is professionally acceptable and fairly assesses the costs for capital and resource improvements to the city's library facilities that are necessitated by the proposed land development activity if the city's library facilities are going to be maintained at the level of service established by the Florida Library Association. If the city manager determines the methodology is unreasonable, it shall be denied, and the developer shall pay the fair share library fee as established in subsection (a) of this section. 
(6)  Any person may appeal the city manager's decision on any library facilities impact analysis he submits by filing a petition with the city commission within thirty (30) days of a decision by the city manager. In reviewing the city manager's decision, the city commission shall use the standards established by the Florida Library Association. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 4, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 7.40. - Credits to the fair share library fee. 
(a)  Where the person initiating the land development has entered into an agreement with the city to dedicate land, books, periodicals or video tapes or to construct a library facility, the city manager shall grant a credit against any fair share library fee imposed by this division upon any new residential land development activity placing a demand on the city's library facilities in an amount equal to the dollar value of the capital or resource improvements. No credit shall exceed the fair share library fee imposed by this division for the proposed land development activity. 
(b)  The determination of the credit shall be undertaken through the submission of a proposed credit agreement to the city manager, which agreement shall include the following information: 
(1)  The proposed donation of land, books, periodicals or video tapes or the proposed plan of specific library space improvements; and 
(2)  The projected dollar value for the suggested donations or improvements, which shall be based on local information of similar land, books, periodicals, video tapes or space improvements and may be determined by an appraisal if appropriate. 
(c)  The proposed credit agreement shall be prepared by qualified professionals in the fields of planning, impact analysis, economics and library capital facility and resource standards. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the proposed credit agreement, the city manager, after consulting the appropriate staff members, shall determine if the proposal is complete. If it is determined that the proposed credit agreement is not complete, the city manager shall send a written statement to the applicant outlining the deficiencies. The city manager shall take no further action on the proposed credit agreement until all deficiencies have been corrected or otherwise settled. 
(e)  Once the city manager determines the credit agreement is complete, he shall review it within thirty (30) days and shall, after consulting the appropriate staff members, approve the proposed credit agreement, if it is determined that the proposed donation or space improvement is consistent with the standards established by the Florida Library Association as well as compatible with the capital resource improvements outlined in the annual budget and capital improvements program and the proposed valuation of the donation or space improvement, as determined by an appraisal, if appropriate, is professionally acceptable. If the city manager determines that either the proposed donation or space improvement is not compatible with the standards established by the Florida Library Association or is not consistent with the annual budget and capital improvements program, he shall deny the credit agreement, and the applicant shall pay the fair share library fee. 
(f)  If the proposed credit agreement is approved by the city manager, a credit agreement shall be prepared and signed by the applicant and the city. It shall specifically outline the donation or space improvement that will be made by the applicant and the dollar credit the applicant shall receive for the donation or space improvement. 
(g)  Any person may appeal the city manager's decision on any credit agreement he submits by filing a petition with the city commission within thirty (30) days of a decision by the city manager. In reviewing the city manager's decision, the city commission shall use the standards established by the Florida Library Association and the library capital and resource improvements outlined in the annual budget and capital improvements program. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 5, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 7.41. - Review of fee schedule. 
Prior to the adoption of the annual budget and capital improvements program, the city commission shall receive a report from the city manager reviewing the fair share library fee schedule in section 7.39 and any recommended changes in the fee schedule. Changes in the schedule should be based on any revisions to the population projections, projections of new residential units, library costs, inflation and other relevant factors. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 6, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 7.42. - Use of funds collected and trust funds. 
(a)  Establishment of fair share library trust fund. There is hereby established the fair share library fund (trust fund) for the purpose of ensuring that the fees collected pursuant to this division are appropriately earmarked and spent for the capital and resource expansion of the city's library facilities in accordance with the standards established by the Florida Library Association. 
(b)  Payment of fair share fees into trust fund. Fair share library fees collected pursuant to this division shall be paid into the trust fund. 
(c)  Expenditure of fair share fees in trust fund. 
(1)  Proceeds from the trust fund shall be used exclusively for capital and resource expansion of the city's library facilities in a manner consistent with the annual budget and capital improvements program. 
(2)  Any funds in the trust fund on deposit, not immediately necessary for expenditure, shall be invested in interest-bearing assets. All income derived from these investments shall be retained in the applicable trust account. These monies shall be utilized for the capital and resource expansion of the city's library facilities in a manner consistent with the annual budget and capital improvements program. 
(3)  Each year, at the time the annual city budget and capital improvements program are reviewed, the city manager shall propose appropriations to be spent from the trust fund. The proceeds shall be spent for library capital and resource improvements consistent with the capital improvements program and the standards established by the Florida Library Association. Any amounts not appropriated from the trust fund, together with any interest earnings, shall be carried over in the specific trust account to the following fiscal period. 
(d)  Refund of fair share fees not encumbered for city library facilities. 
(1)  Any fair share library fees collected shall be returned to the fee payer if the fees have not been spent or encumbered within ten (10) years from the date the fees were paid. Fair share library fees collected shall be deemed to be spent (encumbered) on the basis of the first fee collected shall be the first fee spent for library improvements. 
(2)  Any fair share library fees collected shall be returned to the fee payer if the land development activity is cancelled due to noncommencement and if the fees have not been spent or encumbered. Fair share library fees collected shall be deemed to be spent (encumbered) on the basis of the first fee collected shall be the first fee spent for library improvements. 
(3)  The refund of fair share library fees shall be undertaken through the submission of a refund application, to be submitted within six (6) months following the end of the tenth year from the date on which the fair share library fee was paid or within one (1) month of noncommencement. The refund application shall include the following information: 
a.  A notarized sworn statement that the fee payer paid the fair share library fee for the property and the amount paid; and 
b.  A copy of the receipt issued by the city for payment of the fee. 
(4)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the refund application, the city manager shall determine if it is complete. If the city manager determines the application is not complete, he shall send a written statement specifying the deficiencies by mail to the person submitting the application. Unless the deficiencies are corrected, the city manager shall take no further action on the refund application. 
(5)  When the city manager determines the refund application is complete, he shall review it within thirty (30) days and shall approve the proposed refund if he determines the fee payer has paid a fair share library fee which the city has not spent or encumbered within ten (10) years from the date the fees were paid or within one (1) month of noncommencement. 
(6)  Any fee payer may appeal the city manager's decision on a refund application by filing a petition with the city commission within thirty (30) days of a decision by the city manager. In reviewing the city manager's decision, the city commission shall use the standards established in this section of this division. 
(7)  If no application is received by the city pursuant to this section within ninety (90) days of the date such application could be made, the right to make such application shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 7, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 7.43. - Exemptions. 
The following new land development activities shall be exempted from payment of the fair share library fee: 
(1)  Alteration or expansion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional units are created and the use is not changed. 
(2)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which are not dwelling units and which do not constitute an increase in intensity of use. 
(3)  The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building of the same size and use. 
(4)  The construction of any publicly owned governmental buildings. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 8, 4-2-90)  
Chapter 8 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; code enforcement board, § 2.10.01 et seq.; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23; yacht basin, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, F.S. § 633.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Statewide fire codes adopted. 
(a)  The Florida Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code as promulgated by the Florida Building Commission, as amended by the county construction licensing board and/or the Florida Building Commission, shall be the fire codes for the city. 
These codes are intended to be used in conjunction with other existing codes and ordinances adopted by the city, and nothing contained herein shall be deemed to invalidate such other codes and ordinances. In the event of a conflict between these codes and other codes or ordinances adopted by the city, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
(b)  A copy of the codes shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 8-1; Ord. No. 89-30, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 95-17, § 1, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 98-26, § 1, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 2001-28, § 14, 1-7-2002)  
Sec. 8.02. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, adopted Apr. 7, 2003, repealed § 8.02, which pertained to adequate access and derived from Code 1970, § 8-2(A)(7).  
Sec. 8.03. - Inspections. 
The fire prevention division shall make periodic inspections of all buildings or structures and is empowered to issue citations for violations. Wherein there is a conflict between the terms and provisions of the code as published and the requirements for fire protection above set out, then the requirements for fire protection shall prevail. 
(Code 1970, § 8-2(C)  
Secs. 8.04, 8.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-28, § 15, adopted Jan. 7, 2002, deleted §§ 8.04, 8.05 which pertained to fire district established and types of construction permitted, respectively and derived from Code 1970, §§ 8-7, 8-8; Ord. No. 80-28, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 7, 1980; Ord. No. 95-17, §§ 2, 3, adopted Mar. 20, 1995.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003, § 1, adopted Apr. 7, 2003, repealed §§ 8.09—8.15, 8.17 which pertained to fire chief; appointment; qualifications; removal; accountability of chief and member; appointment of personnel; general duties of chief; inspections; right of entry; equipment; use of city equipment outside city restricted; false alarms and derived from Code 1970 §§ 8-18—8-22; 8-33; 8-35; 8-36. 
State Law reference— Firefighters; qualifications, F.S. § 633.34; firefighters; supplemental compensation from state, F.S. § 633.382. 
 
Sec. 8.08. - Creation. 
A department to be hereafter known as the Safety Harbor Fire Department for the prevention and extinguishment of fire and the protection of life and property within the corporate limits of the city, is hereby created. 
(Code 1970, § 8-17; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 4-7-2003)  
Secs. 8.09—8.15. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8.16. - Contracts with other communities for mutual aid and automatic mutual aid. 
The city manager, subject to the approval of the commission, is hereby authorized to enter into written agreements or contracts with nearby incorporated communities or governing bodies of other organizations to provide the members of such communities or organizations with fire protection or to establish a mutual aid and automatic mutual aid system. 
(Code 1970, § 8-34; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2, 4-7-2003)  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC SAFETY BUILDING CONSTRUCTION FEE 
 
Sec. 8.18. - Imposed. 
All new construction in the city shall pay a public safety building construction fee. 
(Ord. No. 80-46, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Sec. 8.19. - Rates. 
Every firm or person constructing dwellings, commercial, manufacturing or public assembly units, himself or by independent contractor, shall pay to the city, in advance, the following: 
(1)  Dwelling units. Three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per unit; 
(2)  Commercial. Four hundred seventy-five dollars ($475.00) per unit or per five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is greater; 
(3)  Industrial/warehousing. Four hundred seventy-five dollars ($475.00) per unit or per four thousand (4,000) square feet, whichever is greater; 
(4)  Public assembly/institutional units. Four hundred seventy-five dollars ($475.00) per unit or per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 80-46, § 1, 11-3-80; Ord. No. 85-28, § 1, 7-1-85)  
Sec. 8.20. - Payment before permit issued. 
No permits shall be issued prior to payment of this fee. Refunds for payment made will be allowed upon application when it is determined that the unit has not been established or constructed. 
(Ord. No. 80-46, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Sec. 8.21. - Use of proceeds. 
The proceeds accumulated by reason of the establishment of the public safety building or construction fee shall be used only for public safety related capital improvements limited to facilities, vehicles, and equipment for firefighting and fire protection services and for emergency medical services. 
(Ord. No. 80-46, § 1, 11-3-80)  
Sec. 8.22. - Trust fund. 
All public safety building construction fees shall be deposited in an appropriate trust fund, to be held in separate accounts and used only for the purposes referred to in section 8.21. Funds may be disbursed from these accounts in the customary manner in accordance with appropriate law with the added requirement that such disbursement of funds shall require the approval of the city manager. Any funds on deposit in the trust fund which are not immediately necessary for expenditure may be invested by the city and all income derived from such investments shall be deposited in the trust fund hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 80-46, § 1, 11-3-80)  
ARTICLE V. - OPEN BURNING 
 
Sec. 8.23. - Open burning. 
Any open burning within the City of Safety Harbor is subject to article V of the Pinellas County Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2019-08, § 6, 8-5-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-08, § 6, adopted Aug. 5, 2019, repealed § 8.23 and enacted a new § 8.23, as set out herein. The former § 8.23 pertained to definitions of open burning and derived from the Code of 1970, § 20-21.  
Sec. 8.24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-08, § 6, adopted Aug. 5, 2019, repealed § 8.24 which pertained to prohibition and permits and derived from the Code of 1970, § 20-22.  
Sec. 8.25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-08, § 6, adopted Aug. 5, 2019, repealed § 8.25 which pertained to limitations and derived from the Code of 1970, § 20-23.  
Sec. 8.26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-08, § 6, adopted Aug. 5, 2019, repealed § 8.26 which pertained to burning for cold frost protection and derived from the Code of 1970, § 20-25.  
Sec. 8.27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-08, § 6, adopted Aug. 5, 2019, repealed § 8.27 which pertained to certain open burning allowed and derived from the Code of 1970, § 20-28.  
Sec. 8.28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-08, § 6, adopted Aug. 5, 2019, repealed § 8.28 which pertained to penalties and derived from the Code of 1970, § 20-29.  
Sec. 8.29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FALSE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 8.30. - Use of fire alarm system. 
Every person making use of any fire alarm system within the city shall be responsible for the proper maintenance, adjustment and usage of such system. For the purpose of this section, a fire alarm shall mean any device or system for the detection and notification of the presence of flame, heat or smoke, or any combination of such devices or systems. Each fire alarm system shall comply with all fire and building codes in effect at the time of installation and with codes as may be thereafter amended from time to time. As used in this article, the phrase "every person making use of any fire alarm system" is defined as the owner or owners of any residential, commercial, industrial, storage, assembly, educational, correctional, mercantile, detention or health care building, whether absent or not, any tenant, manager, administrator, or other person regularly in charge whether any of the aforementioned are present on the premises or not at the time of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.31. - Fake alarm prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deliberately cause such system to give a false alarm, which, for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as any false information, alarm, indication or report that a fire is in progress. No person shall be charged with an offense under this article for a false alarm sounded under a reasonable mistake that a fire was in progress. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.32. - Corrective action required to prevent improper operation of fire alarm system. 
Where a fire alarm system has previously caused a fire alarm, it shall be unlawful for any person making use of the system to fail to take appropriate corrective action to prevent further improper operation of the system. It shall be presumed that a system caused a false alarm when the alarm is not the result of an actual fire. The presumption shall not apply when the alarm is caused by a malfunction or a disturbance of any public or private utility servicing said system. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.33. - Failure to take appropriate corrective action. 
It shall be presumed that a person failed to take appropriate corrective action to prevent improper operation of a fire alarm system where it is shown that the person, after being notified of a false alarm having occurred, allows or causes a subsequent false alarm within seventy-two (72) hours of the date and time of such notification. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.34. - Notification forms and procedures. 
The fire chief is hereby authorized and directed to establish official notification forms and procedures to carry out the notification requirements of the article. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.35. - Unlawful testing of fire alarm system. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, it shall not be a violation of this section of the Code to test a fire alarm system under the following conditions: 
(a)  Where there is no visual, audio, electronic or other indication which can be heard, seen or received beyond the boundaries of the property; or 
(b)  Where audio, visual, electronic, or other indication of an alarm can be seen, heard or received beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the test is being conducted and one of the following precautions is observed: 
(1)  Adequate precautions are taken to insure that any one seeing, hearing or receiving the indication of an alarm will not report it either directly or indirectly to the fire department as an alarm requiring assistance. 
(2)  The fire department is notified in advance of the test and instructed not to respond by the owner or tenant of the property upon which the test is to occur. 
(3)  Where the alarm test is being conducted by the City of Safety Harbor; Pinellas County; the State of Florida; or the federal government or any agency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.36. - Penalty. 
The penalty for violation of this article shall be a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.37. - Appeal. 
If any person, firm, or corporation is aggrieved by the ruling of the city manager or fire chief under the enforcement of this article, an appeal in writing shall be filed by the complain-ing party with the city manager within ten (10) working days of the ruling. Such appeal shall be placed upon the agenda of the commission and the commission by majority vote shall enter its finding upon such appeal and the finding shall be a final ruling as to the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Sec. 8.38. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. If any section is found invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 84-63, § 1, 1-21-85)  
Secs. 8.39—8.50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ordinance No. 94-08, adopted March 7, 1994, amended the Code by adding § 10.15. For purposes of classification, such new substantive provisions were included as §§ 8.51—8.61 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 8.51. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The fire chief is instructed to regulate the storage and handling of hazardous materials within the city. The following are regulations governing the permitting of hazardous substance storage. These regulations shall apply to all persons, property, operations and storage within the city presently existing or in the future. Requirements for the granting of a permit shall include, but not be limited to a storage containment plan, a hazardous material inventory plan, and a safety plan, including a hazardous material management plan. 
(b)  Substances controlled. Rules and regulations shall govern ignitable, hazardous, toxic, corrosive, and reactive materials, in the form of gaseous vapor mist, or fumes at standard temperature-pressure; compressed gases as a liquid vapor combination under pressure; liquids at ambient temperature; and solids as particulates, dust, molecules and larger dimension compounds, or mixtures of any combination. 
(c)  Unauthorized storage. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall cause, suffer, or permit the storage of hazardous materials in a manner which violates a provision of this article, or in a manner which causes an unauthorized release or discharge of hazardous materials or poses a significant risk of such release or discharge. 
(d)  Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Abandoned. When referring to a storage facility, means out of service and not safeguarded in compliance with this article. 
B.T.U. (British Thermal Unit) means the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of one (1) pound of water one (1) degree Fahrenheit at or near thirty-nine and two-tenths degrees Fahrenheit. 
Facility means any building, equipment, structure, installation, pipe or pipeline (including any pipe into a sewer or publicly owned treatment works), well, pit, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill, storage container, motor vehicle, rolling stock, or aircraft; or any site or area where a hazardous substance has been deposited, stored, disposed of, or placed, or otherwise has come to be located. 
Fire chief means the Safety Harbor Fire Chief or an officer assigned to administer this article or his designee. 
Florida Substance List means the compilation of toxic substances established by the Secretary of the Florida Department of Labor and Employment Security and which are subject to the provisions of Chapter 442, Florida Statutes, as may be amended. 
Hazardous material means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical chemical characteristics, poses significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or environment. Hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste and toxic substances. 
Hazardous material inventory statement means an inventory of materials to be stored at a permitted facility, including hazardous class information from MSDS sheets. 
Hazardous material management plan is a written plan to be submitted to the fire chief outlining handling and storage procedures of hazardous materials at a given storage facility during both normal and emergency conditions. 
Hazardous substance means any substance or chemical product for which one (1) of the following applies: 
(1)  The manufacturer or producer is required to prepare an MSDS for the substance or produce pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation. 
(2)  The substance is listed as an extremely hazardous substance in Appendix A and B of 40 CFR Part 355. 
(3)  The substance is listed in the Title III List of Lists. 
MSDS means a material safety data sheet prepared pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor. 
New storage facilities means that primary and secondary levels of containment shall be required for all new storage facilities intended for the storage of hazardous materials which are gases, except inert gases and gases which are components of air, where located in the open atmosphere or are present in such volume and containment as to preclude a life-threatening exchange with the existing atmosphere, liquids or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP). 
Officer means the appropriate fire department official as assigned to administer this article or any desginee. 
Permit means any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
Permit quantity limit means the maximum amount of hazardous material that can be stored in a storage facility. Separate permit quantity limits will be set for each storage facility for which a permit is obtained in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
Permittee means any person, firm, or corporation to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this article and any authorized representative, agent or designee of such person, firm, or corporation. 
Pipes means pipelines systems which are used in connection with the storage of hazardous materials exclusively within the confines of a facility and which are not intended to transport hazardous materials in interstate or intrastate commerce or to transfer hazardous materials in bulk to or from a marine vessel. 
Product containment means the first level of containment, i.e. the inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with hazardous material being contained. 
Product tight means impervious to the hazardous material which is contained, or is to be contained, so as to prevent the seepage of the hazardous material from the primary containment. To be product-tight, the container shall be made of material that is not subject to physical or chemical deterioration by the hazardous material being contained. 
Quantity ranges (levels) means those ranges as are established in section 8.52(d). 
Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment. 
Secondary containment means the level of containment external to and separate from the primary containment. 
Single-walled means construction with walls made of but one (1) thickness of material. Laminated, coated, or clad materials shall be considered as single-walled. 
Storage facility means any one (1) or combination of tanks, sumps, wet floors, waste treatment facilities, pipes, vaults, or other portable or fixed containers used, or designed to be used, for the storage of hazardous materials at the facility. 
Sump means a pit or well in which liquids collect. 
Threatened release means a condition creating a substantial probability of harm, when the probability and potential extent of harm make it reasonably necessary to take immediate action to prevent, reduce, or mitigate damages to persons, property or the environment. 
Toxic substances means any chemical substance or mixture in a gaseous, liquid, or solid state, which substance or mixture causes a significant risk to safety or health during, or as a proximate result of, any customary or reasonable foreseeable handling or use, and which is listed in the Florida Substance List, and which is manufactured, produced, used, applied, or stored in the workplace. 
Unauthorized release discharge means any release, discharge, or emission of any hazardous material which does not conform to the provisions of this article, unless such release is in accordance with the release regulations of the Pinellas County Air Quality Department, Florida Department of Environmental Regulation, and waste discharge requirements established by the City of Clearwater. 
Wet floor means a floor which is used to routinely collect, contain, or maintain standing liquids or to transmit standing liquids on a more or less continuous basis. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(1—4), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.52. - Permit for storage. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  Any person, firm, or corporation which stores any hazardous material shall obtain and keep current a permit issued pursuant to this article. One (1) such permit shall be issued for a single facility. Additional permits shall be obtained for any storage facility thereafter connected, installed, constructed, or substantially repaired. Additional permits shall be obtained for the storing of new or different hazardous material not within the original permit. The permittee shall have thirty (30) days from acquisition of the material to apply for an additional permit for the storing of a new or different hazardous material not within the original permit. 
(2)  A permit shall also be required for closure of a storage facility. The permittee shall apply for approval to close such storage facility not less than thirty (30) days prior to the termination of the storage of hazardous materials at the storage facility. This thirty-day period may be waived on a showing of special circumstances. Such closure shall be in accordance with a closure plan which describes procedures for terminating the storage of hazardous materials in each storage facility in a manner that minimizes the need for further maintenance; controls to the extent that a threat to public health or safety or to the environment from residual hazardous materials in the storage facility is minimized or eliminated; and demonstrates that hazardous materials that were stored in the storage facility will be removed, disposed of, neutralized, or reused in an appropriate manner. 
(b)  Application. Application for a permit, other than for closure, shall be made on the form provided. In addition to the information required by such form, the applicant shall submit: 
(1)  The hazardous materials management plan (HMMP); 
(2)  The hazardous materials inventory statement; 
(3)  The containment standards to be followed; and 
(4)  The construction plans, if any. 
No fee should be charged. The applicant shall specify the amount of each hazardous substance requested to be stored at each storage facility. 
(c)  Investigation. Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the fire chief may make such investigation of the applicant and the proposed facility or activity as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Approval. A permit shall not be approved unless the storage approved adequately conforms to this community's requirements for protecting the public health and safety. In determining whether a permit shall be granted, the following factors shall be considered, including, but not limited to, the age of the storage facility; the methods of containment; the methods of monitoring; the feasibility of the required retrofit; the concentration of the hazardous materials contained; the severity of potential unauthorized release or discharge; past practice; safety performance record; acceptable industry standards; and the suitability of other long-term preventative measures which meet the intent of this article. The quantities of materials stored shall be relevant to the determination whether the storage adequately protects the public health and safety. The quantity ranges established as described below. These ranges shall be used to determine whether the storage adequately protects the public health and safety. 
Quantity Range 
[Level] No. 	Range Amounts 
1 	Up to and including 500 pounds for solids, 55 gallons for liquids, and 200 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases. 
2 	Between 501 and 5,000 pounds for solids, 56 and 549 gallons for liquids, and 201 and 2,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases. 
3 	Between 5,001 and 25,000 pounds for solids, 550 and 2,750 gallons for liquids, and 2,001 and 10,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases. 
4 	Between 25,001 and 50,000 pounds for solids, 2,751 and 5,500 gallons for liquids, and 10,001 and 20,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases. 
5 	More than 50,001 pounds for solids, 5,501 gallons for liquids, and 20,001 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases. 
 
In order to obtain a permit, the applicant must demonstrate compliance with this article and must also hold the permits required by state and federal law. 
(e)  Provisional permit. Existing storage facilities and/or those for which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this article may obtain a provisional permit. In addition to the terms of this section, the applicant must meet the requirements described in section 8.56(e), dealing with containment standards for existing facilities. 
(f)  Temporary permit. A temporary permit for storage may be issued for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The requirements of the containment standards, the hazardous materials management plan, and hazardous material inventory statement may be modified as appropriate under these circumstances. 
(g)  Term. A permit issued under this article shall continue unless revoked or suspended for the period of time designated therein at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(h)  Renewal. Every application for the renewal of a permit shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of such permit. If a timely application for renewal has been submitted, the permit shall remain in effect until a determination has been made and time for an administrative appeal has been exhausted. 
(i)  Determination. A determination with regard to any application for a permit, an additional approval, a provisional permit, or a renewal, shall be made within ninety (90) days from the date that the completed application has been submitted. Applicants may appeal the decision of the fire chief to the city manager. 
(j)  Transfer. Permits are not transferable. 
(k)  Effective date. No permit shall become effective until the permit has been signed and accepted by the permittee. Where the permittee is a company, firm, or corporation, the acceptance must be signed by a person having the legal authority to bind the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(5—15), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.53. - Denial of permit application. 
(a)  Noncompliance. If the applicant does not comply with the requirements of this article, then the fire chief shall deny the application. 
(b)  Notice. The decision to deny the application shall be given to the applicant, in writing, setting forth the findings upon which the decision is based. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(16, 17), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.54. - Remedial action. 
(a)  Notice of noncompliance. Unless it is determined that an immediate suspension is necessary to protect the public health and safety from imminent danger, the fire chief may: 
(1)  Issue a notice of noncompliance to the permittee for failure to comply with the provisions of this article, any permit conditions, or any provisions of the hazardous materials management plan. Permittee must abate, correct or rectify any noncompliance within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance; 
(2)  Issue an order to correct the particular violation. Failure to correct will be heard by the code enforcement board. A notice of code enforcement board hearing shall be given to the permittee in writing, setting forth the time and place of the hearing, the ground or grounds upon which the remedial action is based, the pertinent Code section or sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be given a reasonable time prior to the hearing date; 
(3)  Issue a revocation of the permit for the facility; 
(4)  Issue a suspension of the permit for the facility; or 
(5)  Issue a modification of the permit or require additional conditions on the permit. 
If the grounds for remedial action are limited to one (1) storage facility, the remedial action taken shall be limited to that storage facility. 
(b)  Grounds for action. A permit may be subjected to remedial action for any of the following reasons, arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, either before or after a permit is issued: 
(1)  Unauthorized release, discharge, fire, chemical or life-threatening event. 
(2)  Violation of this article. 
(3)  Failure to abate, correct or rectify any noncompliance within the time specified. 
(4)  Failure to correct conditions constituting an unreasonable risk of an unauthorized discharge. 
(5)  Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any willful, inaccurate or false statement in applying for a new or renewed permit. 
(6)  Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any willful, inaccurate or false statement in any report required by this article. 
(c)  Return of permit. In the event that a permit issued under the provisions of this article is suspended or revoked, the permittee shall forward it to the issuing officer not later than the end of the third business day after notification of such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(18—20), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.55. - Materials regulated. 
(a)  Enumeration. The materials regulated by this article shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Any material which is listed on the list of environmental protection agency (EPA) pollutants, 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 117, as a hazardous and/or extremely hazardous material or hazardous and/or extremely hazardous waste, as amended, whether such material is stored or handled in waste or nonwaste form; 
(2)  Any material which is listed in the department of transportation regulations within 49 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 100 through 199; 
(3)  Any material which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as either a flammable liquid, a Class II combustible liquid, or a Class IIIA combustible liquid; or 
(4)  Any material which is listed by the Florida Secretary of Labor in the "Florida Substance List." 
(5)  In addition to the materials listed in subsections (1) through (4), above, any material which has been determined to be hazardous based upon any appraisal or assessment by or on behalf of the party storing this material. 
(b)  Identity markings. All materials subject to regulation shall be identified by plainly marking the structure, containment area, and ancillary tankage with markings in conformance with NFPA Standard 704. Such markings shall reflect the appropriate health, flammability and reactivity hazards of the materials contained. All markings within the city shall be placed upon a minimum twelve-inch placard to be visible at three hundred (300) feet. In addition, quantity levels 2, 3, 4 and 5 shall mark on the structure and ancillary tankage the quantity designations as established by this article. 
(c)  Exclusions. This article does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Retail products. Hazardous materials, when contained solely in consumer products packaged for distribution to, located at the final point of sale, and for use by the general public, or commercial products used at the facility solely for janitorial or minor maintenance purposes, such as paint thinner or wax strippers. 
(2)  Feed. Hazardous materials, when contained in a substance intended for use as animal feed. 
(3)  Work station. Hazardous materials located at a work station in a quantity reasonably required for use under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(21—23), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.56. - Containment standards. 
(a)  Containment of hazardous materials. 
(1)  No person, firm, or corporation shall store any regulated hazardous materials until a permit has been issued pursuant to this article. No permit shall be granted pursuant to this article unless the permit applicant demonstrates, by the submission of appropriate plans and other information, that the design and construction of the storage facility will result in a suitable manner of storage for the hazardous material or materials to be contained therein. 
(2)  Installation, construction, repair, modification, closure, and removal of containers by the permittee or applicant shall comply with the state department of environmental standards and regulations concerning underground tanks and stationary storage tanks (DER Rules FAC 17). 
(3)  Dispensing and mixing of hazardous materials must not be done in such a manner as to substantially increase the risk of an unauthorized release or discharge. When hazardous materials are moved into or out of a storage facility, they shall remain in the travel path only for the time reasonably necessary to transport the hazardous material, and such movement shall be in a manner which will not result in an unauthorized release or discharge. 
(4)  Access to the storage facilities shall be secured by means of fences and/or locks. The access to the storage facilities shall be kept securely locked when unattended. Where practical, key protection points shall be double-locked or double-valved, with fixed employee responsibility for access. 
(b)  New storage facilities. 
(1)  [ Permit required. No person, firm, or corporation shall construct or install any new storage facility until a permit has been issued pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Monitoring capability. All new storage facilities intended for the storage of hazardous materials which are gases, liquids, or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP) shall be designed and constructed with a monitoring system capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in the primary containment has entered the secondary containment. Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however, other means of monitoring may be required by the fire chief where visual inspection is not appropriate or feasible. Where secondary containment may be subject to the intrusion of water, a means of monitoring for water intrusion and for safely removing the water shall also be provided. Whenever monitoring devices are provided, they shall, where applicable, be connected to attention-getting visual and/or audible alarms. 
(3)  Containment requirements. Primary and secondary levels of containment shall be required for all new storage facilities intended for the storage of hazardous materials which are gases, liquids, or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP). 
a.  [ Primary containment. ] All primary containment shall be product-tight, including warehousing, enclosed structures and sheds, and shall be of construction resistant to the stored material, and able to withstand the effects of chemical reaction, fire, or spill as might occur. 
b.  Secondary containment. 
1.  All secondary containment shall be construed of materials of sufficient thickness, density, and composition so as not to be structurally weakened as a result of the contact with the discharged hazardous materials and so as to be capable of containing hazardous materials discharged from a primary container for a period of time equal to or longer than the maximum anticipated time sufficient to allow recovery of the discharged hazardous material. 
2.  In the case of an installation with one (1) primary container, the secondary containment shall be large enough to contain at least one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the primary container. 
3.  In the case of a storage facility with multiple primary containers, the secondary container shall be large enough to contain one hundred fifty (150) percent of the volume of the largest primary container placed in it, or ten (10) percent of the aggregate internal volume of all primary containers in the storage facility, whichever is greater. 
4.  If the storage facility is open to rainfall, then the secondary containment must be able to additionally accommodate the volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by a 100-year storm history. 
c.  [ Exceptions. ] Laminated, coated, or clad materials shall be considered single-walled and shall not be construed to fulfill the requirements of both primary and secondary containment. 
(4)  Overfill protection. Means of overfill protection may be required for any primary container. This may be an overfill prevention device and/or an attention-getting high-level alarm. 
(5)  Separation of materials. Materials that in combination may cause a fire explosion, or the production of a flammable, toxic, or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of a primary or secondary container shall be separated in both the primary and secondary containment so as to avoid potential intermixing. 
(6)  Drainage system. Drainage of water entered by precipitation or infiltration from within a storage facility containing hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at STP shall be controlled in a manner approved by the fire chief so as to prevent hazardous materials from being discharged. No drainage system will be approved unless the flow of the drain can be controlled and only if permitted to do so by the City of Clearwater, Pinellas County Environmental Management, or other appropriate agency. The facility shall contain a means of removing the water by the owner or operator. This removal system shall also provide for a means of analyzing the removed water for hazardous substance contamination and a means of disposing of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal facility. 
(7)  [ Limitations on bulk storage.] The bulk storage of flammable combustible liquids shall be limited to quantity and placement as follows: 
a.  Storage of any substance capable of generating 800,000 BTUs per pound shall be prohibited. 
b.  Storage of any substance capable of generating 400,000 BTUs to 800,000 BTUs per pound shall be limited to a maximum of 550 million BTUs per acre. 
c.  The primary containment of bulk storage of any substance covered by this section shall not cover more than twenty (20) percent of the total site area contained in the legal property description. 
d.  The secondary containment surface area of the bulk storage of any substance covered by this section shall be twenty (20) percent or less of the total surface area of the primary containment. 
e.  Any containment system required within this section shall be located at a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any residential use or sleeping occupancy. 
f.  Any secondary containment system serving violatiles or highly reactive or ignitable materials shall be of a minimum four-hour fire rating, found in Chapter 30, NFPA. 
(c)  Existing storage facilities. 
(1)  Any storage facility in existence as of the effective date of this article, or any storage facility for which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this article, which does not meet the standards for new storage facilities, may be issued a provisional permit. Application for a provisional permit must be made within one (1) month of the effective date of this article. In order to obtain a provisional permit, the applicant must submit: 
a.  An approved monitoring plan for each storage facility; 
b.  An approved hazardous material management plan; and 
c.  An approved hazardous material inventory statement. 
(2)  Where an existing storage facility has been deemed an extra hazardous occupancy, the applicant must agree to meet all the provisions of this section [article] within the time frames set by the fire chief. 
(3)  Provisional permittees must install and use monitoring devices and methods, as approved by the fire chief, within six (6) months of the issuance of a provisional permit. An extension of this compliance date may be granted; however, such extension shall not exceed twenty-four (24) months from the issuance of the provisional permit. 
a.  Monitoring under such plan shall include visual inspection of the primary containment; however, if the visual inspection is not appropriate or feasible, an alternative method of monitoring each storage facility may be required by the fire chief. 
b.  Alternative method(s) of monitoring may include, but are not limited to, pressure testing, vacuum testing or hydrostatic testing of the piping systems or underground storage tanks; ground water monitoring well(s) which are downgradient and adjacent to the storage facility; vapor analysis within the well(s), where appropriate; and analysis of the soil boring(s) at the initial installation of the well(s). The alternative method shall be approved by the fire chief. 
(4)  Existing storage facilities must fully comply with the provisions of the new facility section regulation within two (2) years of the effective date of this article. 
(d)  Out-of-service storage facilities. 
(1)  No regulated storage facility shall be abandoned. 
(2)  Storage facilities which are temporarily out of service and are intended to be returned to use must continue to be monitored and inspected. 
(3)  Any out-of-service storage facility which is not being monitored and inspected in accordance with this article must be closed or removed in a manner approved by the fire chief. 
(4)  Whenever an abandoned storage facility is located, a plan for the closing or removing or the upgrading and permitting of such storage facility shall be filed with the fire chief within ninety (90) days of its discovery. A closure plan shall be subject to approval by the Fire Chief. 
(e)  Maintenance, repair or replacement. 
(1)  Every permittee under this article shall provide testing, monitoring (if applicable), and inspections in compliance with the hazardous materials management plan and shall maintain records adequate to demonstrate compliance therewith. 
(2)  A permittee will carry out maintenance, ordinary upkeep, and minor repairs in a careful and safe manner. No permit or other approval will be required for such maintenance and upkeep. 
(3)  Any substantial modification or repair of a regulated storage facility other than minor repairs or emergency repairs shall be in accordance with approved plans, to be submitted to the city building department and the fire chief prior to the initiation of such work. 
(4)  The permittee may make emergency repairs to a regulated storage facility in advance of submitting plans whenever an immediate repair is required to prevent or contain an unauthorized discharge or to protect the integrity of the containment. However, within five (5) working days after such emergency repairs have been started, permittee shall seek approval by submitting drawings or other information adequate to describe the repairs. 
(5)  Replacement of any storage facility for hazardous materials which are gases, liquids, or solids at STP must be in accordance with the new containment standards. 
(f)  Emergency requirements. 
(1)  Emergency equipment shall be provided which is reasonable and appropriate for potential emergencies presented by the stored hazardous materials. Such equipment shall be regularly tested and adequately maintained. 
(2)  Where emergency storage is required and where emergency containment is utilized, ongoing operations shall cease until such time as the emergency storage and/or containment is emptied and again available for service. 
(3)  Simplified emergency procedures shall be posted conspicuously in locations where hazardous materials are stored. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(24—29), 3-7-94; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 8.57. - Hazardous materials management plan. 
(a)  Required. Each applicant for a permit pursuant to this article shall file a written plan, to be known as a hazardous material management plan (HMMP). The HMMP may be amended at any time with the consent of the fire chief and the city manager. The HMMP shall be a public record. 
(b)  Standard form. The standard form hazardous material management plan must be submitted unless the facility qualifies as a minimal storage site. The HMMP shall include the following: 
(1)  Facility description. 
a.  General information. The HMMP shall contain the occupancy use, the address of the facility, and business phone number of the applicant, the name and titles and emergency phone numbers of the primary response person and an alternate, the number of the employees, number of shifts, hours of operation, principal business activity, and the location of MSDS forms. 
b.  General facility description. The HMMP shall contain a map drawn at a legible scale and in a format and detail determined by the fire chief. It shall show the location of all buildings and structures, chemical loading areas, parking lots, internal roads, storm and sewer drains, and shall specify the uses of adjacent properties. The fire chief may require information as to the location of wells, floodplains, surface water bodies and/or general land uses (schools, hospitals, institutions, residential areas) within one (1) mile of the facility boundaries. 
c.  Facility storage map. The HMMP shall contain a facility storage map at a legible scale for licensing and enforcement purposes. The facility storage map shall indicate the location of each hazardous materials storage facility, including all interior, exterior, and underground storage facilities, and access to such storage facilities. In addition, the map shall indicate the location of emergency equipment relative to each storage facility. For each storage facility, the map shall contain information as prescribed below: 
1.  A floor plan to scale; 
2.  The total quantities of each hazardous substance, including wastes, to be stored at each storage facility; 
3.  For all hazardous materials, including wastes, stored in each storage facility, the hazard class or classes of each substance; 
4.  For tanks, the capacity limit of each tank and the hazardous material contained in each tank by general chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents for mixtures, United Nations (UN) or North American (NA) number, if available, and physical state. 
(2)  A plan for separation of materials. The HMMP shall contain a description of the methods to be utilized to ensure separation and protection of stored hazardous materials from factors which may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of a flammable, toxic, or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of the primary or secondary containment. 
(3)  A monitoring program. The HMMP shall contain a description of the location, type, manufacturer specifications (if applicable), and suitability of monitoring methods to be used in each storage facility storing hazardous materials which are gases, liquids or solids at STP. It shall also specify the frequency of inspections of storage facilities which will be conducted by the permittee. 
(4)  Recordkeeping forms. The HMMP shall contain an inspection check sheet or log designed to be used in conjunction with routine inspections. The check sheet or log shall provide for the recording of the date and time of inspection and, for monitoring activity, the date and time of any correction action taken, the name of the inspector, and the countersignature of the designated safety manager for the facility or the responsible official as designated in the HMMP. 
(5)  Emergency equipment. The HMMP shall describe emergency equipment availability, testing, and maintenance. 
Additional information may be required for the HMMP where such information is deemed reasonably necessary. Requirements for information in the HMMP may be waived where such information is not deemed reasonably necessary. Whenever the permittee has submitted a plan which includes substantially the same information required for any component(s) of the HMMP to any other public agency regulating hazardous materials, such plan may be submitted in lieu of such component(s). Each HMMP shall provide for a designated facility safety manager to be responsible for the HMMP. 
(c)  Short form for minimal storage site. 
(1)  A facility shall qualify as a minimal storage site if the quantity of each hazardous material stored on one (1) or more storage facilities in an aggregate quantity for the facility(ies) is five hundred one (501) pounds to five thousand (5,000) pounds for solids, fifty-six (56) to five hundred forty-nine (549) gallons for liquids, or two hundred one (201) to one thousand nine hundred ninety-nine (1,999) cubic feet at STP for compressed gases. 
(2)  The applicant for a permit to operate a facility which qualifies as a minimal storage site may opt to file the short form HMMP. Such plan shall include the following components: 
a.  General application information; 
b.  A simple-line drawing of the facility showing the location of the storage facilities and indicating the hazard class or classes and physical state of the hazardous materials being stored and whether any of the material is a waste; 
c.  A narrative describing how hazardous materials will be stored in a suitable manner and will be appropriately contained, separated, and monitored; 
d.  Description of emergency equipment to be maintained; 
e.  A description of the method of disposal of any hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(30—32), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.58. - Hazardous materials inventory statement. 
(a)  A hazardous materials inventory statement (HMIS) shall be filed by any facility which stores any hazardous material in an amount which is equal to or greater than the quantities specified in quantity level 1. Such person, firm, or corporation shall amend the HMIS within thirty (30) days of the storage of any hazardous material not listed thereon but required to be listed or of an increase above the quantity amount permitted or required to be identified in accordance with Chapter 704, NFPA, as a Class 3 or 4 hazard. 
(b)  The information in the HMIS shall include: 
(1)  For nonwastes: The general chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents for mixtures, the manufacturer, United Nations (UN) or North American (NA) number, if available, and the hazard class or classes that appear on the material safety data sheet (MSDS) or equivalent information as manufacturers specifications. 
(2)  For wastes: Laboratory analysis of wastes or equivalent information, and the hazard class or classes. 
(c)  The HMIS shall be public record, except to the extent that it contains trade secrets protected by Florida Statutes, Section 90.506. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(33), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.59. - Reporting unauthorized discharge of gases, liquids and solids at STP. 
As soon as any person in charge of a storage facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed, unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which is gas, liquid or solid at STP, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and cleanup of such discharge. Under certain conditions described below, the fire chief shall be notified of the unauthorized discharge. 
(1)  Confirmed unauthorized discharge. 
a.  Recordable. A recordable, unauthorized discharge must be recorded, but not reported. Such a discharge meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  The discharge is from a primary containment to a secondary containment or to a rigid, above-ground surface covering capable of containing the discharge until cleanup of the hazardous material is completed. 
2.  The permittee is able to adequately clean up the discharge before it escapes from such secondary containment or such above-ground surface, and such cleanup requires less than eight (8) hours. 
3.  There is no increase in the hazard of fire or explosion, nor is there any production of a flammable or poisonous gas, nor is there any deterioration of such secondary containment or such rigid, above-ground surface. 
4.  An otherwise recordable discharge does not need to be recorded if the discharge is not the result of the deterioration or failure of the primary container and the quantity discharged is less than one (1) ounce by weight, and can be cleaned up within fifteen (15) minutes. 
b.  Reportable. Any other unauthorized discharge must be reported to the fire department (county warning point) by dialing 911 immediately. The reporting party shall provide information to the fire department relating to the ability of the permittee to contain and dispose of the hazardous material, the estimated time it will take to complete containment and disposal, and the degree of hazard created. The fire department may verify that the hazardous material is being contained and appropriately disposed. The fire chief, at any time upon a determination that permittee is not adequately containing and disposing of such hazardous material, shall have the power and authority to undertake and direct an emergency response in order to protect the public health and safety. 
(2)  Inventory storage; presumed discharge. 
a.  Indication of loss of inventory records. Whenever a material balance or other inventory record, employed as a monitoring technique under the HMMP, indicates a loss of hazardous material, and no unauthorized discharge has been confirmed by other means, the permittee shall have five (5) working days from the time of the detection to determine whether or not there has been unauthorized discharge. If, before the end of such period, it is determined that there has been no unauthorized discharge, [and] an unauthorized discharge is [was] deemed presumed, the permittee must immediately report this occurrence to the fire chief. The fire chief may enforce this section in accordance with section 2.10.01 et seq. of the City Code, or other appropriate legal means. 
b.  Test results. Whenever any test results suggest a possible unauthorized discharge, and no unauthorized discharge has been confirmed by other means, the permittee shall have five (5) working days to retest. If second test results obtained within that period establish that there has been no unauthorized discharge, the results of both tests shall be recorded in the permittee's monitoring records. If it has not been established within such period that there has been no unauthorized discharge, an unauthorized discharge is deemed presumed. The permittee must immediately report this occurrence to the fire chief. The fire chief may enforce this section in accordance with section 2.10.01 et seq. of the City Code, or other appropriate legal means. 
c.  Gases at STP. Any person in charge of a storage facility, or responsible for emergency response for a storage facility, who has knowledge of any unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which is a gas at STP must immediately report such discharge to the fire chief. The fire chief may enforce this section in accordance with section 2.10.01 et seq. of the City Code, or other appropriate legal means. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(34), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.60. - Inspections; records. 
(a)  Purpose; disclosure of trade secrets; discretion of city. 
(1)  Inspections may be conducted for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this article and causing to be corrected any conditions which would constitute any violation of this article. 
(2)  Permittees are not required to disclose the identity of hazardous materials protected as trade secrets listed in the HMIS statement to anyone other than the official designated for that purpose pursuant to NFPA, Chapter 1, except in the case of an emergency response or an unauthorized discharge related to the storage facility in which the trade secret material is contained. Therefore, the permittee may put temporary coverings over the labels of trade secret materials during the course of city inspections conducted by city officials other than fire inspectors. 
(3)  All inspections specified herein shall be at the discretion of the city and nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the city to conduct any such inspection, nor shall any actual inspection made imply a duty to conduct any other inspections. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be construed to hold the city or any officer, employee, or representative of the city responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of making an inadequate or negligent inspection or by reason of any failure to make an inspection or reinspections. 
(b)  Inspections by permittee. The permittee shall conduct regular inspections of its own facilities to assure compliance with this article and shall maintain logs or file reports in accordance with its hazardous materials management plan. The inspector conducting such inspection shall be qualified to conduct such inspections. 
(c)  Special inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the city manager may periodically employ special inspectors to conduct an audit or assessment of permittee's facility to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. All costs associated with special inspections shall be the responsibility of the permittee. 
(1)  The special inspector shall be a qualified person or firm who shall demonstrate expertise to the satisfaction of the fire chief and the city manager. 
(2)  The special inspection report shall include an evaluation of the facilities and recommendations consistent with the provisions of this article where appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the fire chief at the same time that it is submitted to permittee. 
(3)  Upon review of the report, the fire chief shall mail to the permittee a written notice of required improvements. The permittee shall, within thirty (30) days of mailing of such notice, file with the fire chief a plan to implement the improvements or to appeal the written order. 
(d)  Substituted inspections. An inspector by an employee of any other public agency may be deemed by the city as a substitute for any requirement above. 
(e)  Maintenance of records. All records required by this article shall be maintained by the permitted for a period of not less than three (3) years. Such records shall be made available to the city during normal working hours and upon reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(35—39), 3-7-94)  
Sec. 8.61. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate section 8.51 through 8.61; to fail, neglect, or refuse to follow an order of the city manager or any other authorized personnel of the city issued under sections 8.51 through 8.61; or to maintain a public nuisance or allow a public nuisance to exist on his property. Violations of section 8.51 through 8.61 shall be punished as provided in section 1.12 of the City Code. Each separate day during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 94-08, § 1(40), 3-7-94)  
Chapter 9 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, adopted Jan. 4, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 9, §§ 9.01—9.21, and enacted a new Ch. 9 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9 pertained to flood prevention and control and derived from Ord. No. 87-09, § 1, adopted Apr. 6, 1987; Ord. No. 91-05, §§ 1—3, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; Ord. No. 95-22, §§ 1—9, adopted Apr. 3, 1995; and Ord. No. 2003-11, § 1, adopted July 21, 2003. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 24; yacht basin, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 9.01. - General. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of Safety Harbor, hereinafter referred to as "this chapter." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(c)  Findings of fact. The city commission hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  Because of variations in rainfall and the amount of stormwater runoff, flooding is a natural, recurring phenomenon. 
(2)  The floodprone areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life, property damage, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which could adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)  These flood losses are caused, in part, by the cumulative effect of obstructions and fill in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in floodprone areas of uses vulnerable to damage by floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(4)  Flooding and lands that are subject to flooding (flood-prone lands) serve the following important functions in the hydrologic cycle and ecological system: 
a.  Flood-prone lands provide natural storage and conveyance of floodwaters; 
b.  The water on flooded lands may provide recharge to groundwater and is a basic source of flow to rivers, streams and estuaries; 
c.  Temporary storage of surface waters on flood-prone lands regulates flood elevations and the timing, velocity and rate of flood discharges; 
d.  Flood-prone lands and the natural vegetation thereon maintain water quality by reducing erosion, removing nutrients and other pollutants and allowing sediment to settle. 
(5)  Development of flood-prone lands is inconsistent with their natural functions, and improper management of floodwaters have the following significant adverse impacts on the health, safety and welfare of the community: 
a.  The owners of homes and business structures located in frequently flooded areas and their customers, guests, employees, children and future generations are subjected to unreasonable risk of personal injury and property damage. 
b.  Expensive and dangerous search and rescue and disaster relief operations must be conducted when developed properties are flooded. 
c.  Roads and utilities associated with development are subject to damage from flooding at great expense to taxpayers and rate payers. 
d.  Flooding of developed properties leads to demands for government to construct expensive and often environmentally damaging projects to control floodwaters. 
e.  Loss of natural water storage capacity leads to reduction in the available water supply and a reduction in the stormwater treatment effectiveness in these areas. 
f.  The level, velocity, frequency and duration of flooding on other lands are often increased when floodwaters are obstructed, diverted, displaced or channelized. 
g.  Water quality is degraded, freshwater inflows to estuaries are disrupted and valuable wetland and wildlife habitat is lost. 
h.  Property values are lowered and economic activity is disrupted by damaging floods. 
(d)  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(e)  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter. 
(f)  Disclaimer of liability. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city commission of the City of Safety Harbor or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.02. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Areas to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Safety Harbor as established in subsection 9.02(c) of this chapter. 
(c)  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The flood insurance study for Pinellas County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated August 18, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this chapter and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the community development department in Safety Harbor City Hall located at 750 Main Street, Safety Harbor, Florida, 34695. 
(d)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 9.05 of this chapter the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this chapter and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(e)  Other laws. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(f)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This chapter shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this chapter. 
(g)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.03. - Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The building official is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(b)  General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this chapter without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 9.07 of this chapter. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this chapter is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as specified in the definition of "substantial improvement"; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this chapter is required. 
(e)  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 9.07 of this chapter. 
(f)  Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(g)  Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 9.06 of this chapter for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(h)  Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to subsection 9.03(d) of this chapter; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six (6) months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this chapter and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Safety Harbor are modified; and 
(6)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on flood insurance rate maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(i)  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this chapter; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the community development department in City Hall located at 750 Main Street, Safety Harbor, Florida 34695. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.04. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this chapter, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(b)  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(c)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in Section 604.50, Florida Statutes. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in Section 366.02, Florida Statutes, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in Section 553.73(10)(k), Florida Statutes, are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(d)  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in section 9.05 of this chapter. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(e)  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this chapter, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(f)  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(g)  Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(h)  Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The Southwest Florida Water Management District; Section 373.036, Florida Statutes. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; Section 381.0065, Florida Statutes and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; Section 161.141, Florida Statutes. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; Section 161.055, Florida Statutes. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.05. - Site plans and construction documents. 
(a)  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with subsections 9.05(b)(2) or (3) of this chapter. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with subsection 9.05(b)(1) of this chapter. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Delineation of the Coastal Construction Control Line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(8)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(9)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
(10)  Elevation of all structures, in relation to the datum on the flood insurance rate map, of the lowest floor, including basement, or lowest horizontal structural member, as applicable. 
(11)  Datum used to determine the floodplain elevation and source of data. A datum of NAVD 88 shall be used. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two (2) feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(c)  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 9.05(d) of this chapter and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in subsection 9.05(d) of this chapter. 
(4)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(d)  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.06. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(b)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(c)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(d)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with subsection 9.05(b)(3)(b) of this chapter, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(e)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in subsection 9.06(d) of this chapter. 
(f)  Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.07. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  General. The board of appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 553.73(5), Florida Statutes, the board of appeals shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(b)  Appeals. The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(c)  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The board of appeals shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in subsection 9.07(g) of this chapter, the conditions of issuance set forth in subsection 9.07(h) of this chapter, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The board of appeals has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter. 
(d)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in subsection 9.05(c) of this chapter. 
(e)  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this chapter, provided the variance meets the requirements of subsection 9.07(d), is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(g)  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this chapter, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(h)  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the board of appeals that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.08. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(b)  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, it shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.09. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  The owners of property subject to this chapter shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter with respect to their property. Enforcement action taken by the city or state may be brought against the owner and/or persons or entities in control of the property, including a contractor working on the property. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in Code of Ordinances section 2.10.06. 
(c)  Any person or agency violating the provisions of this chapter may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition and may be held responsible for any damages occurring as a result of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 9.10. - General. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(b)  Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(c)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.11. - Definitions. 
(a)  Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
(b)  Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
(c)  ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
(d)  Base flood. A flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
(e)  Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(f)  Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(g)  Coastal Barrier Resource Act of 1982 (CBRA). For the purposes of the NFIP, the Coastal Barrier Resources Act of 1982 designated certain portions of the Gulf and East Coasts and undeveloped coastal barriers. These areas are shown on the appropriate flood insurance maps panels and have certain flood insurance coverage restrictions. 
(h)  Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to Section 161.053, Florida Statutes, and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
(i)  Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
(j)  Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
(k)  Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two (2) feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(l)  Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
(m)  Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
(n)  Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 14, 1971. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(o)  Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 14, 1971. 
(p)  Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
(q)  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(r)  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(s)  Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(t)  Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
(u)  Floodplain. The lateral extent of inundation by an event of given statistical frequency, such as special flood hazard areas as designated in the FIRMs, and 100-year floodplain as designated in the city stormwater master plan. 
(v)  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(w)  Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(x)  Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
(y)  Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this chapter. 
(z)  Floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
(aa)  Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(bb)  Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
(cc)  Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
(dd)  Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
(ee)  Hazardous material. Means those chemicals or substances that are physical hazards or health hazards as defined and classified in the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition. 
(ff)  Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
(gg)  Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
(hh)  Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
(ii)  Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of forty-five (45) square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
(jj)  Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(kk)  Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
(ll)  Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
(mm)  Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this chapter, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
(nn)  New construction. For the purposes of administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after May 14, 1971, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(oo)  New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 14, 1971. 
(pp)  Otherwise protected areas (OPAS). Undeveloped coastal barriers that are within the boundaries of areas established under federal, state or local law, or held by a qualified organization, primarily for wildlife refuge, sanctuary, recreational or natural resource conservation purposes. The only federal spending limitation within OPAS is federal flood insurance. 
(qq)  Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in Section 320.01, Florida Statutes.] 
(rr)  Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See Section 320.01, Florida Statutes.) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(ss)  Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
(tt)  Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
(uu)  Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
(vv)  Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
(ww)  Substantial improvement. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during the life of the structure, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the life of the structure begins on the date of the first permit issued for improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to March 16, 1987. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(xx)  Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter or the Florida Building Code. 
(yy)  Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(zz)  Wetland. Means all those waters, fresh and saline, or areas which are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation specifically adapted to life in saturated conditions. Such wetland vegetative indicators shall be those species listed in the Florida Administrative Code. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, rivers, lakes, streams, springs, impoundments, swamps, hydric hammocks, marshes, bogs, sinkholes, estuaries, sloughs, cypress heads, mangrove forests, bayheads, bayous, bays, and open marine waters, whether on private or public lands and whether they are manmade or natural. Wetlands shall not include stormwater retention ponds. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 9.12. - Buildings and structures. 
(a)  Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to Section 9.04(c) of this chapter, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 9.18 of this chapter. 
(b)  Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in Section 161.54, Florida Statutes, shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this chapter and ASCE 24. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.13. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with subsection 9.05(b)(1) of this chapter; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 9.14 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.14. - Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(b)  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(c)  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(d)  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in subsection 9.05(c)(1) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(e)  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this chapter, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(f)  Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by subsection 9.05(c)(4) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with subsection 9.18(h)(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.15. - Manufactured homes. 
(a)  General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to Section 320.8249, Florida Statutes, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this chapter. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(b)  Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this chapter. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to subsection 9.15(f) are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this chapter. 
(c)  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(d)  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with subsection 9.15(e) or subsection 9.15(f) of this chapter, as applicable. 
(e)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of subsection 9.15(f) of this chapter, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
(f)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to subsection 9.15(e) of this chapter, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
(2)  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(g)  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 or R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(h)  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.16. - Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
(a)  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(b)  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in subsection 9.16(a) of this chapter for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 9.15 of this chapter for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.17. - Tanks. 
(a)  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(b)  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection 9.17(c) of this chapter shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
(c)  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(d)  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.18. - Other development. 
(a)  General requirements for other development. All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of subsection 9.14(d) of this chapter if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(b)  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of subsection 9.14(d) of this chapter. 
(c)  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 9.14(d) of this chapter. 
(d)  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one (1) side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of subsection 9.14(d) of this chapter. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of subsection 9.05(c)(3) of this chapter. 
(e)  Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four (4) inches. 
(f)  Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than twelve (12) inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of twelve (12) inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
(g)  Other development in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(h)  Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one (1) unit vertical to five (5) units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Sec. 9.19 - Hazardous materials. 
(a)  Manufacture and storage of hazardous materials. Structures used for the manufacture or storage of hazardous materials shall not be permitted in any floodplain or floodway. 
(b)  Discharge of hazardous materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, cause to be discharged, or allow to be discharged any hazardous materials within any floodplain or floodway. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 1-4-2016)  
Chapter 10 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1995, amended Ch. 10 to read as herein set out. Formerly, Ch. 10 consisted of §§ 10.01—10.14, which pertained to garbage and refuse and derived from those ordinances as are listed in the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; finance, Ch. 7; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; junked, abandoned or wrecked property, Ch. 12; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; signs, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 24; yacht basin and waterways, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Resource recovery and management, F.S. Ch. 403, Part IV; public health, F.S. Ch. 381. 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall be construed to have the meaning as hereinafter defined: 
Bulk item shall mean any item, except white goods, which either whole or dissembled, will not fit into a ninety-gallon garbage can. Examples of bulk items include but are not limited to: bathtubs, cabinets, indoor and outdoor furniture, chairs, tables, box springs, mattresses, couches, pillows, toilets, sinks and oversized cardboard boxes. 
City-owned garbage can shall mean a ninety (90) or sixty (60) gallon plastic garbage can provided by the city through the public works director or his/her designee for trash pickup. 
Commercial account shall mean any account not defined as a residential account. 
Commercial container, also known as a dumpster, shall mean a detachable metal container to be mechanically dumped into a packer-type garbage truck and ranging in size from two (2) cubic yards to eight (8) cubic yards. This container shall include, if deemed necessary by the public works director or his/her designee, lifting lugs, dumping barrels, and wheels so as to make it suitable for handling and hoisting by the city sanitation trucks. 
Dry garbage shall mean any and all papers, bags, sacks, cartons, containers and boxes from which obnoxious odors are not likely to be emitted and to which flies and other insects will not likely be attracted. 
Hazardous material shall mean any material as defined in subsection 8.51(d) of the City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
Hazardous substance shall mean any substance or chemical product as defined in subsection 8.51(d) of the City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
Hazardous waste shall mean any material or substance identified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 261. 
Moist garbage shall mean any and all refuse matter from edible fruits and vegetables whether cooked or raw, or any can, container or other materials that might become sour, spoiled, rotten or putrid and from which obnoxious odors are likely to be emitted or to which flies or other insects are likely to be attracted. 
Residential account shall mean a dwelling unit housing one (1) family for which the occupant is billed for water, sewer, stormwater, street light, recycling and garbage charges or any combination thereof. 
Toxic substance shall mean any chemical substance or mixture as defined in section 8.51(d) of the City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
Trash shall mean such other small rubbish (other than that defined as "moist garbage" and "dry garbage") as ordinarily accumulates about a residential premise. 
Waste materials shall mean and include sand, wood, stone, brick, cement, concrete, roofing and other refuse building materials usually left over from a construction or remodeling project; trees, tree limbs (except as otherwise defined as "yard waste"), tree trunks and tree stumps. 
White goods shall mean any household appliance which could be safely disposed of and does not contain any hazardous materials or environmentally harmful substances, such as Freon. These white good items include washers, dryers, ranges and water heaters. 
Yard waste shall mean any and all vegetative matters, such as yard clippings, grass clippings, leaves, moss, palm fronds, branches, plants and tree limbs (not to exceed six (6) inches in diameter and four (4) feet in length). Yard waste collected as part of the city's recycling program will be collected separately from garbage and trash on a date specified by the public works director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2017-20, §§ 1, 2, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 10.02. - Containers. 
(a)  The city shall issue a ninety (90) gallon garbage can for customers except those customers described in subsection (b) below and except where the public works director grants an exception under section 10.04. An additional ninety (90) gallon city issued garbage can may be provided at a rate specified in subsection 10.07(a) at the discretion of the public works director. 
(b)  Semipublic, commercial and industrial establishments and multifamily dwellings of six (6) or more units, shall use commercial containers supplied by the city which shall be not less than two (2) nor more than eight (8) cubic yards in volume and shall be of the capacity, as determined by the public works director, as being most appropriate for the respective entity. The use of privately owned commercial containers is prohibited. 
(c)  The public works director and/or his/her designee may allow a waiver to subsection (b) above under the following conditions: 
(1)  Lack of space for the placement of a commercial container where a redevelopment project is involved; 
(2)  Lack of accessibility to the containerized unit where a redevelopment project is involved; or 
(3)  The establishment generates amounts of loose garbage capable of being serviced by garbage cans. 
(d)  All garbage cans and/or containers shall be maintained in a safe handling condition and in good repair. Any garbage can or container that becomes unserviceable due to defects which are liable to hamper the person(s) collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon written notice by the city. The public works director and/or his/her designee shall have the authority to refuse collection service of any garbage can or container determined to be unserviceable. The owner and/or occupant of the premises shall be notified in advance that a garbage can or container is unserviceable and, if not corrected, shall also be notified that collection services are discontinued until correction of the condition. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 2, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2017-20, §§ 3, 4, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 10.03. - Commercial containers; deposits. 
(a)  Commercial containers shall provide adequate capacity and volume as determined by the public works director and/or his/her designee and shall comply with the standards set forth in sections 159.00 through 159.04 of the city's land development code. 
(b)  Each establishment utilizing commercial containers shall place a deposit on account with the city prior to the installation of the container. During the period that the city holds the deposit, the city shall be responsible to replace and maintain the commercial container and shall refund the deposit upon the cessation of operation and return of the container. The deposits which shall be due and payable shall be set by the public works director. 
(c)  Any successor or assignee of the original owner of the establishment, unless the deposit has not been refunded, shall be obligated to make the appropriate deposit for the use of the commercial container prior to utilizing the city's garbage collection service. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 10.04. - Placing refuse in receptacles. 
All garbage and trash, as defined in this chapter, shall be deposited in a city issued garbage can or commercial container provided for such purposes. The public works director may grant an exception to a residential customer and allow the use of a thirty-two (32) gallon commercially manufactured watertight receptacle or container constructed of light gauge steel, or plastic having a nonattached lid or cover and a handle(s) on the receptacle or container, where there would be a lack of accessibility to the city issued garbage can. Prior to depositing the same for collection in garbage cans, the owner or customer shall crush or collapse all wooden or cardboard boxes or crates and bundle same. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 3, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2017-20, § 5, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 10.05. - Placing refuse for collection. 
(a)  All garbage and trash shall be deposited at the curb for pickup no later than 6:30 a.m. on the scheduled day for collection. All garbage and trash shall be placed at the curb no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the day prior to collection and all garbage containers shall be removed from the right-of-way and the property adjacent thereto no later than midnight the day of collection. 
(b)  All yard waste shall be collected as part of the city's recycling program in the following manner. Yard waste shall be placed at the curb once a week on a day specified by the public works director or his/her designee and in the amount not to exceed one and one-half (1.5) cubic yards in volume, or eight (8) thirty-two (32) gallon cans. Yard waste shall be collected in cans not to exceed thirty-two (32) gallons in capacity or forty (40) pounds in weight. Yard waste that is too bulky to fit in prescribed containers shall be cut into pieces four (4) feet long, no more than six (6) inches in diameter, tied in bundles not exceeding forty (40) pounds, or one and one-half (1.5) cubic yards in volume. Piles of yard waste in excess of one and one-half (1.5) cubic yards shall be considered the responsibility of the occupant. Piles of yard waste in excess of one and one-half (1.5) cubic yards may be picked up by the city only on special arrangement with the sanitation division at an additional charge set in subsection 10.07(c). The use of plastic bags or city issued garbage cans for yard waste is prohibited. 
(c)  Commercial customers utilizing commercial containers (dumpsters) shall be responsible to insure that the containers are accessible for purposes of collection by city personnel. Should the commercial container not be accessible on the scheduled collection day, such will not be serviced until the next regular scheduled collection day unless a special pickup is requested, which will be charged in accordance with the fee structure set forth in section 10.07(b)(2). 
(d)  Arrangements for pickup in alleys may be made where such service results in economy and efficiency for the city. 
(e)  No more than ten (10) bags and/or bulk items will be picked up on the designated bulk item day. More than ten (10) bags and/or bulk items will require special residential pickup to be scheduled by the customer which will result in a special pickup fee as described in subsection 10.07(c). 
(f)  Multifamily residential properties will have a once a month bulk pickup on a day designated by the public works director or his/her designee upon prior written request. All such bulk pickups shall meet the requirements of subsection 10.05(e) above. 
(g)  White goods will be picked up and disposed of at no charge. Customers are required to schedule a special residential pickup for all white goods except as described in subsection 10.07(e). 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 4, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2017-20, § 6, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 10.06. - Prohibited practices. 
It is hereby declared unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to do or permit to be done any of the following acts or practices: 
(1)  To deposit on, or burn, or bury in, or cause to be deposited on, or burned, or buried in, any land, public square, street, alley, vacant lot or unoccupied lot, the water or shore of Old Tampa Bay, in or on the banks of any other waterway, channel, ditch, stream or any part of any drainage system or drainage way within the city, any garbage or other noxious, malodorous or offensive matter. 
(2)  To deposit or place in or cause to be deposited or placed in a garbage can or container any material other than those set forth in this chapter. 
(3)  To fail or neglect to keep or cause to be kept clean and sanitary or tightly covered and in good state of repair all garbage cans and containers. 
(4)  To use or supply garbage cans or commercial containers other than those defined and provided for in this chapter. 
(5)  To place or allow to be placed upon the streets, alleys, curbing or sidewalks of the city any rubbish, sweepings, debris, trash or waste material of any kind which might be a menace to traffic either vehicular or pedestrian or which might endanger the proper operation of the city's sewer or drainage system. 
(6)  To collect or permit to be collected by anyone the garbage or yard waste from any garbage can, commercial container, or like receptacles other than persons regularly employed by the city for that purpose or by persons or establishments providing specialized services not provided by the city which have executed an agreement or franchise with the city for the provision of such services. 
(7)  To deposit or place or cause to be deposited or placed, waste materials (as defined in section 10.01) any place except as provided in section 10.08(b). 
(8)  To violate any of the provisions or sections of this chapter or any reasonable interpretation of the same. 
(9)  To allow or permit garbage cans or containers to remain along the curb of the street for a longer period of time than is necessary and reasonable after the collections have been made and the receptacles have been emptied of their contents as specified in subsection 10.05(a). 
(10)  To place or allow to be placed for collection in a garbage can, commercial container or like receptacle animal excreta not packaged in plastic bags or other sealed packaging or material for the purposes of limiting exposure to sanitation collection personnel. 
(11)  To place for collection within any residential area garbage or refuse generated offsite of the subject residential premises. 
(12)  To place or allow to be placed for collection any hazardous materials, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, or toxic substance, as defined in section 10.01. 
(13)  To place or allow to be placed for collection yard waste, as defined in section 10.01, in plastic bags or other nonapproved containers on the day designated for collection under the city's recycling program. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2017-20, § 7, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 10.07. - Service charges. 
(a)  Residential. 
Residential Rates 
Per Unit 	Monthly Charge 
Effective Date 
	2/7/06 	10/1/06 	10/1/07 	10/1/08 	10/1/09 	10/1/13 
(1) 	Single family 
residential 	15.53 	17.00 	18.62 	20.39 	22.32 	
	Additional 

container 						16.74 
(2) 	Multiple dwelling units 	12.17 	13.32 	14.59 	15.97 	17.49 	
(3) 	Mobile home/trailer parks 	12.17 	13.32 	14.59 	15.97 	17.49 	
 
(b)  Special containers. 
(1)  Rate schedule. 
Size 2 
Cubic Yards 	Monthly Charges 
Times 
Per Week 
Picked Up 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 
1 	54.90 	60.12 	65.83 	72.08 	78.93 
2 	109.81 	120.24 	131.66 	144.17 	157.86 
3 	164.69 	180.33 	197.47 	216.22 	236.77 
4 	219.59 	240.45 	263.30 	288.31 	315.70 
5 	274.49 	300.57 	329.13 	360.39 	394.63 
6 	329.39 	360.68 	394.94 	432.46 	473.55 
 
Size 4 
Cubic Yards 	Monthly Charges 
Times 
Per Week 
Picked Up 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 
1 	109.81 	120.24 	131.66 	144.17 	157.86 
2 	219.59 	240.45 	263.30 	288.31 	315.70 
3 	329.39 	360.68 	394.94 	432.46 	473.55 
4 	439.18 	480.90 	526.59 	576.62 	631.40 
5 	548.98 	601.13 	658.24 	720.77 	789.24 
6 	658.77 	721.36 	789.89 	864.93 	947.09 
 
Size 6 
Cubic Yards 	Monthly Charges 
Times 
Per Week 
Picked Up 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 
1 	164.69 	180.33 	197.47 	216.22 	236.77 
2 	329.45 	360.75 	395.02 	432.55 	473.64 
3 	494.09 	541.02 	592.42 	648.70 	710.33 
4 	658.34 	720.88 	789.36 	864.35 	946.46 
5 	823.47 	901.70 	987.36 	1081.16 	1183.87 
6 	988.16 	1082.04 	1184.83 	1297.39 	1420.64 
 
Size 8 
Cubic Yards 	Monthly Charges 
Times 
Per Week 
Picked Up 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 
1 	219.59 	240.45 	263.30 	288.31 	315.70 
2 	439.18 	480.90 	526.59 	576.62 	631.40 
3 	658.77 	721.36 	789.89 	864.93 	947.09 
4 	878.37 	961.81 	1053.18 	1153.23 	1262.79 
5 	1097.96 	1202.26 	1316.48 	1441.54 	1578.49 
6 	1317.55 	1442.71 	1579.77 	1729.85 	1894.19 
 
(2)  If more frequent or special pickups are required on other than normal collection days, a flat rate additional charge based on the size of the container used for collection will be added to the basic charge using the following fee schedule: 
Size 
Cubic 
Yards 	Additional special container pickups 
	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 
2 	43.80 	47.96 	52.52 	57.51 	62.97 
4 	49.28 	53.96 	59.08 	64.69 	70.84 
6 	54.75 	59.95 	65.65 	71.88 	78.71 
8 	60.23 	65.95 	72.21 	79.07 	86.58 
 
(3)  For those entities which have been granted a waiver by the public works director and/or his/her designee under section 10.02(c), the monthly charges per unit depending on the number of garbage cans shall be as follows: 
Number 
Of 
Cans 	Per Unit Charge 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 	10/01/13 
1 - 2 	15.53 	17.00 	18.62 	20.39 	22.32 	22.32 
Each additional can 	54.90 	60.12 	65.83 	72.08 	78.93 	16.74 
 
(4)  Commercial containers that have compactors attached shall be charged a rate for each day's service in accordance with the manufacturer's compaction rate per cubic yard. Account holders shall provide the necessary specifications and information to the public works director for computation of the applicable rate. 
(5)  Accounts utilizing special containers shall be charged the special container rate or on a per-unit rate whichever is higher. 
(c)  Special residential pickup. Special residential pickups shall mean pickups requiring more time for collection at a residential customer than is common or usual. Special trash and yard waste pickups can be arranged through the sanitation department and are subject to a fee, however the city commission may vote to waive this special residential pickup fee by resolution for all residential customers, if the commission determines that the city will benefit by the waiver of this fee. The schedule of fees for special residential pickups is as follows: 
Per 
Trip 
Charge 	Special Residential Pickup 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 
	44.00 	48.00 	53.00 	58.00 	63.00 
 
(d)  Recycling fee. 
(1)  A charge of two dollars and seventy-seven cents ($2.77) per month shall be levied for each residential unit for curbside recycling. 
(2)  A charge of one dollar and seventy-three cents ($1.73) per month shall be levied for each multifamily dwelling unit and mobile home park unit for recycling. 
(3)  The provisions of sections 10.10, 10.11, 10.12, 10.13 and 10.14 shall be fully applicable and govern fees provided under this section and the provision of recycling services. 
(e)  Special appliance removal. Appliance removal may be arranged by contacting the public works department. Such appliances will be removed at no extra cost; however for those appliances that contain Freon or have the capability of having contained Freon, a fee shall be charged for removal of the Freon or verification that the appliance is free of Freon. The fee for Freon removal is as follows: 
Per 
Item 
Fee 	Freon Removal Fee 
	Effective Date 
	02/07/06 	10/01/06 	10/01/07 	10/01/08 	10/01/09 
	16.50 	18.00 	19.75 	21.50 	23.50 
 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 98-16, § 1, 7-6-98; Ord. No. 2001-25, § 1, 2, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 2002-08, §§ 1, 2, 3-18-2002; Ord. No. 2006-04, §§ 1—5, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 2006-14, § 1, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 2008-27, § 1, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 2017-20, §§ 8—11, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 10.08. - Disposal of certain materials by owner. 
(a)  The service charges referred to in this chapter shall apply only for the collection of garbage and yard waste, as defined herein, and the city shall not collect waste materials defined herein as including general "refuse building materials usually left over from a construction or remodeling project" and also trees, tree limbs, tree trunks and tree stumps. It is the responsibility of all tree surgeons, nurseries, lawn care services and landscaping contractors, general contractors, or any individual or company doing work on private property, to remove from the premises all such residue, rubbish, and/or waste resulting from said work. These above-mentioned items shall be disposed of by the owner or contractor at their sole expense. 
(b)  All construction sites shall be provided with a commercial container(s), the number and size to be determined by the city building official. Construction sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times, and the city building official may suspend or red-tag a construction job until the premises are brought up to a satisfactory sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2017-20, § 12, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 10.09. - Special arrangements for the impaired or disabled. 
All garbage, trash and yard waste shall be placed at curbside for collection in accordance with section 10.05. In cases whereby the owner or person in charge is incapacitated due to injury, disability or age, such individuals may submit a request in writing to the public works department for special arrangements for collection. Such request shall be subject to approval by the public works director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 10.10. - Provision of services within city. 
The city shall have the exclusive right to provide sanitation services within the municipal limits of the city. Individuals or establishments requiring specialized services not provided by the city shall request approval for such services through the public works director and/or his/her designee. Entities providing such collection services must execute an agreement with the city prior to commencing service. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 10.11. - Service outside city. 
There will be no garbage and trash collection service provided outside of the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 10.12. - Billing. 
(a)  The monthly charges provided for in section 10.07 shall be billed and collected with the monthly utility bill issued by the city. Garbage collection charges shall be itemized separately on such statement. 
(b)  Garbage collection charges provided for herein shall be payable within twenty (20) days after the original date of billing, or such collection service shall be discontinued until all such charges shall be paid in full. 
(c)  The monthly garbage collection charges, as set forth, shall initially become due upon final inspection and approval of the facility by the building official, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or occupancy, whichever shall first occur, and shall remain in effect thereafter. 
(d)  If garbage collection charges shall be in arrears, all utilities served to the delinquent customer shall be immediately shut off and discontinued until such arrearage becomes current. In addition, the city may collect such arrearage pursuant to the enforcement provisions as provided in the utilities chapter of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 10.13. - Violations. 
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, penalty or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation, including reasonable attorney fees for defending or prosecuting any action with regard to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 10.14. - Contract for garbage and yard waste services with owner of property; city may bill tenant. 
The city shall contract only with the owner of the property for garbage and yard waste collection services to be furnished to the property and the fees therefor are chargeable to the property owner. The city may bill the tenant or occupant of the premises for the garbage and trash collection service charges at the express request of the owner, but this shall in no way relieve the owner of responsibility for payment. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Sec. 10.15. - Sanitation impact fees. 
(a)  Residential. A sanitation impact fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for construction of any dwelling within the city. There shall be no distinction made as to single-family dwelling units or multifamily dwelling units. 
(b)  Commercial/industrial/institutional. A sanitation impact fee shall be paid upon the issuance of a building permit for any commercial, industrial, or institutional development at the rate of four hundred sixty dollars ($460.00) for all development up to and including five thousand (5,000) square feet and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 9-18-95)  
Chapter 11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 4; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; junked, abandoned or wrecked property, Ch. 12; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; utilities, Ch. 24; yacht basins, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Authority to enact health regulations not inconsistent with state public health laws and rules and regulations of Department of Health and Rehabilitation Services, F.S. § 381.101; enforcement, F.S. § 381.121. 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 98-10, adopted April 20, 1998, repealed § 11.01 in its entirety. Formerly, § 11.01 pertained to adoption of the sanitary code and derived from § 10-1 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 11.02. - Sanitary facilities required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to live in, own, lease, maintain or control any temporary or permanent quarters, either stationary or mobile, within the territorial limits of the city without having, providing, and maintaining adequate sanitary facilities. 
(b)  Adequate sanitary facilities may be defined as the provision of potable water, the sanitary disposal of sewer and the disposal of solid waste in accordance with all applicable city, county, state and federal guidelines. 
(Code 1970, § 10-2; Ord. No. 95-09, § 1, 2-20-95) 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 5.11 et seq.; water and sewer department, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 11.03. - Hurricane precautions. 
Upon the issuance of an advisory by the U.S. Weather Bureau alerting the Pinellas County area to a hurricane condition, every owner or owners of any lot, tract, or parcel of land, occupied as well as unoccupied, within the city shall securely tie down all loose lumber, trash, and other materials located on his property. 
(Code 1970, § 10-3)  
Chapter 14 - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; code enforcement board, § 2.10.01 et seq.; finance, Ch. 7; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; taxation, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local occupational license taxes, F.S. Ch. 205; regulatory fees, F.S. § 166.221. 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Levy. 
A local business tax for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation in the city is hereby levied. Such local business tax shall be levied on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business; 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation; 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (1) or subsection (2) and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if such business tax is not prohibited by s. [Section] 8 of Art. I of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.02. - Required. 
No person shall engage in or manage the profession, business or occupation hereinafter named within the city unless a city license shall be issued to each person on receipt of the amount hereinafter stated. 
(Code 1970, § 14-2; Ord. No. 98-22, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.03. - Persons subject to business tax. 
For the purposes of this chapter any person, holding himself out to the public, at a given location, by sign, printed matter, classified section, telephone directory, or city directory, or otherwise as being engaged in business, or as offering services or property to the public, regardless of whether such person actually transacts any business, or practices a profession, shall be considered as engaging in business and shall be liable for an local business tax therefor. 
(Code 1970, § 14-1; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.04. - Dates due and delinquent; penalties. 
(a)  All receipts shall be sold by the appropriate tax collector beginning July 1 of each year, are due and payable on or before September 30 of each year, and expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. Receipts that are not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent for the month of October, plus an additional five-percent penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency, until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the business tax receipt for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  The receipt shall be obtained prior to the commencement of the business or the practice of the profession. 
(c)  Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation, or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, if required hereunder, shall be subject to a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the receipt determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(d)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation or profession covered by this chapter who does not pay the required local business tax receipt within one hundred fifty (150) days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required local business tax receipt, is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(e)  No receipt shall be issued unless the federal employer identification number or Social Security number is obtained from the person to be licensed. 
(Code 1970, § 14-1; Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 9-17-2018)  
Sec. 14.05. - Subcontractors. 
For purpose of enforcement and construction of this chapter the requirement of a receipt shall not apply solely to contractors or superintendents on the job or undertaking, but shall extend to subcontractors or employees not regularly employed by a firm or person licensed by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 14-3; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.06. - Separate receipt for each category. 
Each applicant shall be required to procure a separate receipt for each category which applies to his activities. 
(Code 1970, § 14-4; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.07. - Term of receipt; half-year receipt. 
(a)  All business taxes imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable on the first day of October of each year. 
(b)  Provided however, that on and after April 1 of each year, a one-half-year receipt may be issued upon the collection of a business tax in the amount of one-half (½) of the annual business tax. 
(Code 1970, § 14-5; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.08. - Prosecution of violators; penalty. 
(a)  Should any person fail or refuse to pay the business tax, the city shall initiate code enforcement action in accordance with section 2.10.06 of the City Code, or any other appropriate means allowed by law. 
(b)  Any person who shall carry on or conduct any business, occupation or profession for which a receipt is hereby required, without first obtaining such receipt, shall, upon issuance of an order by the city code enforcement board, be punished as provided by section 14.04, or section 2.10.09 as applicable. 
(Code 1970, § 14-6; Ord. No. 95-39, § 2, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.09. - Revocation of receipt. 
The right to revoke any receipt issued under the provisions of this chapter, for cause, which shall be deemed to include any violation of the zoning ordinances of the city is reserved to the city and the revocation shall be made at the direction of the commission. 
(Code 1970, § 14-7; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.10. - When certificate required. 
No receipt shall be issued to any person otherwise required by ordinance of the city or by state law to have a certificate of competency or to have passed an examination before engaging in a business or profession in the city, until such person shall have exhibited to the city manager or city clerk proof of having a valid certificate or of having passed the examination. 
(Code 1970, § 14-8; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.11. - State license required. 
(a)  [New local business tax receipts.] Any person applying for a new local business tax receipt to practice any profession regulated by the department of professional regulation, or any board or commission thereof, must exhibit an active state certificate, registration, or license, or proof of copy of the same, before such local business tax receipt may be issued. 
(b)  Pharmacies and pharmacists. No business tax receipt shall be issued to operate a pharmacy unless the applicant shall first exhibit a current permit issued by the board of pharmacy; however, no such business tax receipt shall be required in order to practice the profession of pharmacy. 
(c)  Adult congregate living facilities. No business tax receipt for the operation of an adult congregate living facility, pursuant to part III of chapter 400 [Florida Statutes], shall be issued without first ascertaining that the applicant has been licensed by the department of health and rehabilitative services to operate such a facility at the specified location or locations. 
(d)  Pest control business. No business tax receipt shall be issued to any pest control business coming under chapter 482 [Florida Statutes], unless a current license has been procured from the department of agriculture and consumer service for each of its locations in the city. Upon presentation of the requisite licenses from the department and the required fee, a business tax receipt shall be issued. 
(e)  Health studios. No business tax receipt shall be issued or renewed for the operation of a health studio pursuant to [Florida Statutes] sections 501.012 through 501.019 or ballroom dance studio pursuant to [Florida Statutes] section 501.143, unless such business exhibits a current license, registration or letter of exemption from the department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(f)  Sellers of travel. No business tax receipt shall be issued or renewed to engage in businesses as a seller of travel pursuant to [Florida Statutes] section 559.927, unless such business exhibits a registration or letter of exemption from the department of agriculture and consumer services. 
(g)  Telemarketing businesses. No business tax receipt shall be issued or renewed for the operation of a telemarketing business under [Florida Statutes] sections 501.604 and 501.608, unless such business exhibits a current license or registration from the department of agriculture and consumer services, or a current affidavit of exemption. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 3, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007) 
State Law reference— State certificate of competency or license required prior to issuing occupational license, F.S. §§ 205.195, 205.196, 205.197, 205.198 and 205.199.  
Sec. 14.12. - Adoption of statutes. 
There is hereby adopted, by reference, the provisions of Chapter 205, Florida Statutes pertaining to local business taxes. 
(Code 1970, § 14-89; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.13. - Receipt schedule. 
The assessment of local business taxes, per annum unless otherwise specified, are hereby fixed as follows: 
Fee 
Classification     Amount 
(1)  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE ..... 140.00 
(2)  AGENCY, AGENT: 
a.  Per agent or agency ..... 90.00 
b.  Per additional broker or salesman ..... 50.00 
(3)  AMUSEMENT: 
a.  Amusement machine dealer ..... 90.00 
b.  Amusement machine operator ..... 15.00 
c.  Amusement park ..... 240.00 
d.  Amusement parlor ..... 140.00 
1.  Each machine over three (3) ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
e.  Amusement rides, each, per day ..... 15.00 
f.  Billiards ..... 60.00 
1.  Each additional table ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
g.  Bowling alley ..... 60.00 
1.  Each additional lane ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
h.  Booths or concessions, each, per day ..... 40.00 
i.  Boats, charter or party ..... 60.00 
j.  Carnivals and cruises, per day ..... 365.00 
k.  Golf course ..... 60.00 
l.  Miniature golf ..... 60.00 
m.  Driving range ..... 60.00 
n.  Night club ..... 240.00 
o.  Theater ..... 190.00 
p.  Lounge ..... 240.00 
q.  Rinks, skating ..... 60.00 
r.  Shuffleboard ..... 60.00 
1.  Each additional table or court ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
s.  Vending machines, each ..... 10.00 
(4)  ART: 
a.  Artist ..... 40.00 
b.  Art studio and gallery ..... 90.00 
(5)  AUCTION AND AUCTIONEERS: 
a.  Auctioneer ..... 90.00 
b.  Per auction ..... 40.00 
(6)  BANKING AND FINANCE: 
a.  Banks ..... 240.00 
b.  Per ATM ..... 90.00 
c.  Finance companies ..... 190.00 
(7)  BEREAVEMENT: 
a.  Mortuary ..... 140.00 
b.  Cemetery or crematorium ..... 140.00 
(8)  CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS: 
a.  Class A ..... 140.00 
b.  Class B ..... 140.00 
c.  Class C ..... 140.00 
d.  Cabinet contractor ..... 90.00 
e.  Carpentry contractor ..... 90.00 
f.  Air conditioning contractors ..... 90.00 
g.  Aluminum/vinyl/screen enclosures ..... 90.00 
h.  Demolition/excavating ..... 90.00 
i.  Electrical ..... 90.00 
j.  Fencing ..... 90.00 
k.  Gunite and sandblasting ..... 90.00 
l.  House moving ..... 90.00 
m.  Land clearing ..... 90.00 
n.  Mechanical contractor ..... 90.00 
1.  Class A ..... 90.00 
2.  Class B ..... 90.00 
3.  Class C ..... 90.00 
o.  Plumbing-Gas fitters ..... 90.00 
p.  Pools, swimming ..... 90.00 
q.  Roofing, state certified ..... 90.00 
r.  Solar heating ..... 90.00 
s.  Tank, storage, gasoline ..... 90.00 
t.  Window sales and installation ..... 90.00 
u.  Fire sprinkler installation ..... 90.00 
v.  Contractor/subcontractor, no other category ..... 90.00 
(9)  DRY CLEANING/LAUNDRIES: 
a.  Plant ..... 140.00 
b.  Branch or collection agent ..... 90.00 
c.  Laundry and linen service ..... 90.00 
d.  Self-service laundry ..... 60.00 
(10)  GASOLINE AND OILS: 
a.  Wholesale, bulk or dealer ..... 190.00 
b.  Fuel oil station ..... 60.00 
c.  Fuel oil station and mini-store ..... 140.00 
(11)  HEALTH AND BEAUTY: 
a.  Animal grooming ..... 40.00 
1.  Each additional station ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
b.  Barbershop ..... 40.00 
1.  Each additional station ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
c.  Beauty salon ..... 40.00 
1.  Each additional station ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
d.  Tanning salon ..... 40.00 
1.  Each additional station ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
e.  Manicurist ..... 40.00 
1.  Each additional station ..... 10.00 
2.  Reserved 
f.  Health club and reducing salon ..... 190.00 
1.  Each additional employee over ten (10) ..... 1.00 
2.  Reserved 
g.  Massage parlor/therapist ..... 115.00 
1.  Each additional therapist ..... 40.00 
2.  Reserved 
(11.5)  INSURANCE COMPANY, either existing within the city or doing business within the city ..... 90.00 
(12)  MANUFACTURER: 
a.  1—10 employees ..... 90.00 
b.  11—50 employees ..... 140.00 
c.  51—100 employees ..... 240.00 
d.  101—250 employees ..... 340.00 
e.  251—500 employees ..... 490.00 
f.  Over 500 employees ..... 590.00 
(13)  MEDIA: 
a.  Broadcasting radio and TV ..... 240.00 
b.  Newspaper or periodical ..... 140.00 
(14)  MEDICAL: 
a.  Clinics/medical or dental ..... 240.00 
b.  Hospital ..... 390.00 
c.  Pharmacy ..... 140.00 
d.  Laboratory ..... 190.00 
e.  Nursing home/convalescent ..... 165.00 
f.  Congregate living: 
1.  1—6 beds ..... 40.00 
2.  7—14 beds ..... 65.00 
3.  15 beds and over ..... 90.00 
g.  Animal hospital/kennel ..... 115.00 
(15)  MERCHANT: 
a.  1—5 employees ..... 65.00 
b.  6—10 employees ..... 90.00 
c.  11 and over employees ..... 140.00 
(16)  PAWN BROKER ..... 190.00 
(17)  PROFESSIONAL: 
a.  State or board certified ..... 190.00 
b.  Non-certified ..... 140.00 
c.  Paraprofessional ..... 65.00 
d.  Each additional professional ..... 40.00 
e.  Each additional paraprofessional ..... 40.00 
(18)  RENTALS: 
a.  Apartments: 
1.  Rooms 1 to 10 ..... 65.00 
2.  Each additional apartment/room ..... 4.00 
b.  Hotels, motels, cabins, cottages: 
1.  1—10 [rooms] ..... 65.00 
2.  Each additional [room] over 10 ..... 4.00 
c.  Equipment rental ..... 65.00 
d.  Rental vehicles ..... 65.00 
e.  Clothing/costume rental ..... 65.00 
f.  Rental-storage (unit/vehicle) ..... 65.00 
1.  Each additional unit/vehicle space over 10 ..... 4.00 
2.  Reserved 
g.  Mobile home parks: 
1.  1 to 10 ..... 65.00 
2.  Over 10, each additional unit ..... 4.00 
h.  Hall rental ..... 65.00 
(19)  REPAIR SHOP ..... 65.00 
(20)  RESTAURANT: 
a.  1 to 10 tables ..... 65.00 
b.  11 to 25 tables ..... 90.00 
c.  Over 25 tables ..... 110.00 
d.  Stand without seats ..... 65.00 
e.  Drive-in ..... 190.00 
(21)  SCHOOLS: 
a.  Private ..... 140.00 
b.  Music/dance ..... 65.00 
c.  Day care or nursery ..... 65.00 
d.  Tech or post secondary ..... 190.00 
e.  Schools, NOC ..... 90.00 
(22)  SALES AND SERVICE (REPAIR): 
a.  1 to 5 employees ..... 115.00 
b.  6 to 10 employees ..... 140.00 
c.  11 and over employees ..... 190.00 
(23)  SERVICES ..... 65.00 
(24)  UTILITY COMPANY: 
a.  Electric light company ..... 340.00 
b.  Telephone company ..... 340.00 
c.  Branch office ..... 80.00 
d.  Private business ..... 90.00 
e.  Telephone/telegraph ..... 90.00 
f.  Unclassified, NOC ..... 340.00 
(25)  UNCLASSIFIED ..... 90.00 
(Code 1970, § 14-12; Ord. No. 80-38, § 1, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 81-34, §§ 1—5, 9-21-81; Ord. No. 81-46, § 1, 12-7-81; Ord. No. 90-03, §§ 1—3, 3-19-90; Ord. No. 93-23, § 1, 8-16-93; Ord. No. 95-39, § 4, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 96-35, § 1, 11-4-96; Ord. No. 2004-02, §§ 1, 2, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007) 
Editor's note— Section 7 of Ord. No. 95-39, adopted Sept. 18, 1995, provided that the fee schedule herein shall not be applicable to the occupational license renewals mailed by the city prior to Oct. 1, 1995, regardless of the issue date; and any new applications made subsequent to Oct. 1, 1995, shall be subject to the fee schedule herein.  
Sec. 14.14. - Special receipt categories. 
Should any person, firm or corporation required to have an business tax receipt fail to be reasonably described in any of the above and foregoing enumerated categories then in such event, the city manager shall upon investigation determine the nearest category specified which would be comparable to the occupation of the applicant and shall assess and collect such prescribed receipt fee from the applicant. 
(Code 1970, § 14-12(a); Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.15. - Receipt category appeal. 
Should any person, firm or corporation herein or hereby required to have an business tax receipt feel aggrieved by the ruling of the city manager in regard to the assignment of a receipt category then such person shall file a written protest with the city clerk whereupon such matter will be heard by the commission at its next ensuing regular meeting at which time the aggrieved person may be heard personally or through counsel and a final determination of such protest speedily determined. 
(Code 1970, § 14-12(c); Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.16. - Religious, charitable, educational, institutional, veterans, spouses of veterans and certain service members, and low-income persons exemptions; waiver. 
(a)  Religious tenets; exemption. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a receipt for practicing the religious tenets of any church. 
(b)  Charitable, etc., organizations; occasional sales, fund raising; exemption. No business tax receipt shall be required of any charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service, or other such organization when the organization makes occasional sales or engages in fund-raising projects when the projects are performed exclusively by the members thereof and when the proceeds derived from the activities are used exclusively in the charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, and service activities of the organization. 
(c)  Upon written application on a form to be provided by the city manager, charitable, educational, religious, literary, scientific or other similar organizations, persons or groups may obtain a waiver as to the necessity of obtaining a business tax receipt which would otherwise be required by this chapter; such waiver to be granted in the following manner: 
(1)  The city manager shall determine that the applicant is, in fact, a nonprofit entity for religious, literary, scientific, charitable or educational purposes. In making such determination, the city manager shall be guided by the history of the applicant, its tax-exempt status, the affirmation of the applicant as to how any funds derived shall be used to accomplish the charitable purpose, and the criterion as set forth in F.S. § 205.022(6). 
(2)  If, in the fact, the city manager determines that the applicant is a nonprofit entity and that the funds derived from this trade, business or event shall be used for charitable purposes, then he may attach his certification to this application and waive the requisite receipt fee; except, however, when the application reveals the request: 
a.  For the use of publicly owned property such as but not limited to streets, parks or public buildings; or, 
b.  That the applicant desires to use, conduct or sponsor a circus, carnival or similar type of amusement organization or professional amusement persons. 
Either of these instances will require an action by the commission before a waiver shall be granted for the business tax receipt fee. 
(3)  As a prerequisite to any hearing by the commission, there shall be a certificate from the city manager certifying the nonprofit entities' charitable purpose; and if the application is of the type described in paragraph (c)(2)b. above, documentation shall accompany the application (either an executed contract or an affidavit by the applicant) demonstrating that an amount of not less than fifty (50) percent of the net profits earned from such circus, carnival or other similar type of amusement shall be used by the applicant to accomplish its charitable purpose. 
(d)  Pursuant to F.S. § 205.055, the following persons are entitled to an exemption from the local business tax and any fees imposed under this chapter: 
(1)  A veteran of the United States Armed Forces who was honorably discharged upon separation from service, or the spouse or unremarried surviving spouse of such a veteran; 
(2)  The spouse of an active duty military servicemember who has relocated to the county or municipality pursuant to a permanent change of station order; 
(3)  A person who is receiving public assistance as defined in F.S. § 409.2554; or 
(4)  A person whose household income is below 130 percent of the federal poverty level based on the current year's federal poverty guidelines. 
(e)  To be eligible for the exemption in subsection (d) above, a person must complete and sign, under penalty of perjury, a "Request for Fee Exemption" to be furnished by the city and provide written documentation in support of his or her request for an exemption under subsection (d). 
(f)  If a person who is exempt under this subsection (d) owns a majority interest in a business with fewer than 100 employees, the business is exempt. Such person must complete and sign, under penalty of perjury, a "Request for Fee Exemption" to be furnished by the city and provide written documentation in support of his or her request for an exemption for the business under subsection (d). 
(Code 1970, § 14-12(b); Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 2018-16, § 3, 9-17-2018)  
Sec. 14.17. - Registration of receipt issued by another jurisdiction. 
(a)  If any person, firm or corporation, required under the terms of the Code to have a business tax receipt, is in possession of a valid or current business tax receipt from any other municipality within Pinellas County, or has its primary office located within an unincorporated area of Pinellas County, the receipt shall be recognized by the clerk and shall be registered with the city. 
(b)  Upon presentation of the valid business tax receipt from another municipality, together with a registration fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the city shall issue a registration of receipt. 
(c)  Any person engaging in or managing a business, profession or occupation regulated by the department of professional regulation, which has paid an local business tax to the local government where the permanent business is located or branch office maintained, shall not be required to pay the registration fee mentioned in section 14.17(b). 
(Code 1970, § 14-13; Ord. No. 82-28, § 1, 10-18-82; Ord. No. 89-44, § 1, 12-4-89; Ord. No. 93-24, § 1, 8-16-93; Ord. No. 95-39, § 5, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2004-01, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.18. - Business tax receipt transfer. 
(a)  Any business tax receipt may be transferred to a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten (10) percent of the annual local business tax, but not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and presentation of the original receipt and evidence of the sale. 
(b)  Upon written request and presentation of the original receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one location to another location in the same municipality upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten (10) percent of the annual business tax, but not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 6, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 14.19. - Proof of insurance required for tree service companies. 
No business tax receipt, or any renewal of any business tax receipt, shall be issued to any tree trimming service company or other persons who are employed, contracted or paid to perform tree trimming and/or maintenance within the city limits unless said entity, employee, contractor, or subcontractor has valid workers compensation insurance pursuant to F.S. ch. 440, and a minimum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) general liability insurance of the type that allows tree work to be performed at heights greater than twelve (12) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 4, 2-7-2011)  
Chapter 15 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Case Law reference— A municipality may enact an ordinance creating an offense against municipal law for the same act constitutes an offense in state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (1975). 
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific or general reference. 
Adoption of state law misdemeanors by reference includes laws both in existence at the time and those later adopted by the state legislature. State v. Smith, 189 So.2d 846. 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1.12; administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 8; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; junked, abandoned or wrecked property, Ch. 12; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 24; yacht basins, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Fines and forfeitures in County Court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083. 
 
Sec. 15.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-10, § 1, adopted February 20, 1995, repealed § 15.01 in its entirety. Formerly, § 15.01 pertained to adoption of state laws relating to misdemeanors and derived from § 15-1 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 15.02. - Advertising matter; attaching to or scattering on public or private property. 
No person within the city shall erect, fasten, attach, scatter or cast, in any way, any sign, showcard, poster or other advertising device or matter, except newspapers as defined by state statute, upon any public or private property within the city unless legally authorized to do so, by the city or the owner of such property. 
(Code 1970, § 15-2)  
Sec. 15.03. - Prohibited excessive or unnecessary noises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud and raucous noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its volume level, duration or character, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the city limits. The term includes the kinds of noise generated by the activities enumerated in subsection (b), except as provided in subsection (d). 
(b)  The following specific acts and causes thereof are presumed to be in violation of subsection (a) and to constitute a loud and raucous noise. This enumeration does not constitute an exclusive list: 
(1)  Engine exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine or stationary internal combustion engine except through an operative and effective muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud and raucous noises therefrom. A muffler or other device shall be considered effective under this subsection if the muffler or other device is equal to or better than the original equipment manufacturer's specifications for preventing noise. 
(2)  Construction equipment. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, between the hours of 6:00 pm and 8:30 am on Saturdays or at any time on Sunday, of construction equipment, including, but not limited to, any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, dredge, steam or electric hoist tractor, earth moving equipment or other construction equipment, the use of which is attended by loud and raucous noise. The operation of construction equipment prohibited during the above-stated times shall include pre-staging and set up of such equipment, and lining up vehicles with gross combination weight rating (GCWR) above 50,000 pounds, or powered industrial trucks, at or near the construction site. 
(3)  Blowers, etc. The operation of any blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes loud and raucous noise, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled or such engine is equipped with a muffler device which is operative and effective to prevent loud and raucous noise. 
(4)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn, whistle or other audible signaling device so as to create a loud and raucous noise. 
(5)  Entertainment noise. Entertainment as defined in section 271.00 of the Safety Harbor Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code performed outdoors between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. for the area of 2 nd Street N to 2 nd Street S, between 10 th Avenue and Bayshore Boulevard, including the land extending east from Bayshore Boulevard to Tampa Bay, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at all other locations within the city. 
(6)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing at any time or place so as to create a loud and raucous noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day. 
(7)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which frequently or for continuous periods of time causes a loud and raucous noise on two (2) separate incidents of, at least, fifteen (15) minutes continuously within a fourteen-day period between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; or a single period of, at least, fifteen (15) minutes continuously between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(8)  Vehicles or vessels. The use or operation of any motor vehicle or vessel which produces loud, grating, grinding, rattling, irritating or other loud and raucous noise or which is not equipped with an effective motor sound suppression device equal to or better than the original manufacturer's specifications or is otherwise sufficient to prevent loud and raucous noise so as to prevent loud and raucous noise. 
(9)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building so as to create a loud and raucous noise between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with permission from the building director. 
(10)  Noises heard within schools, public buildings, churches, [or] hospitals. The creation of any loud and raucous noise heard within any school, public building, church, or hospital, or the grounds thereof, while in use, which interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital. 
(11)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device to create a loud and raucous noise. 
(12)  Machinery, etc. Sounds produced from machinery, manufacturing equipment, air conditioners, heating units, ventilators, or blower equipment at frequent or continuous periods of time which create a loud and raucous noise. 
(13)  Lawn maintenance equipment. Sounds produced from lawn maintenance equipment between the hours of sunset and 7:00 a.m. on any day so as to create a loud and raucous noise. 
(c)  Any person, owner, agent or supervisor in charge of operating, ordering, directing or allowing the operation or maintenance of a device or machine creating noise as prohibited in this section, any person who is in possession of any such device or machine, or any person who creates an unlawful noise as defined by this section shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. 
(d)  The term "loud and raucous noise" does not include noise or sound generated by the following: 
(1)  Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls. 
(2)  Radios, sirens, horns, and whistles on police, fire, ambulances and other emergency response vehicles. 
(3)  Parades, fireworks displays and other special events for which a permit has been obtained from the city, within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of the permit. 
(4)  Activities on or in municipal and school athletic facilities and on or in publicly owned property and facilities, provided that such activities have been authorized by the owner of such property or facilities or its agent, including festivals, concerts, and athletic events. 
(5)  Emergency alarms, such as fire and burglar alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm. 
(6)  Religious worship activities, including, but not limited to, bells and organs. 
(7)  Locomotives and other railroad equipment, buses and aircraft. 
(8)  Public service vehicles, street sweeping machinery, buses or other vehicles, equipment, or machinery operated by employees of a county, city, or other public agency. 
(e)  Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(f)  Any violator of section 15.03(b)(2) shall be subject to a fine of $250.00 for the first offense, $500.00 for the second offense and $750.00 for the third offense. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings prescribed below: 
(1)  "Motor boat," "personal water craft" or "vessel" shall have the meanings defined in F.S. § 327.02, paragraphs (11), (12), (16), (17), (22), (27) and (33). 
(2)  "Motor vehicle" shall have the meaning defined in F.S. § 320.01. 
(Code 1970, § 15-18; Ord. No. 96-28, § 1, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 2003-10, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2010-18, § 5, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 2, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 2, 4-2-2018; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 7, 8-5-2019)  
Sec. 15.04. - Signs and certain other property; injuring or removing. 
No person within the city shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy, or remove any sign, notice, marker, fireplug, public telephone booth or the contents thereof, any part of the sewer or water system of the city or any part of any other utilities system or any other public property. 
(Code 1970, § 15-18; Ord. No. 95-10, §§ 2, 3, 2-20-95)  
Sec. 15.05. - Discharge of crossbows and other projectiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or shoot any crossbow, slingshot, bow and arrow or boomerang within the city, except in defense of person or property. 
(Code 1970, § 15-24; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 9-19-2011)  
Sec. 15.06. - Poles, extensions, and other post-like accessories on developed residential property. 
For all properties with single family detached, single family attached, or single family semi-detached dwellings, no pole, extension, or other post-like accessory which extends beyond the roofline of the primary structure may be equipped with an imaging device to record an image of privately owned real property or of the owner, tenant, occupant, invitee, or licensee of such property in areas in which a person is presumed to have a reasonable expectation of privacy without his or her written consent. For purposes of this section, a person is presumed to have a reasonable expectation of privacy on his or her privately owned real property if he or she is not observable by persons located at ground level in a place where they have a legal right to be, regardless of whether he or she is observable from the air with the use of such pole, extension, or other post-like accessory. For the purposes of this section, roofline is defined as the top edge of the roof or parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette when viewed from the ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2019-15, § 2, 9-3-2019)  
Chapter 16 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1.12; administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23; yacht basin, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Recreation, F.S. Ch. 418. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, adopted Apr. 17, 1989, amended Art. I of this chapter in its entirety, in effect repealed former Art. I, §§ 16.01—16.09, and enacted similar new provisions in lieu thereof to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. I pertained generally to park and recreational areas and derived from §§ 16-2—16-8 of the city's 1970 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 80-47, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 3, 1980. 
 
Sec. 16.01. - Land designated as park and recreational areas. 
(a)  The following real property owned by the city, together with any vacated streets adjacent thereto, is hereby declared and designated as park and recreational property and dedicated to that purpose and use: 
(1)  Safety Harbor City Park (940 7th Street South). 
(2)  Bayview Park (329 Bayshore Drive). 
(3)  John Wilson Park (401 Main Street). 
(4)  Daisy Douglas Park (601 9th Avenue North). 
(5)  Bayshore Linear Park (Southeast side of Bayshore Boulevard). 
(6)  Safety Harbor Municipal Pier, Marina, and all adjacent municipal property. 
(7)  Church Street Park (Church Street and Phillippe Parkway). 
(8)  Marshall Street Park (500 Marshall Street). 
(9)  North City Park (2075 Swan Lane). 
(10)  Safety Harbor Community Center (650 9th Avenue South and adjacent property). 
(11)  Rigsby Recreation Center (605 2nd Street North and adjacent property). 
(12)  Safety Harbor Public Library (101 2nd Street North and adjacent property). 
(13)  Mease Area Park. 
(b)  The city may designate additional real property as park and recreational areas, either by resolution or by motion, and those areas and any other areas obtained by the city for park and recreation purposes shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 96-39, § 1, 12-2-96)  
Sec. 16.02. - Definition. 
Vehicle is defined to mean any wheeled conveyance (except a baby carriage or wheelchair) for the transportation of persons or materials, whether: 
(1)  Powered or drawn by a motor, such as an automobile, truck, motorcycle, scooter or moped; 
(2)  Animal-drawn, such as a wagon, carriage or cart; 
(3)  Self-propelled, such as a bicycle or tricycle; 
(4)  Any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. 
Exception is made as to any recreational or park transportation service where specifically authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.03. - Vehicle and bicycle laws. 
All applicable state vehicle and bicycle laws shall apply in and about park property, and in addition thereto, the following rules shall be applicable on roads and driveways within park property: 
(1)  No person shall ride, drive or propel any motorcycle, scooter, or similar vehicle on any but the regular roads within park property; 
(2)  No person shall park a vehicle any place on park property other than the designated areas or at designated times provided for that particular type of vehicle, unless directed otherwise by law enforcement officers, department employees or as authorized. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.04. - Domestic animals. 
(a)  Dogs and other pets will be excluded from any place where food and drinks are sold or consumed. 
(b)  All dogs shall at all times be restrained and on adequate leashes (not greater than six (6) feet in length). Persons bringing such animals shall clean up after their animal. Violators shall be subject to fine. 
(c)  In compliance with the regulations of the state board of health, all pets are excluded from all swimming areas and beaches. 
(d)  Seeing eye and guide dogs shall be excluded from these regulations concerning domestic animals and shall be permitted in all park areas and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.04.1. - Horseback riding. 
No person shall engage in horseback riding in any park or recreation area, other than those areas where provision for such is made by clearly marked bridle paths, trails, rings and other necessary features and then only upon thoroughly broken and properly restrained animals that are ridden with care, prevented from grazing, straying unattended, untethered to any rock, tree or shrub, and not ridden or led on any park land other than so designated. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.05. - Park hours. 
Except for unusual and unforeseeable emergencies, the park areas are to be open to the public every day of the year during the hours of daylight. The operating hours for each individual park shall be established by the director of leisure services and shall be posted therein for public information. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.06. - Projectiles. 
(a)  No person shall, without written authorization, at any time bring into or have in his possession or discharge anywhere any slingshot, bows and arrows, or any toy or instrument that discharges projectiles by air or elastic. 
(b)  Parents or guardians will be held strictly responsible and accountable for the actions of minors in regard to the prohibitions in the foregoing paragraphs. 
(c)  No unauthorized person shall carry, use or possess bows and arrows, slingshots, or boomerangs on or in any park area or property, except at and in accordance with the rules and regulations as a participant in a program sponsored by the department. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 2, 9-19-2011)  
Sec. 16.06.1. - Alcohol, etc. 
(a)  The possession, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, liquor, beer, wine, and illegal drugs or narcotics of any form shall not be permitted in any city park. 
(b)  Upon advance application and for good cause shown, the city manager may exempt from the terms of this section any persons, organizations or city parks for such times and upon such conditions as may be set forth in the action granting such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.06.2. - Glass containers. 
No person shall carry, transport or cause to be transported any glassware, bottles or other potentially dangerous or sharp objects into any park or beach, bathing, wading or swimming pool areas. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.07. - Recreation activities; rules and regulations. 
It is the responsibility of each person to conduct recreational activities in such a manner so as to prevent injury or loss of life to any person. Therefore, it is necessary to prescribe rules and regulations to govern recreational activities in the park areas and on public bathing beaches as follows: 
(1)  Use of park facilities is governed by the leisure services department. The leisure services department will determine the suitability of activities in a particular facility. Activities scheduled by the leisure services department receive priority. 
(2)  No person shall play golf or use golf balls and clubs within the park areas or on the public bathing beaches, except in areas set aside for that purpose. 
(3)  No person shall operate or permit to be operated any engine-driven model airplane within any park area or on the public bathing beaches, except in an area specifically designated by the director of leisure services as suitable for such activity. 
(4)  No person or persons shall engage in rough or potentially dangerous games, or practice for same, such as football, baseball, softball, horseshoes, tennis, volleyball, badminton or any other games, practices or exercise involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, shuttlecocks, frisbees, model aircraft or roller skates, except in the areas suitable for such activities. 
(5)  No person or persons shall use any motorized or manually operated skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, scooter, bicycle, or any similar devise in any park area except in those areas approved by the city manager, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89; Ord. No. 2001-20, § 1, 8-20-2001)  
Sec. 16.07.1. - Safety Harbor Municipal Pier; prohibited activities. 
The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to activity on the municipal pier and, in addition, the following specific regulations shall be applied to the pier: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, custody or control, any alcoholic beverage (including beer) of any kind whatsoever in an open container, or to consume same on the pier, marina, or adjacent municipal property. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in the waters adjacent to the municipal pier or to dive from the pier into the adjacent waters. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or harbor any animals on the municipal pier. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive a bicycle or motorized vehicle on the municipal pier. This restriction shall not apply to wheelchairs or other devices used to aid the disabled. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to be or remain upon the municipal pier after 11:00 p.m. unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian or other person having custody of such minor. 
(Ord. No. 95-49, § 1, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 16.08. - Preservation of property. 
Regulation of conduct with respect to protection of park property to prevent damage, removal or destruction is necessary to preserve park and recreation areas for the use of future generations. 
(1)  As all property in all parks is city property, no unauthorized person shall willfully mark, deface or injure in any way, or displace, remove or tamper with any park building or building material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, park signs, notices or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  No unauthorized person shall remove from any park area any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, flowers, fruits or nuts, down timber or other wood materials, or make any search, excavation by tool, equipment, metal detector, blasting or other means or agency, or construct or erect any buildings or structures of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands. 
(3)  Trees, shrubbery and lawns are property assets of the city, and no unauthorized person shall cut, carve or injure the bark, or break off limbs or branches or mutilate in any way, or pick the flowers, fruits, seeds or nuts of any tree or plant, nor shall any person dig in or otherwise disturb the grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area, nor shall any person pile debris or material of any kind on or about any tree or plant, or attach any item that could result in damage to any tree or plant, whether temporary or permanent in character or use. 
(4)  No unauthorized person shall transplant or remove any tree or plant or part thereof. 
(5)  No person shall tie any animal to any tree or plant. 
(6)  No person shall stand or sit on any structure not intended for such use in any park. 
(7)  No person shall bring in or dump, throw, place, deposit, cause to be thrown or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, decayed meat or animal matter of whatsoever nature or kind, fruit peelings, waste paper, shavings, buckets, rubber, rags, cloth or any other refuse or trash in or on a city park. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.08.1. - Protection and preservation of wildlife. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall molest, harm, frighten, kill, net, trap, snare, hunt, chase, shoot or throw or propel by any means missiles at any wildlife creature, be it mammal, aquatic or marine life, bird or reptile roaming free about the park or in captivity in a cage, nor shall any unauthorized person remove or possess the young of any wild animal or the nest or eggs of any reptile or bird or collect, remove or possess, give away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift any specimen, dead or alive. 
(b)  No unauthorized person shall place, dump, abandon or leave any fish, mammal, reptile or bird, either wild or domestic, on park property. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.08.2. - Miscellaneous. 
Parents or guardians, shall be held strictly responsible and accountable for the actions of minors in regard to this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
Sec. 16.09. - Enforcement of regulations and permits. 
All rules and regulations and permits contained in this article are enforceable by all law enforcement officers. Those properly designated park employees and city employees may warn participants of ordinance violations and report the same to the proper law enforcement officers for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 89-13, § 1, 4-17-89)  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public records, F.S. § 119.01 et seq.; public meeting, F.S. § 286.011. 
 
Sec. 16.10. - Created. 
The commission hereby establishes a permanent advisory board to assist the commission which shall be named the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 1, 12-15-80)  
Sec. 16.11. - Membership; terms. 
(a)  The board shall consist of five (5) regular members. 
(b)  In addition to the regular board members, the board shall consist of one (1) alternate member. The alternate shall serve a term consistent with the terms of the regular board members. If there is one (1) regular board member absent at any meeting of the board, the alternate will sit as a voting member of the board. If there are no regular board members absent at a meeting, the alternate member will sit as a nonvoting member, but will be allowed to participate in the discussion of the board. 
(c)  All terms shall be for two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 2, 12-15-80; Ord. No. 93-04, § 1, 3-1-93; Ord. No. 93-15, § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. 93-20, § 1, 7-19-93; Ord. No. 96-09, § 1, 2-19-96; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 5-18-2015)  
Sec. 16.12. - Qualifications; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  No member of the board shall be employed by or be an official of the city. 
(b)  In the event of resignation or death by a member prior to the expiration of his term, the commission shall select his replacement from a list of applicants submitted by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 3, 12-15-80)  
Sec. 16.13. - Organization; by-laws; quorum; meetings. 
(a)  Members of the board shall select from their own membership a chairman, vice chairman and secretary. The board shall organize itself as it deems proper in order to appropriately carry out the duties assigned to it, including the enactment of by-laws or rules of procedure, which shall be approved by resolution of the commission. 
(b)  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum necessary for the conduct of the business of the board. 
(c)  Meetings shall be held by the board not less often than once a month. Meetings shall be at the call of the chairman or, in his absence, the vice chairman, or at the call of any three (3) members of the board. 
(d)  The records and minutes of the deliberations and decisions of the board shall be kept and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(e)  All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 4, 12-15-80)  
Sec. 16.14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-13, § 2, adopted May 18, 2015, repealed § 16.14, which pertained to compensation; attendance and derived from Ord. No. 80-51, § 5, adopted Dec. 15, 1980.  
Sec. 16.15. - Duties. 
The primary duty of the board will be: 
(1)  To advise the commission and the staff of the city as to its interpretation of the community needs and desires as to types of leisure programs and facilities; 
(2)  To prepare and from time to time to amend and revise a general plan for meeting present and future leisure requirements of all areas of the city and for all of its citizens; 
(3)  To act as a liaison group and conduit of public opinion from the citizens of the city to the commission and to the city manager; 
(4)  To coordinate with the work of any single purpose committees dealing with a single purpose project or program; and 
(5)  To perform such other duties which may from time to time be requested of it by the commission or by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 80-51, § 6, 12-15-80)  
Chapter 17 - PEDDLERS, PANHANDLERS, SOLICITORS AND SECONDHAND SALES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-18, § 6, adopted Feb. 7, 2011, changed the title of ch. 17 from "peddlers and solicitors" to "peddlers, panhandlers, solicitors and secondhand sales." 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; local business tax receipts, Ch. 14; signs, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Solicitations of funds, F.S. Ch. 496; peddlers at camp meetings, F.S. § 871.03. 
 
Sec. 17.01. - Definitions. 
The following words, when used in this chapter shall be construed to have the same meaning as hereinafter defined: 
Canvasser or solicitor is defined as any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. Any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, car, room, shop or any other place within the city, for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Estate sale means a sale within the city by a relative of a deceased resident or representative of the deceased resident of items belonging to such deceased resident which shall take place at the residential site of the deceased resident and is the final sale of items of the deceased resident due to the death of the resident. 
Garage sale means a sale by a resident within the city of secondhand items belonging to such resident for a period of more than six (6) months which shall take place at the residential site of the resident conducting the garage sale. 
Mobile vendor is an individual or group selling food other than fresh fruits or vegetables from a self-contained truck, trailer, or self-propelled conveyance, independent with respect to water, sewer and power utilities, capable of moving or being moved, used for the preparation and/or sale of food products and has been issued a valid, active food permit by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and does not qualify as an accessory structure to an eating establishment under the Land Development Code. 
Panhandler means any solicitation made in person requesting an immediate donation of money or other thing of value for oneself or another person or entity. Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is, in substance, a donation, is a donation for the purpose of this section. 
Peddler is defined to include any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, carrying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles purchased, or who shall sell or offer for sale goods, wares and merchandise from his person or from any vehicle or conveyance, not including roadside vending. Any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed a peddler, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word peddler shall include the words hawker and huckster. 
Roadside vendor is an individual or group selling goods, wares and merchandise including, but not limited to, rugs, prepared foods, crafts, fresh fruits and vegetables from a location either adjacent to or within the right-of-way or from private property. 
(Code 1970, § 17-1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2010-18, § 7, 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-5-2012)  
Sec. 17.02. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for a peddler, solicitor or canvasser to engage in business within the city without first obtaining a permit, which shall be issued upon the payment of any license fee due by the applicant to the city. Roadside vendors are prohibited unless a temporary permit is obtained pursuant to the Safety Harbor Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code. Mobile vendors operating on private property with industrial or light industrial land uses from Monday through Friday during employee breaks and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. are exempted from permitting. Mobile vendors may be permitted on private property as an accessory use to an establishment where beer and wine is legally sold for on-site consumption upon prior approval by the planning and zoning director and payment of the mobile vendor permit fee as described below. 
(1)  Conditions of approval. The planning and zoning director may only grant such approval if the mobile vendor is stationed in a rear yard or other approved location, no other mobile vendor is concurrently approved to operate on the requested property, and the mobile vendor only operates for a time period not to exceed five (5) consecutive hours, starting no earlier than 10:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and from 3:00 p.m. until business closing time Friday through Sunday. 
(2)  Issuance of permit. The community development director shall specify the required conditions of approval in a written permit certificate that shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked. Failure to abide by the conditions of approval in subsection (1) and any additional conditions included in the permit by the planning and zoning director shall be grounds for immediate suspension and/or revocation of the permit. 
(3)  Display of permit. The permit certificate shall be attached to the mobile vending vehicle or unit where it is readily visible. 
(4)  Permit fee. The mobile vendor permit fee shall be equivalent to the fee amount established under section 14.13(20)(a) for a restaurant with one (1) to ten (10) tables. 
(Code 1970, § 17-2; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 2, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 3-5-2012; Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 3-6-2017)  
Sec. 17.03. - Application for permit. 
Applicants for permits shall file, in duplicate, with the city manager, a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city manager, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Address (permanent and local); 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods, wares, merchandise or services, if any are to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  The length of time for which the permit is desired, the place or places within the city from which the business is to be operated (if from a vehicle, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification); 
(6)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the evidence, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; 
(7)  Credentials from the person or firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative. 
(Code 1970, § 17-3)  
Sec. 17.04. - Investigation of applicant; issuance of permit. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application, the city manager shall cause an investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public. The applicant shall pay to the city manager all costs associated with said investigation. The city manager shall have forty-five (45) days from receipt of payment of appropriate investigation fees to complete such investigation. 
(b)  After the completion of the investigation, the city manager may deny a permit to solicit or peddle if an applicant has: 
(1)  Been convicted of, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, a crime against the laws of this state or any other state or the United States, involving moral turpitude, fraudulent or dishonest dealing, or the illegal use or sale of a controlled substance, or been convicted or, or entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any of the provisions of F.S. §§ 501.210—501.055. 
(2)  Has obtained a permit by fraud, false statement, misrepresentation, or failure to truthfully answer any questions in the required permit application. 
(3)  Has failed to obtain required county or municipal business tax receipts. 
(c)  If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the city shall execute a permit in the name of the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for, which shall be issued upon the payment of a ninety dollars ($90.00) license fee due by the applicant to the city. 
(Code 1970, § 17-4; Ord. No. 2004-03, §§ 3—5, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 3, 5-21-2007)  
Sec. 17.05. - Permits—Display required. 
(a)  Each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be kept on the person of the individual to whom it is issued, and shall show on its face the date of its expiration. Any person engaged in solicitation activities described in this article shall prominently display, upon his person at all times that he is engaged in solicitation within the city, the permit card issued to him by the city manager authorizing him to conduct commercial solicitations and shall show on its face the date of its expiration, which in no event shall extend beyond the thirtieth day of September following the date of is issuance. 
(b)  No permit shall be transferable. 
(Code 1970, § 17-5; Ord. No. 2006-13, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-2006)  
Sec. 17.06. - Revocation of permit. 
Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city manager for just cause or upon conviction of the holder for violation of any of the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 17-6)  
Sec. 17.07. - Restrictions on garage sales and estate sales. 
(a)  Duration of sale. A garage or estate sale shall not last more than three (3) consecutive days. A garage sale may not be conducted by any resident or representative of a resident more than once every three (3) months from the last garage sale. 
(b)  Parking. Garage or estate sale parking shall be controlled by the resident or representative of a resident so as not to be a hazard or create congestion on adjacent streets. If the city's code enforcement or law enforcement officer determines that the garage sale or estate sale is causing excessive parking congestion or creating a traffic hazard, the code inspector or law enforcement officer may require the resident or representative of a resident to cease the garage or estate sale. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 8, 2-7-2011)  
Sec. 17.08. - Restrictions on panhandling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in an act of panhandling when either the panhandler or the person being solicited is located in, on, or at any of the following locations: 
(1)  Area within ten (10) feet (in any direction) of a bus stop; 
(2)  Area within fifteen (15) feet (in any direction) of an automatic teller machine or entrance to a bank; or 
(3)  Private property, unless the panhandler has permission from the owner of such property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling on any day after sunset or before sunrise. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any panhandler to: 
(1)  Approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to believe that the person is being threatened with: 
a.  Imminent bodily injury; or 
b.  The commission of a criminal act upon the person or another person, or upon property in the person's immediate possession; 
(2)  Persist in panhandling after the person solicited has given a negative response; 
(3)  Block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited person; 
(4)  Touch a solicited person; or 
(5)  Engage in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to intimidate, compel or force a solicited person to accede to demands. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 2-21-2011)  
Chapter 18 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; finance, Ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Actuarial soundness of retirement systems, F.S. § 112.60 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE II. - OLD AGE AND SURVIVOR'S INSURANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Social Security for public employees, F.S. Ch. 650. 
 
Sec. 18.01. - Adopted. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of the first day of July, 1951, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of Old Age and Survivor's Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and by Chapter 650, Florida Statutes, and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in section 650.02, Florida Statutes, performed in the employ of the city by employees thereof. 
(b)  In pursuance of this policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1970, § 18-1)  
Sec. 18.02. - Agreement with state. 
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old age and survivor's insurance to the employees and officials of this city which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary for the proper and efficient administration thereof, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed after the first day of July, 1951. 
(Code 1970, § 18-2)  
Sec. 18.03. - Employee contributions. 
Withholdings from salaries, wages, or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 18.01 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by the laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1970, § 18-3)  
Sec. 18.04. - Contributions by city. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from ad valorem taxes, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the contributions required of the city as employer by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1970, § 18-4)  
Sec. 18.05. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the rules and regulations of the state agency for the enforcement of the laws and regulations. 
(Code 1970, § 18-5)  
Sec. 18.06. - Acceptance of benefits. 
The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining of the Social Security Act as amended, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof and of its departments and agencies, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1970, § 18-6)  
Sec. 18.07. - Custodian of funds. 
The clerk of the city is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the clerk of the city is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 18-7)  
ARTICLE III. - FLORIDA RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Retirement System, F.S. Ch. 121. 
 
Sec. 18.08. - Declaration of policy of coverage. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective June 1, 1972, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or excepted herein, the benefits of the Florida Retirement System as authorized by Chapter 121, Florida Statutes, and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in that law performed in the employ of the city by employees and officials thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 18-11)  
Sec. 18.09. - Exclusion of certain employees. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to include in any agreement entered into under section hereof any service, position, employee, or official now covered by or eligible to be covered by an existing retirement system sponsored by the city except social security only after holding a referendum, in which all employees and officials in the affected units have the right to participate. Only those employees and officials electing coverage under the Florida Retirement System by affirmative vote in the referendum shall be eligible for coverage, and those not participating or electing not to be covered by the Florida Retirement System shall remain in their present system and shall not be eligible for coverage. After the referendum is held, all future employees shall be compulsory members of Florida Retirement System. 
(Code 1970, § 18-12)  
Sec. 18.10. - Execution of agreements. 
The mayor and city manager are hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the administrator of the Florida Retirement System for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the Florida Retirement System to the employees and officials of this city as provided in sections 18.08 and 18.09, hereof, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the administrator of the Florida Retirement System to be necessary and proper, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed on and after the first day of June, 1972. 
(Code 1970, § 18-13)  
Sec. 18.11. - Appropriation of funds. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general revenues such amounts and at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and assessments required of the city as employer, by applicable state laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated administrator of the Florida Retirement System at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1970, § 18-15)  
Sec. 18.12. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations, and shall adhere to all laws and regulations relating to the Florida Retirement System. 
(Code 1970, § 18-16)  
Sec. 18.13. - Adoption of terms of state system. 
The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of the Florida Retirement System, for and on behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be covered under the agreement. 
(Code 1970, § 18-17)  
Sec. 18.14. - Custodian of funds. 
The finance director of the city is hereby designated the custodian of all sums appropriated for the employer's contributions as provided in section 18.11 hereof. The finance director is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining records for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 18-18)  
Chapter 19 - SIGN REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-34, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed Ch. 19, §§ 19.01—19.18, of the City Code. Formerly, such sections pertained to sign regulations and derived from Ord. No. 87-36, § 1, adopted Oct. 5, 1987. Similar sign regulations are set out in Art. XII of the LDC. 
 
Chapter 20 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; code enforcement board, § 2.10.01 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; junked, abandoned or wrecked property, Ch. 12; signs, Ch. 19; subdivision, Ch. 21; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20.01. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all new developments and all developments in process that do not have commission approval of final plat or final site plan, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 11.0), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.02. - Open areaways and cellar doors to be guarded. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave open any cellar door, grating, areaway or other covering for a cellar, stairway, coal hole or other excavation in any sidewalk, alley or street, within the city, without properly and securely guarding the same. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.0), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.03. - Obstructions to be guarded. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while constructing any sidewalk, residence, building or other improvement, or while making repairs to the same, or for any other purpose, to pile sand, dirt, brick, lumber or other material upon any street, avenue, alley, or public place, or within the street limits, within the city, without maintaining at and thereon at proper places reflectorized barricades, a lighted lamp, lighted lantern or flares between the hours of sunset and sunrise, sufficiently bright to be easily observed at a distance of three hundred (300) feet (91.44 meters). 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.4), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.04. - Removal of danger signals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street, alley or public place, any lamp, lantern, flare or other light, barricade or danger signal, within the city, erected or placed therein for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places or giving warning or notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.5), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.05. - Encumbering sidewalks, right-of-way; exception; permission. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber any sidewalk, right-of-way, within the city with boxes, barrels, packages, signs, building or other material or vehicles, except temporarily when receiving or taking away goods or merchandise from adjoining premises, and except when building or improving such property, and then only after obtaining permission from the city engineer under such conditions as he may impose. 
(b)  Mail boxes, telephone and power poles and café tables and seating compliant with subsection 20.21(a) which do not create traffic visibility conflicts or hazards, shall be excluded from this requirement. 
(c)  Certain signs shall be excluded from this requirement to the extent permitted by the city's sign code. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.6), 3-15-82; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 20.06. - New sidewalks or pavement; walking or driving on or removal of barricades prohibited; civil liability. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to walk or drive a vehicle upon any newly laid pavement or sidewalk before the same has been opened to traffic, or to remove or interfere with any barriers protecting the same, and such person, in addition to any fine that may be assessed, shall be liable for any damage done to the paving or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.7), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.07. - Certain articles not to be thrown in street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place in any street or public place, within the city, any broken glass, glass bottles or other articles of glass, tacks, nails, or any other sharp pointed materials, substance or things. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.8), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.08. - Defacing or removing street signs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, break, take down or remove, or in any manner interfere with any street sign placed in a street right-of-way under authority of the appropriate public body. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.9), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.09. - Nonliability of city. 
The owner, lessee or his agent, shall assume all responsibility and save the city free and harmless from all liability for damages to persons or property in any way connected with, arising out of or incidental to the installation, maintenance or use of municipally-owned property or the granting and exercise of permit or privilege. He shall pay all expenses for any change of grade of municipally-owned property, and shall hereby waive all claims for damage or expense in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.6), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.10. - Failure of compliance by permittee. 
In any case where a permittee hereunder shall be in default or shall fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the city engineer shall order the completion of the work by the city and shall recover the cost from permittee as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.7(b)), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.11. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.10), 3-15-82)  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 20.12. - Rules, regulations, standards and specifications. 
(a)  The city manager, on the recommendations from the director of public works, shall promulgate and keep in force and effect reasonable rules, regulations, standards and specifications governing the interpretation and clarification where in his sole discretion the same is desirable in connection with this chapter. 
(b)  The rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 7.0), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.13. - Appeal. 
(a)  If any person, firm or corporation is aggrieved by the ruling of the city manager or director of public works or the city engineer under the literal enforcement of either this chapter or the rules and regulations which the departments from time to time promulgate, a protest in writing shall be filed by the complaining party with the city manager. 
(b)  Such protest shall be placed upon the agenda of the commission, and the commission shall by majority vote enter its findings upon such appeal and the findings shall be a final ruling as to the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 8.0), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.14. - Variances—Authorized. 
(a)  The commission may authorize a variance to these regulations where special conditions exist which are peculiar to the site; where strict adherence to the provisions of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship or where strict adherence to the provisions of these regulations is impossible or impractical, providing that such a variance can be made without substantially impairing the purpose and intent of these regulations. 
(b)  No pre-existing conditions on neighboring lands which are contrary to these regulations shall be considered as grounds for the approval of a variance. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 8.0), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.15. - Same—Application. 
Any request for an appeal or variance to these regulations shall be submitted in writing to the city manager or his designee for transmittal to the commission along with the city manager's summary and recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 8.1), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.16. - Same—Criteria. 
The commission shall not approve any variance to these regulations unless the commission shall make findings based upon evidence presented to them in each specific case that: 
(1)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(2)  The property is characterized by particular physical surroundings, shape, topographical or other similar conditions which would result in a particular hardship to the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations were imposed; 
(3)  The special conditions and circumstances upon which the request for a variance is based did not result from an action by the applicant or with prior knowledge or approval of the applicant; 
(4)  The approval of the requested variance will not confer to the applicant any special privilege that is denied by these regulations to other property under similar conditions; and 
(5)  The granting of the variance will not substantially impair the purpose or intent of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 8.2), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.17. - Same—Conditions. 
(a)  The commission may prescribe, in approving variances to these regulations, appropriate conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary for the protection of surrounding property and general welfare and the purpose and intent of these regulations and the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(b)  In stipulating such conditions, the commission may require a reasonable time for compliance, however, approval of a variance shall expire within twelve (12) months of approval by the commission unless the commission shall either stipulate a longer period of time for compliance or upon application by the developer prior to the expiration date, approve an extension to the compliance period. Any extension to the compliance period shall be granted only upon good cause being shown to the commission and shall be for the shortest possible period of time consistent with the facts associated with the particular request. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 8.2), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.18. - Same—Entered in minutes. 
Any variance thus authorized by the commission shall be entered in writing in the commission minutes, and the reasoning set forth for which the variance was justified. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 8.2), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.19. - Enforcement. 
This chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated therein are deemed by the commission to be essential to the protection of the health, safety and well-being of the city, and enforcement of compliance therewith may be compelled by and on behalf of the city through its city manager or the director of public works or his designee in the manner prescribed from time to time by law. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 9.0), 3-15-82)  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 20.20. - Right-of-way and easement use permit required. 
No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, pave, or grade any sidewalk, curb, curb cut, driveway, parkway, or street within a public right-of-way or easement without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer as provided by this article. No obstruction of what ever kind shall be planted, built, or otherwise created within the limits of the public right-of-way or easement without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.1), 3-15-82; Ord. No. 2004-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-20-2004)  
Sec. 20.21. - Right-of-way and easement use permits. 
(a)  Permits for paving, grading, or use of any portion of a public right-of-way or easement for any purpose may be granted by the city engineer, when, in his or her discretion, the safety and convenience of the city can be protected. The city engineer may impose any such conditions upon said permit which are deemed necessary to protect the safety and convenience of the city. Businesses with frontage on Main Street may place cafe tables measuring up to three (3) feet in diameter and chairs without a right-of-way use permit and shall not cause the minimum accessible path to be less than three (3) feet in width. 
(b)  All such permits shall be clearly marked to indicate that they are revocable at the will of the city, and that their issuance in no way grants to the permittee or his successors any right to the continued use of such parkway or right-of-way. 
(c)  If any person undertakes any activity as a result of an emergency within a public right-of-way or easement without a permit as required under this article, a permit shall be obtained within forty-eight (48) hours of the emergency activity. An emergency shall exist if, without undertaking activity in the right-of-way or easement, there is an immediate danger of damage occurring to life or property. If it is determined by the city engineer that no emergency existed at the time of the activity, the city engineer may require removal of any objects placed within the public right-of-way or easement and/or deny the requested permit. Additionally, the person shall be subject to enforcement action as provided for in the Safety Harbor City Code or as otherwise provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.2), 3-15-82; Ord. No. 2004-04, §§ 3—5, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 2, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 20.22. - Application procedure. 
An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the city engineer an application showing: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner, or agent, in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area; 
(2)  Name and address of the party doing the work; 
(3)  Location of the work area; 
(4)  Attached sample drawing showing necessary details of the proposal; and 
(5)  Such other information as the city engineer shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should be issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.3), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.23. - Bond requirements and exemptions. 
The following bonds may be required to accompany an application for a driveway/road use permit hereunder: 
(1)  Construction and maintenance. In cases where the estimated cost of the project shall exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), the city engineer may require a maintenance and construction bond to be filed with the application for a permit hereunder in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of the project and conditioned that such work shall be done in accordance with the city's standard specifications and guaranteeing the same for a period of two (2) years, thereafter the property owner shall maintain the driveway in good and safe condition. 
(2)  Indemnity. The city engineer shall have the authority to require an applicant to file a bond conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to persons and property sustained during the actual course of such alteration work. 
(3)  Exemptions. Utility companies serving the public through a franchise agreement with the city shall be exempt from posting bonds for construction. However, they must obtain the required permits. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.7(a), (c), (d)), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.24. - Fee. 
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, established by the commission by resolution for filing, engineering and inspection, unless a building permit for major construction is in effect in which case there may be no fee. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.4), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.25. - Revocation. 
All permits or privileges issued or granted under this article may be revoked at any time upon order of the city engineer or of the commission, and upon such order of revocation, the owner or lessee or their agents, shall cause such municipally-owned property to be restored completely and to the entire satisfaction of the city engineer without expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 2.5), 3-15-82)  
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
Sec. 20.26. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms are defined as follows: 
Block party means a gathering of neighbors in a residential area, where such gathering occurs within the neighborhood or residential area at least partly or otherwise affects the use of a public right-of-way, and is not open to the general public. 
Larger special event means a special event involving one hundred fifty (150) or more participants or potentially involving one hundred fifty (150) or more participants, including any special event that provides an open invitation to the public to attend or any special event where the attendance by private invitation of one hundred fifty (150) or more people. 
Smaller special event means a special event involving less than one hundred fifty (150) participants. 
Special event means: 
(1)  Any organized activity, formation, parade, procession, or assembly consisting of persons, animals, vehicles or any combination thereof, that is requested to occur partly or wholly upon any public right-of-way, including but not limited to public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and trails; 
(2)  Any organized activity or set of activities conducted by an individual, group, or entity, excluding the city, for a common or collective use or benefit, and which requests the use of city-owned facilities or the provision of ancillary city services; or 
(3)  An event held on public or private property that is requested to occur in a space or area not specifically approved for such use; or that the city believes would interfere with any pedestrian or vehicular circulation; or that the city believes is likely to significantly impact motorized or non-motorized traffic congestion or traffic flow to or upon public right-of-way; or that the city believes would significantly impact the need for emergency services such as police, fire or medical aid. Any event which involves an open invitation to the public to attend is presumed to be an event that will have a direct significant impact on the public streets, rights-of-way or emergency services. 
(4)  For purposes of this article, the term "special event" shall not include any events organized or carried out by the city. 
Sponsoring party means any individual, business, organization, or other entity that is hosting, organizing, holding, or sponsoring the event. (The term does not include individuals or entities who have a minor role in the event and no significant involvement in financing or organizing the event and does not include the city.) 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.27. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all special events. However, all other ordinances, laws, regulations, permits, and licenses shall also apply to the special event, whether or not a special event permit is required under this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful to conduct a special event unless the special event meets the requirements of this article and other applicable ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.28. - Permit required for certain events. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to hold or sponsor any special event or to participate in a special event without a sponsoring party first applying for and obtaining a special event permit from the city; provided, that certain special events may be excluded from obtaining a permit pursuant to subsection (c) below. 
(b)  A special events permit does not waive the requirement to obtain any other applicable and necessary permits, including but not limited to permits or approvals for right-of-way use, signage, electrical, fire, and building safety. The sponsoring party is responsible for obtaining all necessary permits. 
(c)  Special events that are excluded from the requirement to obtain a special event permit under this article are as follows: 
(1)  Assembly uses that occur entirely within a building; provided, that any such use is consistent with the building's certificate of occupancy and consistent with all other applicable laws and regulations, including regulations for the underlying zoning district in which the special event would occur; 
(2)  Smaller special events in public parks, provided, that for any part of this event that is to occur within the public right-of-way, a special event permit must be obtained under this article; 
(3)  Sports and other outdoor activities that are conducted on fields, playgrounds, parks, or courts that have been legally constructed for such purpose; 
(4)  Activities held on the grounds of a legally operating school for its students and their family members and/or for faculty as part of the school's program for education, orientation, commencement, or other planned school events; 
(5)  Any smaller special event held entirely on private property; and 
(6)  Block parties involving less than seventy-five (75) people; provided, that a block party permit is obtained pursuant to section 20.40 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.29. - Fees. 
(a)  Special event permits are subject to a fee schedule as may be separately adopted or established by resolution of the city commission. The intent of charging fees is to help recover the cost of providing public services or facilities related to the event. The fee schedule shall include, but not be limited to, an application fee of at least fifty dollars ($50.00) for each special event permit, except as any exemptions or reductions are specifically provided in the schedule, and may require additional fees either due upon application or prior to permit issuance for some types of events. The application fee is nonrefundable. The fee schedule for additional fees may take into account factors, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The type of event; 
(2)  The type of activities being held; 
(3)  Whether the event is sponsored as a fundraiser for a nonprofit entity and if registration or admission fees are being charged by the nonprofit entity; 
(4)  The number of participants; 
(5)  The length of the event or span of time that the event will take; 
(6)  The use of city facilities, city equipment, or public right-of-way; 
(7)  Other factors affecting the amount of city resources likely to be needed related to the event. 
(b)  In addition to any special event fee, additional fees may be due for other permits or licenses necessary to meet state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.30. - Pre-application conference. 
(a)  Prior to submitting a permit application for a larger special event, one (1) or more authorized representatives of the sponsoring party shall participate in a pre-application conference. To arrange said conference, a sponsoring party shall contact the leisure services department. Its purpose shall be to clarify the scope of the special event, permit requirements, anticipated fees, the interdepartmental review process, and potential impacts to be addressed. 
(b)  The sponsoring party of smaller special events that is expected to occur at least partially within the public right-of-way are encouraged to request a pre-application conference in the manner described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.31. - Special event application. 
(a)  A sponsoring party shall submit its proposal for the event on an application form provided by the leisure services department for that purpose and, as needed, shall submit additional information related to the event. 
(b)  Information provided by the sponsoring party shall be true, accurate, and complete. 
(c)  Applications for smaller special events shall be submitted to the city at least sixty (60) days prior to the event. 
(d)  Applications for larger special events shall be submitted to the city at least ninety (90) days prior to the event. 
(e)  The special event permit application shall address the following: 
(1)  Name of the event; 
(2)  Purpose of the event; 
(3)  Address or other specific location or route data for where the event is to occur; 
(4)  Time of the event, including set-up and take-down activities; 
(5)  Sponsoring party's name, signature, and contact information; 
(6)  Name(s) and contact information for any other sponsoring party(ies); 
(7)  Name(s) and contact information for owners or tenants of property on which an event is to be held; provided, that this information is not required for any portion of the event occurring on city-owned property or within public right-of-way; 
(8)  Documentation that the owner(s) or tenant(s) of any property on which the event is to be held, or the owner's or tenant's authorized agent, has provided permission for the event's occurrence; 
(9)  Whether the event is being sponsored by a non-profit entity and, if so, evidence of its nonprofit status; 
(10)  Thorough description of the activities to occur, including any type of music, sound amplification system, games, performances, displays, food-handling, or sales; 
(11)  Site plan indicating the location of the event, the specific location(s) of activities occurring at the event, and the routes for access and circulation; 
(12)  Whether alcohol is to be provided or allowed anywhere on site; and what entity will provide the temporary alcohol permit; 
(13)  Description and location of any furniture, awnings, canopies, buildings, structures, inflatable structures, play equipment, large machines, or other equipment (excluding small tabletop appliances and equipment) that will be used at the event; 
(14)  Electrical and water connections to be used, if any; 
(15)  Estimated number of attendees and estimated number of persons helping with the event at the time and place that it occurs; 
(16)  Manner in which the event will be announced to potential attendees, for example, by flyers, personal invitations, internet, newsletters, newspaper, radio, community announcements, or other means; 
(17)  Whether registration, admission, parking or other fees will be required for event participants and, if so, the type and amount of each fee; 
(18)  Information about the sponsoring party's insurance or ability to provide insurance; 
(19)  Plan for staffing the event and all its activities on the day(s) of the event; 
(20)  Plan for security for any larger special event; 
(21)  Proposed location and number of any sanitary facilities to be available, whether fixed or portable; 
(22)  Traffic control plan for any larger special event and for any event using, closing, or otherwise affecting a public right-of-way as determined by the Pinellas County Sheriff's Office and any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction over the event area; 
(23)  Parking management plan for larger special events as determined by the Pinellas County Sheriff's Office; 
(24)  Plans for garbage management and recycling; 
(25)  Any proposed event signage and its location(s); and 
(26)  Additional information requested by the leisure services department related to the event and any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.32. - Waiver of application deadline—Waiver of pre-application conference. 
Upon a showing of good cause, the leisure services director may waive any required pre-application conference and shall consider an application that is filed after the filing deadline, if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the application and obtain required services. Good cause can be demonstrated by the sponsoring party showing that the circumstances that gave rise to the permit application did not reasonably allow the participants to file within the time period prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.33. - Permit process. 
(a)  No special event permit shall be issued without the approval of all affected city departments, or approval with conditions as set forth in section 20.34, through an interdepartmental review process coordinated by the leisure services department; provided that if any department does not provide a written approval, approval with conditions, or denial to the leisure services department within fourteen (14) days of receiving a smaller special event permit application for review or within twenty-nine (29) days of receiving a larger special event permit application the timeframes set forth in subsection (b) below may be extended by the leisure services department. 
(b)  The city's permit review process shall include issuance of an approval, approval with conditions as described in section 20.34, or denial no later than thirty (30) days after receiving a complete application for a larger special event and no later than fifteen (15) days after receiving a complete application for a smaller special event. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.34. - Conditions or denial. 
(a)  The leisure services department may condition the issuance of a special event permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning time, place, and manner of the event. Such conditions shall be based solely on compliance with this article, other laws and regulations, the event's potential impact on public health, safety, and welfare, availability of necessary city resources and/or facilities, and priorities pursuant to section 20.35 of this article. Such restrictions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on the event application; 
(2)  Elimination of an activity which cannot be mitigated to a point as to ensure public safety and welfare, or which causes undue liability to the city; 
(3)  Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of a parade or other events occurring along a route; 
(4)  Conditions concerning the accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street or right-of-way traversed; 
(5)  Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades; 
(6)  Requirements for the use of city personnel and equipment; 
(7)  Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities; 
(8)  Requirements for the use of event monitors and providing notice of permit conditions to event participants; 
(9)  Requirements to provide notice to surrounding property owners; 
(10)  Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals or structures at the event, and inspection and approval of floats, structures, and decorated vehicles for fire safety; 
(11)  Requirement for the use of garbage containers, cleanup, and restoration of property; 
(12)  Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with noise ordinances, regulations, and laws; 
(13)  Compliance with any relevant ordinance or law and obtaining any legally required permit or license; or 
(14)  Restrictions on the sale and/or consumption of alcohol. 
(b)  The city may deny a special event permit application if one (1) or more of the following criteria applies and appropriate conditions cannot otherwise be placed on the permit: 
(1)  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the sponsoring party, is found to be false or nonexistent in any material detail; for purposes of this section material details shall include the existence, good standing, or type of entity of the sponsoring party with the department of state, division of corporations; or 
(2)  The sponsoring party fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents required; or 
(3)  The sponsoring party refuses to agree, to abide or comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit; or 
(4)  The time, route, hours, location, or size of the special event will, in the opinion of the Pinellas County Sherriff's Office, unnecessarily disrupt the movement of traffic within the area; or 
(5)  The special event is of the size or nature that, in the opinion of the Pinellas County Sherriff's Office, requires the diversion of so great a number of sheriff deputies to the city to properly police the event, site and contiguous areas that allowing the special event would unreasonably deny police protection to the remainder of the city and its residents; or 
(6)  Another special event permit application has already been received, or has already been approved, to hold another special event at the same time and place requested by the sponsoring party, or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion, or the sheriff's office and/or other city departments are unable to meet the needs for police and other city services for both events; or 
(7)  The location of the special event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along public property or right-of-way, or a previously granted right-of-way use permit; or 
(8)  The event would endanger public safety or health; or 
(9)  The sponsoring party fails to comply with the liability insurance requirements, or the sponsoring party's insurance lapses or is cancelled; or 
(10)  The event would create or constitute a public nuisance; or 
(11)  The event would be likely to cause significant damage to public property or facilities; or 
(12)  Failure to meet state or federal requirements related to the event or obtain approvals from other governmental entities or agencies affected by or regulating the event; or 
(13)  The event would engage in or encourage participants to engage in illegal acts. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.35. - Prioritization of permits. 
When an event is proposed that would conflict with the time or location of another event, the following criteria shall guide the determination of priority for the special event: 
(1)  Whether a special event is being proposed for the same area or time as another event and, if so, whether multiple events can be reasonably accommodated given the location and resources, and if not, giving priority to the first event for which a permit application has been timely submitted; provided, that an event sponsored by the City of Safety Harbor shall have ultimate priority; 
(2)  Whether the timing or location of an event might conflict with other projects and activities, for example, road work or a construction project; 
(3)  History of the event or other events held by a sponsoring party as related to safety, security, and compliance with permit conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.36. - Insurance and liability. 
(a)  Liability coverage required. The sponsoring party of a larger special event, if required by this article to obtain a permit and the special event would occur partially or wholly on public right-of-way or city property, must possess or obtain public liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the event. A certificate of insurance shall be filed thirty (30) days prior to the event with the leisure services director, and shall name the city, its officials, employees and agents as additional insured. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the event. 
(b)  Minimum limits defined. Required coverage shall be a commercial general liability policy. Minimum limits required are one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage; two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. If food or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for product liability. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an endorsement for host liquor liability. If the event involves athletic or other types of active participants, the policy must include participant coverage. The leisure services director may require additional endorsements depending upon the proposed activity. 
(c)  If vehicles are used for other than nominal and standard commute purposes, a policy of business automotive liability, on an insurance industry standard form or equivalent including coverage for owned, non-owned, leased or hired vehicles, or equivalent coverage. 
(d)  Waiver or reduction of required limits. The city manager may waive or reduce the insurance requirements of this article under the following conditions: 
(1)  The sponsoring party or an officer thereof signs a verified statement that the cost of obtaining insurance is so financially burdensome that it would prohibit the special event from occurring. The statement shall include the name and address of two (2) insurance agents or other source of insurance coverage contacted to determine insurance premium rates for insurance coverage. 
(2)  The sponsoring party or an officer thereof signs a verified statement that insurance coverage in the limits required is impossible to obtain. The statement shall include the name and address of two (2) insurance agents or other source of insurance coverage contacted. 
(3)  The city manager determines that the insurance limits are in excess of the reasonable risk presented by the proposed special event. 
(e)  Any costs incurred as a result of an event shall be borne by the sponsoring party. The city may require the posting of a bond to cover estimated costs of clean-up and disposal fees prior to issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.37. - Appeal and appeal procedure. 
(a)  Right to appeal. The sponsoring party shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or imposition of a permit condition. The sponsoring party shall also have the right to appeal the amount of fees imposed. 
(b)  Authority. The city commission is authorized to hear any appeal from the denial of a permit or permit condition in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Written notice of appeal. A written notice of appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days after the mailing or personal delivery of a notice of denial or permit condition with the leisure services director or is thereafter barred. This appeal shall set forth the grounds for the appeal and shall include a statement on why the sponsoring party believes the decision is an error and attach any relevant documents for consideration. 
(d)  Scheduling of hearing. Upon receipt of a timely filed notice of appeal, a hearing shall be scheduled not more than forty-five (45) days from the date of the filing of the notice of appeal. Written notice of the date of the hearing shall be sent to the appellants not less than three (3) business days prior to the scheduled hearing date. The failure of the appellant to appear at the hearing shall result in a judgment by default. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.38. - Performance requirements. 
(a)  All aspects of the special event shall be conducted consistent with applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to this article, and with the terms and conditions of the issued permit. 
(b)  A special event shall be held for no more than three (3) consecutive days. 
(c)  Alcohol is prohibited at special events except if it is specifically allowed under the conditions of a special event permit and state/federal laws. 
(d)  If adequate fixed sanitary facilities are not available for use at the special event, portable toilets shall be provided of a number and type that complies with industry standards as determined by the leisure services director within city parks and by the city's building official anywhere else; provided, that no toilets are required for special events that last less than two (2) hours. 
(e)  Garbage receptacles and recycling containers, as required by the permit conditions, shall be provided at the event site and removed and properly disposed of after the event. Additional fees may be imposed for use of such facilities. Any remaining litter or debris shall be cleaned up and removed the same day as the event, unless a longer clean-up period is granted by the permit. 
(f)  If city equipment is not supplied, the provision of any required barricades, traffic control devices, portable toilets, and/or garbage receptacles, must be submitted to the city through documentation in the form of a work order or an invoice at least two (2) weeks in advance of the event to demonstrate that the equipment or services has been arranged by the event organizer. Additional fees may be imposed for use of such facilities. 
(g)  Any traffic control devices shall be installed and removed pursuant to the terms of the permit. 
(h)  No fires, or fireworks displays are allowed, except in a manner and location specifically approved by the city for such purpose. 
(i)  Inflatable play equipment and all membrane structures shall be properly installed per the manufacturer's instructions. 
(j)  Event sponsors shall follow requirements and guidelines of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) when applicable. 
(k)  Food handling and preparation shall be in accordance with requirements of the Pinellas County Health Department, State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Department of Business and Professional Regulation. 
(l)  A copy of any announcements that the sponsoring party or its agency produces for distribution about the proposed event shall be submitted to the leisure services department either before or within three (3) days after their distribution. 
(m)  Any smaller special event occurring outdoors and not required to obtain a permit under subsection 20.28(c)(6) of this article shall have a duration of four (4) hours or less and shall not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except as is otherwise provided by a special event permit that the sponsor has chosen to obtain. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.39. - Revocation. 
A permit for a special event may be revoked if the city finds that the sponsoring party has failed to provide complete or accurate information in his/her permit application or has not met the terms or conditions of the permit or has failed to comply with any requirement of section 20.38 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.40. - Block parties. 
(a)  Block parties, as defined in section 20.26 of this article, may be conducted; provided, that a block party permit has been obtained from the leisure services department. 
(b)  Block party permits are limited to events that have less than seventy-five (75) participants. Block parties that have seventy-five (75) or more participants or are likely to have seventy-five (75) or more participants are to obtain a special event permit instead of a block party permit. The Pinellas County Sheriff's Office may also make a determination that the proposed block party is subject to a special event permit, rather than a block party permit, based on the likely number of participants or a finding that the event may have special impacts due to the timing of the event, nature of activities or other factors related to public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  Applications for a block party permit shall be submitted to the leisure services department at least ten (10) days prior to the event and shall include information required by the leisure services department, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Name, address, and signature of sponsoring party; 
(2)  Location and boundaries of the event; 
(3)  Date and time of the event; 
(4)  Use or closure of any public right-of-way, including sidewalks; 
(5)  Traffic management plan related to the closure or obstruction of any public right-of-way; 
(6)  Activities to occur, including any form of music; 
(7)  Estimated number of participants and evidence of neighbor support; 
(8)  Copy of any announcements that may have been distributed or are planned to be distributed about the event. 
(d)  A block party permit may be denied if the leisure services department finds that the event is likely to have seventy-five (75) or more participants, in which case the applicant may apply for a special event permit. 
(e)  If the leisure services department finds that the event proposed for a time or location conflicts with other events or necessary transportation access, the leisure services department will make an effort to advise the sponsoring party of other potential times or locations. 
(f)  In no case shall a block party occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(g)  Traffic control devices shall be placed in appropriate locations, as required by the permit. 
(h)  All litter and debris shall be removed from the site the same day as the event occurs, except as the permit allows additional clean-up time. 
(i)  All conditions of the block party permit shall be followed. Failure to follow the block party permit may result in a violation pursuant to section 20.41 of this article. 
(j)  Other laws and regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.41. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, sponsoring party or organization violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty of a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation or by imprisonment of not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-34, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed §§ 20.39—20.66 of the City Code. Formerly, such sections pertained to streets and derived from Ord. No. 82-04, § 1, adopted March 15, 1982; and Ord. No. 88-36, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 1988. 
 
Secs. 20.42—20.66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-34, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed §§ 20.67—20.70 of the City Code. Formerly, such sections pertained to sidewalks and derived from Ord. No. 82-04, § 1, adopted March 15, 1982; and Ord. No. 83-16, § 1, adopted Mar. 21, 1983. 
 
Secs. 20.67—20.70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 20.71. - Excavations to be guarded. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or allow to be open any excavation or vault, in, on, or under any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk within the city, and fail to guard or protect people passing, riding or driving thereby, by proper guards and lights. 
(b)  All such excavations shall conform to appropriate standards and specifications as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.2), 3-15-82)  
Sec. 20.72. - Removal of guard rails or barricades. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take down, remove, carry away or interfere with any fence, railing, barricade, or other guard placed about, around or at any excavation, pile of dirt, rock or other material, in a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or on private property, which has been set as a warning thereof, or to remove, extinguish, carry away or interfere with any light, lantern or flare placed at the obstruction within the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1(§ 1.3), 3-15-82)  
Secs. 20.73—20.80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ART IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 20.81. - Intent. 
The primary intent for the city public art program is to borrow, acquire and commission works of art in order to enhance the cultural environment and city identity of the city. It is further the intent of the public art program to encourage the creation of artwork and to foster the enjoyment and understanding of art by the public. In recognition of the need to provide aesthetically appealing public places for the citizenry to gather which are reflective of the city's history and traditions, the public art program will foster involvement of the community in the process of selecting artwork to be displayed. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 20.82. - Definitions. 
[The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Eligible city public improvement projects means and shall be defined as any public building, facility or structure which permits public occupancy of all or a portion thereof; any public park or recreation facility. For the purposes of this definition, the following shall not be considered as eligible city public improvement projects: 
(1)  Any basic road project, including, but not limited to, construction, resurfacing, curbing, drainage, stripping and signalization. 
(2)  Any public utility project. 
(3)  Any public building, facility or structure which is not generally accessible to or visited by the public. 
(4)  Any project funded by a revenue source which, by law, cannot be utilized for the acquisition of artwork. 
(5)  Any acquisition of land. 
(6)  Any eligible public improvements for which the city commission decides not to allocate funding for public art in the construction budget. 
Integral part means any area in the interior or exterior of a municipal facility in which public art may be displayed or incorporated, including walls, ceilings, sidewalks, seating, stairways and fenestration. 
Public place means any place owned or operated by the city which is accessible to the public, including, but not limited to, buildings, parks and open spaces. 
Work of art means the application of skill and vision in the creation of a tangible or illusionary object or device guided by aesthetic principles. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 20.83. - Appropriation of funds for acquisition of art for eligible city public improvements. 
(a)  At the discretion of the city commission, appropriations for eligible city public improvement projects may include an amount determined by the city commission, not to exceed one (1) percent of the total project cost as bid and accepted by the city or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever is less. Such amount shall be used for the selection, acquisition, installation, maintenance and insurance of works of art to be made a part of a public facility, or placed and/or attached in, on, or adjacent to public facilities. If only a portion of the total project cost is legally eligible for works of art, that eligible portion becomes the base in making the above calculation. 
(b)  For the funds appropriated pursuant to this section and held in a public art fund, the city commission shall approve the amount of monies, if any, to be allocated for selection, acquisition and installation of individual works of art to be incorporated as a part of the eligible city public improvement project for which the monies were appropriated, or placed and/or attached in, on, or adjacent to such project, or to be placed in, on or adjacent to existing public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 20.84. - Public art committee. 
(a)  The city public art committee ("committee") is hereby created. The committee shall be composed of five (5) members and one (1) alternate, all of whom shall be residents of the city appointed by the city commission. The committee will serve as an advisory committee for the selection of artwork, artists or commissioning and siting associated with public art in the city. 
(b)  The regular members of the committee will, at its first meeting, elect from its own membership a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. These individuals will serve in their position for one (1) year, to be reelected on the anniversary of the first meeting each year. The vice-chairperson will act as chairperson in the chairperson's absence and will assist the chairperson in carrying out their duties. The committee shall consist of five (5) regular members and one (1) alternate member. All members of the committee shall be residents of the city at all times. No person shall be eligible for appointment to the committee while serving on another city board or committee unless such person resigns from the other board or committee prior to or coincident to commencing to serve on the committee. At least two (2) members of the committee should have an extensive art background, to mean a professional artist, art teacher, art administrator, long-time volunteer in the arts, etc. The initial terms of the members of the committee shall be three (3) regular members and one (1) alternate member appointed to a term of two (2) years and two (2) regular members appointed to a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, appointment for all members shall be a term of two (2) years. Appointment to fill any vacancy on the committee shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office. At meetings of the committee at which all the regular members are present, the alternate member shall sit as a nonvoting member of the committee, but shall be allowed to participate in the committee's discussion. At meetings of the committee at which one (1) regular member is absent, the alternate shall sit as a voting member of the committee. 
(c)  A majority of the voting members of the committee shall constitute a quorum necessary for the conduct of the business of the committee. Meetings shall be at the call of the chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman, or at the call of any three (3) regular members of the committee. The records and minutes of the deliberations and decisions of the committee shall be kept and filed with the city clerk. 
(d)  The committee will review the city staff projects potentially eligible for appropriation for artwork and potential sites for the artwork. Based on this review, the committee will recommend allocation of funds, choose the appropriate selection procedure and develop guidelines and timetables for each project. These recommendations will then guide the program for the upcoming year. 
(e)  The committee shall develop a program for the loaning of artwork to the city for the display of such artwork at public places. The committee shall be responsible for selecting and siting of loaned artwork. The city attorney will prepare a standard written agreement for the loaning of the artwork for execution by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 2-19-96; Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 20.85. - Selection process and criteria. 
(a)  The selection process to be utilized for artwork purchased or commissioned by the city will be a direct selection process. Committee members may compile slides of available art for review by the committee. 
(b)  Recommendations for the purchase of artworks or commissions selected by the committee will be recorded and submitted to the city commission for the city commission's ap proval. The artist will not be officially notified until the city commission informs the committee of its approval. The approval or rejection of the committee's recommendations shall take place in a timely fashion. 
(c)  No commissioned work shall commence prior to the receipt of a signed and approved contract between the artist and the city. Ownership of all works of art commissioned by the city shall be vested in the city. 
(d)  The criteria for selection of purchased or commissioned artwork will be as follows: 
(1)  Quality of work. 
(2)  Education. 
(3)  Special training. 
(4)  Arts, grants, fellowships and awards. 
(5)  Exhibitions and sales history. 
(6)  Previous public art projects. 
(7)  Appropriateness of work to the designated site. 
(e)  The selection of artwork for loan to the city shall be in accordance with the procedures and criteria established by the committee, provided that the committee complies with the requirements of section 20.84(e). 
(f)  Artists will be encouraged to consult with conservators in order to develop appropriate conservation techniques and materials to minimize maintenance expenses. Projected maintenance cost will be considered as an additional criteria for the selection of commissioned work. Required site visits by the artists for the purpose of designing and executing the work will be included as part of the total cost of the project, which shall not exceed the total project allocation. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 20.86. - Public awareness and community education. 
(a)  It is recognized that works of art often significantly alter public places and stimulate the emotions of the public. The public art program shall endeavor to broaden community awareness and understanding of art forms so that they may be appreciated and positively received. 
(b)  Public awareness and education activities will be supported to bring the public, the visual arts, and artists closer together through informed discussion of art in public places, its history and benefits. Extensive efforts will be made to promote art in public places as a significant cultural resource to residents and visitors. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 20.87. - Acquisition; donations. 
Acquisitions of works that are purchased will be handled as described in the selection process. Artworks offered to the city as gifts will be submitted to the committee for review. The committee will use the same criteria for reviewing potential donations as is used in the selection process. Its recommendations will be passed on to the city commission for final approval. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 20.88. - Documentation policy. 
As a condition of acquisition, all purchases, commissions and donations must be accompanied by a color slide transparency documenting the work. In the case of three-dimensional work, this shall include documentation from three (3) different views. A duplicate of these slides will be made and kept and filed for use in case of loss or damage of the original slide. The city will establish a slide library of the city's collection, which will additionally include a locator card indicating site, artist, date of acquisition, dimensions and condition. 
(Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 10-4-93)  
ARTICLE IX. - COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 20.89. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by: providing for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city; adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including Section 337.401, Florida Statutes (2002), as it may be amended, the home-rule authority of the city, and in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, the relevant portion of which is codified at 47 U.S.C. § 1400 et seq., and other federal and state law; establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers; and minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the city shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 6-6-2016)  
Sec. 20.90. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given. 
Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of all uses of a communications facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. 
Antenna: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services. 
City utility pole: A utility owned by the city in a right-of-way maintained by the city. 
Collocate or collocation: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. This term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in a right-of-way. 
Communications services shall mean the transmission, conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of this article "cable service", as defined in Section 202.11(2), Florida Statutes (2002), as it may be amended, is not included in the definition of "communications services," and cable service providers may be subject to other ordinances of the city. 
Communications services provider shall mean any person including a municipality or county providing communications services through the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. "Communications services provider" shall also include any person including a municipality or county that places or maintains a communications facility in public rights-of-way but does not provide communications services. 
Communications facility or facility or system shall mean any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the city and used or capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
In public rights-of-way or in the public rights-of-way shall mean in, on, over, under or across the public rights-of-way. 
Micro wireless facility: A small wireless facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, 12 inches in height, and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
Ordinance shall mean this article. 
Person shall include any individual, child, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee, personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include the city to the extent the city acts as a communications services provider. 
Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A communications services provider that owns or exercises physical control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A person providing service only through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of way shall mean a public right-of-way, public utility easement, highway, street, bridge, tunnel or alley for which the city is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal property of the city except as described above and shall not include buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements of the city, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Registrant shall mean a communications services provider that has registered with the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Registration or register shall mean the process described in this article whereby a communications services provider provides certain information to the city. 
Small wireless facility: A wireless facility that meets the following qualifications: 
a.  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and 
b.  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
Tower: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term does not include radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. 
Utility pole: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to provide communication services for electrical distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached and does not include a pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or unless an authority grants a waiver for such pole. 
Wireless facility: Equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communication between user equipment and a communication network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include: 
a.  The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated; 
b.  Wireline backhaul facilities; or 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider: A person who has been certified to provide telecommunications service in the state and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures but is not a wireless provider. 
Wireless provider: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services: Any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider: A person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 1, 10-16-2017)  
Sec. 20.91. - Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A communications services provider, wireless services provider, or wireless infrastructure provider, that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall first register with the city in accordance with this article. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this article and pursuant to any permit, if required, a registrant may erect, construct, place install, expand, use, maintain or repair a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this article governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the public rights-of-way of facilities that are not communications facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider, wireless services provider, or wireless infrastructure provider, from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the city or another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider, wireless services provider, or wireless infrastructure provider, from complying with all applicable ordinances, codes or regulations of the city, including this article. 
(c)  Each communications services provider, wireless services provider, or wireless infrastructure provider, that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall file a single registration with the city which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration, and the person to contact in case of an emergency; 
(3)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this article and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this article, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement; and 
(4)  The number of the applicant's certificate of authorization or license to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or other federal or state authority, if any. 
(d)  The city shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be by the city manager or his or her designee. If the applicant submits information in accordance with the subsection (c) above, the registration shall be effective and the city shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the city determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with the subsection (c) above, the city shall notify the applicant of the noneffectiveness of registration, and reasons for the noneffectiveness, in writing. The city shall so reply to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. Noneffectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the city stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way within the city and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Registration does not in and of itself establish a right to place or maintain or priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way within the city but shall establish for the registrant a right to apply for a permit, if permitting is required by the city. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this article and further subject to any additional city ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted. 
(g)  A registrant shall renew its registration with the city by September 30 of each year, in accordance with the registration requirements in this article. Within thirty (30) days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (c), a registrant shall provide updated information to the city. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the city restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this article. 
(h)  In accordance with applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations, a permit may be required of a communications services provider, wireless services provider, or wireless infrastructure provider, that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting requirements shall apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 2, 10-16-2017)  
Sec. 20.92. - Notice of transfer, sale or assignment of assets in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its assets located in public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the registrant's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this article. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided by such registrant to the city within twenty (20) days after the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall register as provided in section 20.91 within sixty (60) days of the transfer, sale or assignment. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 3, 10-16-2017)  
Sec. 20.93. - Placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A registrant shall not commence to place, maintain or repair a communications facility in public rights-of-way until a permit has been obtained from the city engineer as provided for by this chapter. Permits shall apply only to the areas of public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit. However, the city may issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as routine maintenance and repair activities, that may otherwise require individual permits. Registrant acknowledges that, as a condition of granting such permits, the city may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. A registrant shall not be excused from compliance with this section or any other applicable code or regulation due to the necessity for an emergency repair. 
(b)  As part of any permit application to place, replace or maintain an existing communications facility in public rights-of-way, the registrant shall provide the following: 
(1)  The location of the proposed facilities, including a description of the facilities to be installed, including the type/model of antenna(s), tower(s), wireless support structure(s), height of the proposed facilities, where the facilities are to be located, and the approximate size of facilities that will be located in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed, including but not limited to, anticipated construction methods or techniques; 
(3)  A maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, if available; 
(5)  If appropriate given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way and a description of the means of repairing any damage to the rights-of-way; and 
(6)  The timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof, and the areas of the city which will be affected; and 
(7)  Such additional information as the city finds reasonably necessary with respect to the placement or maintenance of the communications facility that is the subject of the permit application to review such permit application. 
(8)  Scaled drawing showing the location of the proposed facilities in the right-of-way including: 
a.  rights-of-way width and road pavement width; 
b.  location of all other utilities in the right-of-way; 
c.  sidewalks including sidewalk width; 
d.  an aerial map showing the location of the communication facilities, including the distance to other towers, poles, or wireless support structures; 
(9)  Camouflaging techniques in accordance with subsection 20.93(e)(3). 
(10)  All antenna and accessory equipment shall be located to avoid any physical or visual obstructions to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians or motorists, including clear zone and site line requirements. 
(11)  Items (1)—(9) listed above must be signed and sealed by a professional structural engineer certified in the State of Florida (unless the applicant is using exempt employees pursuant to F.S. § 471.003(2)(b)2(d), and, where a communication facility is not being collated on a currently permitted pole, tower or wireless support structure, or on the replacement of a currently permitted pole, tower, or wireless support structure, must include an accurate depiction of improvements and the relationship to the right-of-way line. 
(c)  Within 14 days of receiving a permit application to install a small wireless facility and any accessory equipment, the city shall notify the applicant by electronic mail as to whether the application is complete or the application will be deemed complete. The city shall have 60 days from receipt of a completed application to complete the review for compliance with applicable regulations. If the city does not use the 30-day negotiation period provided for in subparagraph (d) relative to the placement of small wireless facilities as provided for in subsection (d), the parties may agree to extend the review period. The city shall grant or deny the permit at the end of the extended period. The city shall notify the applicant of approval or denial by electronic mail. If the application is denied, the city shall notify the applicant the specific basis for the denial, including code provisions. The applicant may cure any deficiencies within 30 days of the date the denial notice was sent. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days of receipt of the revised application. A permit that is issued shall be effective for one year unless extended by the city. 
(d)  The city may not limit the placement of small wireless facilities on a specific utility pole or category of poles or require multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. Within 14 days after the date of filing the application, the city may request the proposed location of a small wireless facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an alternative authority utility pole. The city and the applicant may negotiate an alternative location including objective design standards and reasonable spacing requirements for ground based equipment for 30 days after the date of the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant must notify the authority of such acceptance and the application shall be deemed granted for any new location for which there is agreement. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant must notify the city of such non agreement and the authority must grant or deny the original application within 90 days after the date the application was filed. A request for an alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. 
(e)  The city shall consider the following objective design standards for small wireless facilities: 
(1)  The maximum height of a small wireless facility is ten feet above the utility pole or structure upon which the small wireless facility is to be collocated. The height for a new utility pole is limited to the tallest utility pole as of July 1, 2017 located in the same right-of-way other than a utility pole for which a waiver was previously granted measured from grade in place within 500 feet of the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility pole within 500 feet, the maximum height for a utility pole is 50 feet. 
(2)  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume. 
(3)  Small wireless facilities shall use camouflage techniques, approved by the city, which incorporate architectural treatments to blend in aesthetically with the surrounding environment. 
(4)  Other wireless equipment associated with the facility shall not exceed 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of ancillary equipment are not included in the volume calculation: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs, and utility poles or other support structures. 
(5)  New and replacement wireless support structures shall match the style, design, and color of existing utility poles in the vicinity unless approved by the city. 
(6)  Ground-based equipment boxes that support wireless facilities shall match the style, design and color of existing equipment boxes in the surrounding area. Foliage or another aesthetic features to obscure the view shall be used to the greatest extent possible to allow the boxes to blend in with the surrounding area. 
(7)  New utility poles to support wireless facilities shall not be permitted on Main Street within the community redevelopment district or in other areas where utilities are underground or contiguous to sites designated a local historic district. 
(8)  The rate to collocate small wireless facilities on a city utility pole may not exceed $150.00 per pole annually. 
(f)  All communications facilities shall be placed or maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. The use of trench-less technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever feasible. The city may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way consistent with this article and other applicable law. 
(g)  All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. 
(h)  After the completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way or each phase thereof, a registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the public rights-of-way to its original condition as it was before such work. If the registrant fails to make such restoration within 30 days, the city may perform restoration and charge the costs of the restoration against the registrant in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be amended. For 12 months following the original completion of the work, the registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this article at its own expense. 
(i)  Removal or relocation done at the direction of the city of a registrant's communications facility in public rights-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. § 337.403 and 337.404, as it may be amended. 
(j)  A permit from the city constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in public rights-of-way in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(k)  A registrant shall maintain its communications facility in public rights-of-way in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law. Registrant shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. 
(l)  In connection with excavation in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. ch. 556, as it may be amended. 
(m)  Upon request of the city, and as notified by the city of the other work, construction, installation or repairs referenced below, a registrant may be required to coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable time-frame in the subject public rights-of-way, and registrant may be required to reasonably alter its placement or maintenance schedule as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the public rights-of-way. 
(n)  A registrant shall not place or maintain its communications facilities so as to interfere with, displace, damage or destroy any facilities, including but not limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm drains, pipes, cables or conduits of the city or any other person's facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way of the city. 
(o)  The city makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of city public rights-of-way for the registrant's communications facilities and any performance of work, costs incurred or services provided by registrant shall be at registrant's sole risk. Nothing in this article shall affect the city authority to add, vacate or abandon public rights-of-way, and city makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities. 
(p)  The city shall have the right to make such inspections of communications facilities placed or maintained in public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(q)  The city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant. The city further reserves without limitation the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the city and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered. 
(r)  A registrant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less than 30 days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. 
(s)  A registrant who intends to place an antenna in the public rights-of-way shall be required to comply with section 63.00 through section 63.07 of the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code. 
(t)  The city may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility in the city rights-of-way if the proposed collocation: 
(1)  Materially interferes with the sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes. 
(2)  Materially interferes with the sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purpose. 
(3)  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
(4)  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual. 
(5)  Fails to comply with applicable codes included in section 20.93 above. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 4, 10-16-2017)  
Sec. 20.94. - Termination of registration. 
The city may terminate a registration if: 
(1)  A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification or license to provide communications services; or 
(2)  The registrant's placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the registrant fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; or 
(3)  The registrant ceases to use all of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way and has not complied with subsection 20.91(c) of this article. 
Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified by the city manager or his or her designee with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination action. The registrant shall have sixty (30) days after receipt of such notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the city manager or his or her designee, to accomplish the same. If the plan is rejected, the city manager shall provide written notice of such termination. 
In the event of termination, the former registrant shall: (a) notify the city of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the registrant's communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or (b) provide the city with an acceptable plan for disposition of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way and restoration of the public rights-of-way. If a registrant fails to comply, the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity including but not limited to the removal of some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public rights-of-way to its original condition before the removal. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 20.95. - Existing communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
A communications services provider, wireless services provider, or wireless infrastructure provider, with an existing communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the city has 60 days from the effective date of this article to comply with the terms of this article, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 5, 10-16-2017)  
Sec. 20.96. - Insurance. 
A registrant shall provide, pay for and maintain satisfactory to the city the types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies duly authorized to do business in the state and having a rating reasonably acceptable to the city. The insurance requirements may be satisfied by evidence of self-insurance or other types of insurance acceptable to the city. 
The limits of coverage of insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
(1)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. 
Worker's compensation—Florida statutory requirements. 
Employer's liability—$500,000.00 limit each accident. 
$500,000.00 limit per accident. 
$500,000.00 limit per each employee. 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability. 
Bodily injury and property damage—$500,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence. 
(3)  Automobile liability. 
Bodily injury and property damage—$ 500,000.00 combined single limit each accident. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 20.97. - Indemnification. 
A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the city arising out of the placement or maintenance of its communications system or facilities in public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence, gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the city. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the city reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted: (a) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the state; or (b) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in Section 768.28, Florida Statutes (2002), as it may be amended. The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 20.98. - Appeals. 
Final, written decisions of the city manager or his or her designee suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the city manager or his/her designee within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The appeal shall be reviewed pursuant to section 20.13, City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 20.99. - Enforcement. 
A registrant's failure to comply with provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the registrant to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in the City Code, section 1.12. In addition, a violation of this article may be punishable as provided by the City Code or applicable Florida Law. 
Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this article shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003)  
Sec. 20.100. - Abandonment of a communications facility. 
Upon abandonment of a communications facility owned by a registrant in public rights-of-way, the registrant shall notify the city within ninety (90) days. 
The registrant shall remove the abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the within one hundred eighty (180) days of abandonment unless the city grants in writing, at its sole discretion, permission for the abandoned facility to remain in the rights-of-way. The registrant may request an extension, in writing, of this time frame for good cause. 
If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility within this time frame or obtain written permission from the city may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 4-21-2003)  
Secs. 20.101—20.120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STREET LIGHTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-20, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, did not specifically amend this Code. At the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been included as Art. X, §§ 20.121—20.148, to read as set out herein. 
 
DIVISION 1. - INTRODUCTION 
 
Sec. 20.121. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Annual resolution means the resolution described in division 2 hereof, establishing the rate at which the street lighting services and facilities charges for a specific fiscal year will be computed; and the adoption of which shall be the final proceeding for the imposition of street lighting services and facilities charges, and as applicable in the form of special or non-ad valorem assessments, to fund street lighting services and facilities. 
Assessment coordinator means the city manager, or such person's designee, responsible for coordinating the calculation and collection of street lighting services and facilities charges as provided herein. 
City means the City of Safety Harbor, Florida. 
City clerk means the clerk to the city commission, or such person's designee. 
City commission means the governing body of the City of Safety Harbor, Florida. 
City manager means the chief administrative office of the city. 
Fiscal year means that period commencing October 1 of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the city. 
Ordinance means this article. 
Property appraiser means the property appraiser of Pinellas County, Florida. 
Street lighting cost means the cost of providing street lighting services and facilities for any fiscal year, all or a portion of which will be funded through the imposition of street lighting services and facilities charges. 
Street lighting roll means the list of tax parcels subject to the street lighting services and facilities charges contemplated hereunder. 
Street lighting services and facilities charges or charges means the utility associated charges imposed by the city commission pursuant to this article to fund all or a portion of the street lighting cost. Such charges shall meet the legal requirements of a special assessment under Florida law, and when required or determined necessary, be imposed and collected as same. 
Tax collector means the tax collector of Pinellas County, Florida. 
Tax parcel means a parcel of property to which the property appraiser has assigned a distinct ad valorem property tax identification number. 
Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax roll and database maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 1.01, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.122. - Interpretation. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this article; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of this article. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other gender, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 1.02, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.123. - Findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(1)  Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 2(b) of the Florida Constitution, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, the city commission has all powers of local self-government to perform municipal functions and render municipal services except when expressly prohibited by law and such power may be exercised by the enactment of city ordinances. 
(2)  The city commission may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the city commission may legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in (a), (b), (c), and (d) of F.S. § 166.021(3). The subject matter of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of F.S. § 166.021(3), is not relevant to imposition of the street lighting services and facilities charges contemplated hereunder. 
(3)  The special benefits conveyed by the street lighting services and facilities funded by street lighting services and facilities charges include, by way of example and not limitation, the protection and enhancement of parcel value, and enhanced use and enjoyment of parcels adjacent to or near street lighting. 
(4)  The provision of street lighting services and facilities and the operation and maintenance of street lighting provides better property identification and recognition, and enhances the safe accessibility of affected tax parcels. 
(5)  Street lighting services and facilities charges imposed pursuant to this article are imposed by the city commission, not the property appraiser or tax collector. Any activity of the property appraiser or tax collector under the provisions of this article shall be construed as ministerial. 
(6)  The street lighting services and facilities charges imposed hereunder meet the fundamental legal requirements to also constitute special assessments and non-ad valorem assessments within the meaning of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(7)  The street lighting services and facilities charges to be imposed pursuant to this article provide benefits logically related to the tax parcels served, are otherwise authorized by law, and represent a just and equitable method of funding all or a portion of the costs incurred by the city in providing street lighting services and facilities to affected tax parcels and paying for, inter alia, associated power, equipment and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 1.03, 12-17-2012)  
Secs. 20.124, 20.125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STREET LIGHTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES CHARGES 
 
Sec. 20.126. - General authority. 
(a)  The city commission is hereby authorized to impose street lighting services and facilities charges to fund all or any portion of the street lighting cost upon benefitted property at a rate based on the special benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of street lighting services and facilities. All street lighting services and facilities charges shall be imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this division 2. 
(b)  The amount of the street lighting services and facilities charges imposed each fiscal year against each tax parcel shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a fair and reasonable apportionment of the street lighting cost among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit provided by street lighting services and facilities funded with street lighting services and facilities charges proceeds. The calculation of the amount of the annual street lighting services and facilities charges imposed each fiscal year shall include administration and collection costs associated with the annual street lighting services and facilities charges. In the event the street lighting services and facilities charges are collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the calculation of the amount of the annual street lighting services and facilities charges shall include the fees and charges imposed by the property appraiser and tax collector, and shall be adjusted as necessary to account for any statutory discounts which are necessitated when employing the efficiencies of collecting the street lighting services and facilities charges annually on the same bill as property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.01, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.127. - Proceedings. 
The proceedings for the imposition of street lighting services and facilities charges shall include a public hearing noticed in the manner set forth in section 20.129 hereof, and the adoption at such public hearing or anytime thereafter of an annual resolution which shall (a) contain a brief and general description of the street lighting services and facilities to be provided or made available, (b) describe the method or methods of apportioning the street lighting cost among affected tax parcels, (c) describe the tax parcels, if any, to be exempted from the street lighting services and facilities charges for legal or public policy purposes, (d) identify the rate or rates of the street lighting services and facilities charges and approve and adopt the annual street lighting roll, consistent with the requirements of section 20.128 hereof, and (e) determine the method or methods of collecting the street lighting services and facilities charges. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.02, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.128. - Street lighting roll. 
(a)  The assessment coordinator shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the street lighting roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A summary description of the tax parcels subject to the street lighting services and facilities charges conforming to the description contained on the tax roll. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the tax parcel. 
(3)  The extension or application of the rates of the proposed street lighting services and facilities charges to be imposed against each such tax parcel. 
(b)  The street lighting and facilities charges also meet the minimum requirements for a valid fee because such charges fund governmental services and facilities for which the property owner's activity or land use creates the need for the services and facilities. 
(c)  The street lighting roll shall be retained by the assessment coordinator and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the street lighting roll be in printed form if the amount of the street lighting services and facilities charges for each tax parcel of property can be determined by use of the internet, a computer terminal available to the public or similar technology available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.03, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.129. - Notice. 
(a)  At least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, the city shall publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper generally circulated within the boundaries of the city. The notice shall provide the date, time and place of the hearing. The notice shall contain a general statement that the city commission will consider imposing street lighting services and facilities charges on various parcels of property within the city to fund all or a portion of the cost to provide street lighting services and facilities, the proposed rates or explanation of the schedule of street lighting services and facilities charges and include general information pertaining to the proposed apportionment methodology, the method of collection and a statement that all affected property owners have a right to appear at the public hearing and have the right to file written objections before or at the public hearing. The notice shall direct all interested persons to the street lighting roll and information concerning the amount of the proposed charge applicable to each parcel of property; provided, however, that such street lighting roll need not be in printed form if the amount of the street lighting services and facilities charge for each parcel of property can be determined by use of the internet, a computer terminal available to the public, or similar technology available to the public. 
(b)  In its sole discretion, the city may additionally and supplementally post the street lighting roll on the city website, or direct constituents by hyperlink or other device to an internet address or site where the street light roll may be reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.04, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.130. - Annual resolution. 
At the time named in such notice, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the city commission, the city commission shall receive any oral or written comments or objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city commission, adopt the annual resolution which shall (a) establish the rate or rates of the street lighting services and facilities charges to be imposed in the designated fiscal year, or any portion thereof; (b) approve and adopt the street lighting roll, with such amendments and directions as it deems just and right; and (c) provide direction as to the method of collection. All tax parcels subject to the street lighting services and facilities charges shall derive a special benefit from the provision of street lighting services and facilities to be funded by the street lighting services and facilities charges, and such charges shall be fairly and reasonably apportioned among the tax parcels that receive the special benefit. All objections to the annual resolution shall be made in writing, and filed with the assessment coordinator at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. Adoption of the annual resolution shall constitute the final action necessary annually to impose or re-impose street lighting services and facilities charges hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.05, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.131. - Effect of annual assessment resolution. 
The street lighting services and facilities charges for the initial fiscal year and each subsequent fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the annual resolution. The adoption of the annual resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the amounts of the street lighting cost budgeted, the method of apportioning the street lighting cost, the rate or rates of street lighting services and facilities charges, the street lighting roll, and the levy and lien of the street lighting services and facilities charges), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within twenty (20) days from the date of the city commission action adopting the annual resolution. The initial street lighting roll, as approved by the annual resolution, shall be delivered for collection using the utility bill collection method described in section 20.142 hereof, or such other method as the city commission by resolution may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.06, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.132. - Adoption of subsequent annual assessment resolutions. 
The city commission may adopt subsequent annual resolutions as a part of and during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which street lighting services and facilities charges are imposed hereunder. The annual resolution shall approve the street lighting roll for the upcoming fiscal year. The street lighting roll may be prepared in accordance with the methods of apportionment set forth in the prior annual resolution but may include modifications as a matter of policy as to what, if any, portion or portions of the city's budget is paid for from legally available funds other than street lighting services and facilities charges revenues. Failure to adopt an annual resolution during the budget adoption process may be cured at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.07, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.133. - Lien of street lighting services and facilities charges. 
Upon the adoption of the street lighting roll, all street lighting services and facilities charges constitute a special assessment, and are a lien against each property charged and assessed equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and other special or non-ad valorem assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, until paid such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims. The lien for street lighting services and facilities charges shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the annual resolution. The lien for street lighting services and facilities charges collected under the uniform assessment collection method shall attach to the property included on the street lighting roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. The lien for street lighting services and facilities charges collected under the utility bill method of collection shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the city commission of the annual resolution and shall attach to the property on the date of each such annual resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.08, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.134. - Revisions to street lighting services and facilities charges. 
If any street lighting services and facilities charges made pursuant to this article are either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the city commission is satisfied that any such charges are so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city commission has omitted any property on the street lighting roll which property should have been so included, the city commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new charge in the form of a special assessment against any property benefited by street lighting services and facilities, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this article and in case such second street lighting services and facilities charges are annulled, vacated, or set aside, the city commission may obtain and impose other street lighting services and facilities charges until a valid charge in the form of a special assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.09, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.135. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any street lighting services and facilities charges pursuant to this article shall not affect the validity of the same as a special assessment after the approval thereof, and any street lighting services and facilities charges as finally approved shall be competent and substantial evidence that such street lighting services and facilities charges were duly levied, that the street lighting services and facilities charges in the form of a special assessment were duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such charges in the form of a special assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this article; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any party objecting to street lighting services and facilities charges imposed pursuant to this article must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.10, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.136. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, assessment coordinator, city commission, or their deputies, employees, or agents shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of street lighting services and facilities charges imposed by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(b)  When it shall appear that any street lighting services and facilities charges should have been imposed pursuant to this article against a parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of street lighting services and facilities, but that such property was omitted from the street lighting roll, the city commission may, upon provision of (i) notice to the owner by first class mail, and (ii) an opportunity for the owner to be heard before the assessment coordinator, impose the applicable street lighting services and facilities charges for the fiscal year in which such error is discovered, in addition to the applicable street lighting services and facilities charges due for the prior fiscal year. Such total street lighting services and facilities charges shall become delinquent if not fully paid upon the expiration of sixty (60) days from the date of such notice. The street lighting services and facilities charges so imposed shall constitute a lien against such property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and non-ad valorem assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and may be collected as provided in division 3 hereof. 
(c)  The assessment coordinator shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to street lighting services and facilities charges, based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, to correct any error in applying the rate of the street lighting services and facilities charges, or the applicable apportionment method to any particular parcel of property, not otherwise requiring the provision of mailed notice pursuant to this article or the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Additionally, because the size and nature of the tax roll may yield anomalies, the assessment coordinator is authorized to apply sound public administration judgment and delete or remove individual tax parcels from the street lighting roll that due to specific circumstances do not receive a special benefit, are not developable (e.g. subsurface rights, submerged, slivers, right-of-way, common elements) or are reasonably determined to be inappropriate, infeasible or impracticable to include on the street lighting roll, and do not merit the expenditure of public funds and resources to impose or collect such street lighting services and facilities charges. Any such corrections shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way otherwise affect the enforcement of the street lighting services and facilities charges. All requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the assessment coordinator and not the property appraiser or tax collector. 
(d)  After the street lighting roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon timely written request and direction of the assessment coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 2.11, 12-17-2012)  
Secs. 20.137—20.140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION OF STREET LIGHTING SERVICES AND FACILITIES CHARGES 
 
Sec. 20.141. - Collection. 
(a)  The process of collection is driven by many equitable, practical legal and economic factors. The utility bill collection method is cost efficient and takes advantage of the existing utility billing system employed by the city for its water and sewer utility system. 
(b)  Unless otherwise directed by the city commission, the street lighting services and facilities charges shall be collected pursuant to the utility bill collection method. Any hearing or notice required by this article may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by this article or the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 3.01, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.142. - Utility bill collection method. 
The city may elect to collect the street lighting services and facilities charges by any other method which is authorized by law, or provided by this section as follows: 
(1)  The city shall divide the annual street lighting services and facilities charges for any given fiscal year into monthly installments and collect each installment on the water and sewer utility bill mailed each month by the city. 
(2)  Payment of the monthly installment of the street lighting services and facilities charges shall be due at the same time and in the same manner as any other fee or charge appearing on the utility bill; provided, however, that in the event a monthly payment is received for less than the full amount due and owing on the utility bill, such payment shall be applied first toward the balance of the street lighting services and facilities charges then outstanding, then toward the balance of any stormwater, sanitation and recycling fees appearing on such utility bill and then outstanding, and the balance shall be applied toward any sewer and water charges appearing on such utility bill and then outstanding. 
(3)  In the event of non-payment of the street lighting services and facilities charges, the city may initiate collection procedures including filing a notice of lien on the subject property for the balance due or enforce collection through any other method allowed or provided by law. 
(4)  The city shall have the right to appoint or retain an agent to foreclose and collect all delinquent street lighting services and facilities charges in any manner allowed or provided by law. 
(5)  Payment of delinquent street lighting services and facilities charges may be enforced in any manner authorized by law, including but not limited to (i) termination of unpaid water utility service as and in the event of underpayment or non-payment of the entire payment due on the utility bill, (ii) foreclosure action or suit in equity and causing the foreclosure of such property in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property, and/or (iii); causing an amount equivalent to the delinquent street lighting services and facilities charges, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method of collection under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. Any delinquent street lighting services and facilities charges and the costs, fees and expenses otherwise reasonably attributable to an affected tax parcel, may be collected subsequently pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that (1) notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this article, and (2) any existing lien of record on the affected tax parcel for the delinquent street lighting services and facilities charges are supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the street lighting roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(6)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any collection expenses, or foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any pay-off or settlement, or judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as an individual person or corporation. The city may join in one (1) collection or foreclosure action the collection of street lighting services and facilities charges against any or all property subject thereto in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is subjected to collection for amounts past due or foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent street lighting services and facilities charges and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent street lighting services and facilities charges and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of such actions. 
(7)  Any city commission action required in the collection of street lighting services and facilities charges may be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 3.02, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.143. - Alternative collection authority; use of Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(a)  As an alternative to the utility bill collection method set forth in section 20.142 hereof, the city commission may decide to collect all or part of the street lighting roll and applicable street lighting services and facilities charges pursuant to any lawful collection method, including but not limited to the uniform method of collection provided for in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided, however that all of the procedures required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act can be and are timely complied with. Any alternative collection method may be authorized by resolution. 
(b)  If the city commission decides to use the uniform method of collection provided for in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the assessment coordinator shall publish notice which shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and, in addition to the requirements set forth in this article, the assessment coordinator shall provide notice of the proposed street lighting services and facilities charges by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the street lighting services and facilities charges which shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such mailed notice may be provided by including the street lighting services and facilities charges in the property appraiser's notice of proposed property taxes and proposed or adopted non-ad valorem street lighting services and facilities charges under F.S. § 200.069, or its successor in function. The assessment coordinator may provide proof of any notice provided in conjunction with this article by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall nevertheless not affect the validity of the street lighting roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of street lighting services and facilities charges imposed by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The city commission may also establish by resolution such reasonable procedures or directions to confirm and comply with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or any other lawful collection method, as may be practicable and necessary. 
(d)  The city commission may establish by resolution a maximum rate of street lighting services and facilities charges provided that notice of such maximum rate is, when applicable, provided pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. The failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the street lighting roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of street lighting services and facilities charges imposed by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(e)  The street lighting roll, as approved by the annual resolution, shall be certified and, when applicable, delivered to the tax collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 3.03, 12-17-2012)  
Secs. 20.144, 20.145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 20.146. - Applicability. 
This article achieves a paramount public purpose and provides for the health, safety and welfare of the community and its property owners. The city's authority to impose street lighting services and facilities charges pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 4.01, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.147. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable; and if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision is held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this article shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 4.02, 12-17-2012)  
Sec. 20.148. - Alternative method. 
This article shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This article, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-20, § 4.03, 12-17-2012)  
Chapter 21 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-34, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed Ch. 21, §§ 21.01—21.69 of the City Code. Formerly, such sections pertained to subdivisions and derived from Ord. No. 81-39, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 1981. Similar subdivision regulations are set out in Art. XI of the LDC. 
 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; finance, Ch. 7; local business tax receipts, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public service tax authorized, F.S. §§ 166.231 and 166.232. 
 
Sec. 22.01. - Levy. 
(a)  There is hereby levied by the city on each and every sale in the city of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), and a tax based upon the charge made by the seller of ten (10) percent of such charge, which tax shall, in every case, be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of such electricity, gas or such metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), at the time of paying the charge therefor to the seller thereof, but not less often than monthly. 
(b)  There is hereby levied by the city on each and every sale in the city of local telephone service and intrastate telephone toll service and other telephone service taxable under Florida Statutes 166.231, a tax based upon the charge made by the seller of seven (7) percent of such charge, which tax shall, in every case be paid by the purchaser for the use of the city, to the seller of such local telephone service or intrastate toll service at the time of paying the charge therefor to the seller thereof, but not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1970, § 23-14; Ord. No. 85-72, § 1, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 22.02. - Collection. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), or local telephone service, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the fifteenth day of each calendar month, unto the treasurer of the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), or telephone service, without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such sale or sales, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. 
(c)  Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller, and the city manager shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax. The seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. 
(d)  If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller, the seller's the charge, and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required, on account of the sale for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1970, § 23-15)  
Sec. 22.03. - Records of seller; inspection by city. 
Each and every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), and local telephone service shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof, and the date of payment therefor. The records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1970, § 23-16)  
Sec. 22.04. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The United States of America, State of Florida, and political subdivisions and agencies thereof are hereby exempted from payment of the taxes hereby imposed. 
(b)  The tax shall not apply to sales of long distance telephone service or to coin box telephones. 
(c)  The tax shall not apply to the "increase base" and the "fuel adjustment charge" related to the sale of electricity. All other associated charges, including any additional charges added to the fuel charge, shall be taxed. 
(d)  Purchases by any recognized church in the state for use exclusively for church purposes are exempt. 
(Code 1970, § 23-17; Ord. No. 97-25, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 22.05. - Computation of tax. 
In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural or manufactured), or local telephone service collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1970, § 23-18)  
Sec. 22.06. - Failure or refusal to collect or pay tax. 
Any purchaser wilfully failing or refusing to pay the tax hereby imposed, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions hereof, or any officer, agent, or employee of any seller violating the provisions hereof, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment for each and every violation, in the discretion of the judge. 
(Code 1970, § 23-19)  
Sec. 22.07. - Disposition of revenues collected. 
All revenue received, collected and derived from the taxes levied by this article shall be deposited by the treasurer of the city in its general operating account, and is hereby appropriated for the uses and purposes set forth in the annual operating budget for each fiscal year during which this article remains in effect. The taxes shall be included from year to year, in the city's budgets and appropriation ordinances. 
(Code 1970, § 23-20)  
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX 
 
Sec. 22.08. - Property insurance premiums—Assessment and imposition; appropriation. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation, or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or who shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise or license tax amounting to one and eighty-five one-hundredths (1.85) percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. In the case of multiple peril policies with a single premium for both the property and casualty coverages in such policies, seventy (70) percent of such premium shall be used as the basis for the one and eighty-five one-hundredths (1.85) percent tax above. 
(b)  All money from taxes imposed by this section is hereby appropriated to the firefighters retirement and trust of the city, which shall be administered in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 175, Florida Statutes. 
(c)  The tax herein assessed and imposed shall be in addition to all other license taxes now levied or hereafter levied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, § 2, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 22.09. - Same—Collection. 
The excise or license tax herein provided for shall be payable and collected in the manner provided for by Chapter 175, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, § 3, 4-1-96)  
Secs. 22.10—22.30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES TAX CONVERSION RATES 
 
Sec. 22.31. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the city to adopt the communications services tax conversion rate as stated in sections 202.20(1)(a) and (b), as amended, and additionally to make an election under section 337.401(3)(c)(1), Florida Statutes (2000), as amended by section 34, enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878 by the 2001 Florida Legislature, regarding whether or not to require and collect permit fees from any providers of communications services that use or occupy the city's roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications services. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 1, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 22.32. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the term "communications services" shall have the meaning set forth in section 202.11(3), Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 2, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 22.33. - Adoption of communications services tax conversion rates. 
The city adopts the communications services tax conversion rate of 6.9 percent effective for the period October 1, 2001 through September 30, 2002 as stated in section 202.20(1)(a) Florida Statutes (2000), as amended, and the communications services tax conversion rate of 6.4 percent to take effect October 1, 2002 as stated in section 202.20(1)(b) Florida Statutes (2000), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 3, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 22.34. - Election not to require and collect permit fees. 
The city elects not to require and collect rights-of-way use permit fees from any provider of communications services that uses or occupies the city's roads or rights-of-way for the provision of communications services as provided in section 337.401(3)(c)(1), Florida Statutes (2000), as amended by section 34, enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878 by the 2001 Florida Legislature, and this election shall take effect October 1, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 4, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 22.35. - Election to increase local communications services tax conversion rates. 
Pursuant to section 337.401(3)(c)(1), Florida Statutes (2000), as amended by section 34, enrolled CS/CS/SB 1878 by the 2001 Florida Legislature, the city elects to increase its total rates for the local communications services tax conversion rates of 6.9 percent and 6.4 percent as computed under section 202.20, Florida Statutes (2000), as amended, by an amount of 0.12 percent, and this election shall take effect October 1, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 5, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 22.36. - Notice to the department of revenue. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to provide a certified copy of this article to the department of revenue by certified mail by July 16, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 6, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 22.37. - Exemption. 
Providers of communications services are hereby exempted from the payment of any right-of-way use permit fees imposed by Article III, Chapter 20 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 7, 7-2-2001)  
Sec. 22.38. - Severability of parts of Code. 
All ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed and superseded. However, all ordinances granting franchises and franchise agreements that are in conflict or inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed and suspended only as to the part inconsistent with this article, and the remainder of any such ordinances or franchise agreements shall remain in full force and effect. If any section, sentence, clause, or provision of this article is held invalid, the remainder of this article shall not be affected by such invalidity. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 8, 7-2-2001)  
Secs. 22.39—22.50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 22.51. - Additional homestead exemption. 
(a)  The city, acting by and through its city commission, by the authority of the provisions of the Charter, and by the authority of F.S. § 196.075, hereby grants both of the following additional homestead exemptions on real property as may be applicable to residents sixty-five (65) and older: 
(b)  Up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for persons sixty-five (65) or older who have legal or equitable title to real estate within the city and maintain permanent residence thereon, and whose household income does not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); and/or 
(c)  The amount of the assessed value of the property for any person who has legal or equitable title to real estate with a just value less than two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) and has maintained permanent residence thereon for at least twenty-five (25) years, who is sixty-five (65) or older, and whose household income does not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) as prescribed in subsection (b) above and as calculated in subsection (d), below. 
(d)  The income limitation shall be adjusted annually, on January 1, by the percentage change in the average cost of living index in the period January 1 st through December 31 st of the immediate prior year, compared with the same period for the year prior to that year, in accordance with F.S. § 196.075(3). The index is the average of the monthly consumer-price-index figures for the stated 12-month period, relative to the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(e)  The statement of household income must be supported by copies of federal income tax returns for the prior year, wage and earning statements (W-2 forms), any request for an extension of time to file returns, and any other documents necessary for review by the department of revenue, for each member of the household, to be submitted for inspection by the Pinellas County Property Appraiser. 
(f)  The taxpayer's sworn statement shall attest to the accuracy of the documents and grant permission to allow a review of the documents if requested by the Pinellas County Property Appraiser. 
(g)  Submission of supporting documentation is not required for the renewal of an exemption under Section 196.075, Florida Statutes, unless such documentation is requested by the property appraiser. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1, 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 10-16-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 2016-22, § 1, 11-7-2016)  
Chapter 23 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 8; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; junked, abandoned or wrecked property, Ch. 12; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, F.S. § 316.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008; Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act, F.S. chapter 318. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23.01. - Adoption of Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
There is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, Chapter 316, Florida Statutes, as amended, which law shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set forth herein, and shall be considered as part of this Code. 
(Code 1970, § 25-1)  
Sec. 23.02. - Adoption of Florida Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act. 
There is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act, Chapter 318, Florida Statutes, as amended, which act shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set forth herein, and shall be considered as part of this Code.  
Sec. 23.03. - Speed limits. 
The speed limit of all city roads at all times shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour or as may be designated by the city commission. The speed limit for all state roads located within the corporate limits shall be established by the state department of transportation, and for all county roads in coordination with the County. 
(Code 1970, § 25-2; Ord. No. 91-28, § 1, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 94-16, § 1, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 2-20-95)  
Sec. 23.04. - Railroad trains. 
No railroad train or locomotive shall be operated within the corporate limits of the city, at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Code 1970, § 25-3)  
Sec. 23.05. - Pedestrian crossings. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to designate certain intersections within the corporate limits of the city as requiring regulation of pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  At such intersections so designated, pedestrian crosswalks shall be clearly marked, and signs shall be erected notifying pedestrian traffic that jaywalking is prohibited at such intersections. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any street or avenue at such intersection or within fifty (50) feet thereof, other than within the crosswalk so marked. 
(Code 1970, § 25-5)  
Sec. 23.06. - Trees, shrubs or other objects obstructing view at intersections—Declared nuisance. 
Any person who plants, fixes or maintains any tree, shrubbery, or any other object upon any parkway or private property within the city adjacent to the intersection of any streets in the city, which obstructs the driving vision of the operator of any vehicle properly upon a street approaching such intersection is hereby declared to be guilty of committing a nuisance. 
(Code 1970, § 25-8)  
Sec. 23.07. - Same—Notice. 
(a)  Whenever the code enforcement officer for the city, after investigation, shall determine that any tree, shrubbery or other object planted or fixed upon any parkway or private property in the city adjacent to a street intersection, obstructs the driving vision of the vehicles passing over or through such street intersection, he shall cause to be served upon the owner or occupant of the property abutting such parkway, or the owner of the property upon which such trees, shrubbery or other objects are planted or fixed in violation of section 23.06, a written notice requiring such owner or occupant to remove such tree, shrubbery or other object, or to trim such tree or shrubbery or reduce the height and width of other objects so as not to violate the provisions of section 23.06. 
(b)  The notice herein provided for shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the property herein described and shall require the owner to comply with the directions contained in such written notice, within ten (10) days. Such notice shall be served in accordance with sections 13.03 and 13.04 of the City Code. 
(Code 1970, § 25-9; Ord. No. 95-11, § 2, 2-20-95)  
Sec. 23.08. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ordinance No. 95-11, adopted February 20, 1995, repealed § 23.08 in its entirety. Formerly, § 23.08 pertained to appeal to city commission for trees, shrubs or other objects obstructing view at intersections and derived from § 25-10 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 23.09. - Failure to correct notice requiring removal of trees, shrubs or other objects obstructing view at intersects; action by city. 
(a)  If, after the service of the notice herein provided, the owner or occupant does not comply with the directions contained in such notice within the time specified, the city may choose to abate the nuisance in accordance with the procedure set forth in sections 13.05 and 13.06 of the City Code. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from utilizing the enforcement procedure contained in section 2.10.06 of the City Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the owner of any property from erecting or maintaining buildings or structures as permitted by ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 25-11; Ord. No. 95-11, § 4, 2-20-95)  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008; parking regulations, F.S. §§ 316.1945 and 316.195; handicapped parking, F.S. § 316.1964. 
 
Sec. 23.10. - Parking restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two (2) hours on Main Street between Tenth Avenue and First Avenue when signs are erected giving notice thereof. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than forty-eight (48) hours on all other streets or avenues within the corporate limits of the city. The forty-eight-hour restriction is on a continuous basis and the changing of the position of a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period. 
(c)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a law enforcement officer or official traffic control device, it shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
(1)  Upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to block or impair the passage of pedestrian traffic on such sidewalk, either completely or partially. This shall not be construed to prohibit temporary parking of delivery vehicles either in commercial zones or residential neighborhoods. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; except where approved designated parking spaces are located at a lesser distance from the intersection. 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street; 
(8)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance; 
(9)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(10)  On the side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of curb or street, or what is commonly known as double parking; 
(11)  Upon any bridge; 
(12)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking; 
(13)  Within any specifically designated and marked space reserved for parking by a disabled permit only as provided in Sections 316.1955 and 316.1956, Florida Statutes, unless such vehicle is chauffeuring a disabled person and is making a momentary stop to load or unload such disabled person; 
(14)  Upon or within a designated bicycle path or bicycle lane; 
(15)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, to park a vehicle for longer than such time as is prescribed by such signs in such areas designated in such signs. For purposes of this regulation, the changing of the position of a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the same block shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period; 
(16)  Within a bus stop when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately marked; 
(17)  To park, stand or stop a vehicle in such a manner as to impede, hinder or restrain the normal flow of traffic on a street. This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles and city or commercially owned vehicles engaged in the collection of solid waste or recyclable materials; 
(18)  To park or stand a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the street headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the edge of the street or curb, except upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking where such vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or signs; or 
(19)  To park or stand a vehicle upon any street or right-of-way for the primary purpose of displaying it for sale and/or washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. An exception may be permitted, subject to compliance with any other applicable requirements of the City Code, in those cases where a vehicle is parked on a street immediately adjacent to the vehicle owner's principal place of residence and access to any form of off-street parking is not available. 
(20)  To park, stand or stop a vehicle in such a manner as to impede the curbside delivery of mail when notice has been given by a postal carrier to discontinue the blocking of access to a mailbox in order to allow the delivery of mail. 
(21)  To stop, stand or park a vehicle, for purposes of loading or unloading passengers, in an area where signs are erected giving notice thereof, between the hours as designated by the city manager and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1970, § 25-4; Ord. No. 83-28, § 1, 7-5-83; Ord. No. 85-22, § 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 98-05, § 1, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 1, 4-2-2006)  
Sec. 23.11. - Parking in residential districts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any residential district as defined in the zoning code exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight, and/or exceeding twenty-one (21) feet in length, and/or exceeding eight (8) feet in height, and/or eight (8) feet in width. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to recreational vehicles, or similar types of vehicles, provided that such vehicles are not parked on vacant, undeveloped property. For purposes of this section, the term "recreational vehicle" shall be defined in the same manner as the term "recreational vehicle" is defined in the City's Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 82-02, § 1(§ 25.4.1), 3-15-82; Ord. No. 98-11, § 1, 6-1-98)  
Sec. 23.12. - Recreational vehicles. 
(a)  No recreational vehicles or similar types of vehicles may be used as living quarters or storage on any property except property in areas zoned R-6, Mobile Home District, subject to conditional use approval. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles parked on property in any zoning district other than the R-6, Mobile Home District, shall comply with the size restrictions and locational standards specified in the following table: 
Recreational Vehicle 	Lot Placement 	Minimum Lot Size 
35 feet or less in length 	Any yard with front yard, side yard, or rear yard placement within 10 feet of a side lot line or parked in a paved driveway with the recreational vehicle oriented perpendicular to the main building, except that where there is a paved semicircular driveway with two means of ingress/egress there shall be no requirement that the recreational vehicle be oriented perpendicular to the main building. 	Minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet and minimum lot width of 50 feet. 
Greater than 35 feet in length 	Must be located in a side or rear yard no closer than 5 feet to a lot line with a 6-foot high opaque fence or hedge required to screen the recreational vehicle from adjoining properties. 	Minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet and minimum lot width of 75 feet 
 
(c)  One (1) recreational vehicle or one (1) recreational vehicle on a trailer that is designed to transport said recreational vehicle is permitted per address. All recreational vehicles shall be registered and operable. 
(d)  On corner lots with two (2) front yards (as defined in section 23.05 of the Land Development Code), a recreational vehicle may be parked in a front yard with adjoins a side street not forward of the primary facade of the main building or in the rear yard of a through lot provided the recreational vehicle is concealed from public view by a six-foot opaque fence or hedge. 
(e)  All recreational vehicles shall be stored in safe condition. Under no circumstances shall drums, barrels, concrete blocks, lumber, or similar devices be utilized for storage or recreational vehicles. 
(f)  In all cases where a recreational vehicle is parked, the grass located under such vehicle shall be trimmed to the same height as the rest of the yard. 
(g)  Recreational vehicle repair shall be limited to minor maintenance and in no case shall repair be conducted as a business, for profit, or in a manner which renders a vehicle inoperative, except where vehicle maintenance is permitted in the C-1A, Restricted Commercial District, M-1, Light Industrial District, or M-3, General Industrial District. 
(h)  Recreational vehicles or similar types of vehicles shall not be parked upon any public street for a period longer than six (6) hours, unless signs are posted prohibiting on-street parking or identifying a different period of time. For purposes of this provision, the changing of the position of a vehicle from one (1) point directly to another point within the same block shall be deemed one (1) continuous parking period. 
(i)  For purposes of this section, the term "recreational vehicle" shall be defined in the same manner as that term is defined in the City's Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code. 
(j)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any governmental agency from utilizing a temporary structure on any property in the city controlled by such governmental agency; providing that permission for such utilization of the property has been approved by the city manager. 
(k)  This section shall not apply where temporary housing is required due to a natural disaster and the city or county has instituted emergency actions to allow same. 
(Ord. No. 98-11, § 2, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 2008-25, § 1, 12-15-2008; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 8, 8-5-2019) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 98-11, adopted June 1, 1998, amended § 23.12 to read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment, § 23.12 pertained to trailers and house cars and derived from § 25-7 of the 1970 Code; and Ord. No. 95-11, §§ 5—7, adopted Feb. 20, 1995.  
Sec. 23.13. - Parking or moving vehicles in violation; removal and impoundment by law enforcement agency. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his/her name to stand or park in any street in this city in violation of this article or of any of the ordinances of the city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by such person in such a manner as to be in violation of the regulations of this chapter. 
(c)  The designated law enforcement agency of the city is authorized to take up or cause to be taken up or removed to a place designated by such law enforcement agency any vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and is authorized and empowered to keep same in such place until all fines and charges assessed for moving and storage against the owner and the vehicle have been paid or satisfactory bond arranged. 
(Ord. No. 98-05, § 2, 4-20-98) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 98-05, adopted Apr. 20, 1998, amended § 23.13 to read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment, § 23.13 pertained to prohibited parking near fire stations or hydrants and derived from § 25-6 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 23.14. - Parking fines. 
(a)  The fine for each violation of the parking restrictions set forth in section 23.10 shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), except for violation of designated parking for disabled persons, which shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any fines not paid within fifteen (15) days of the day of the violation shall be doubled. 
(b)  The procedural guidelines for the disposition of parking tickets for the city shall be as set forth in County Court Administrative Order 90-19 and any future amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 98-05, § 3, 4-20-98; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2, 4-2-2006)  
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; building and property maintenance regulations, Ch. 5; finance, Ch. 7; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Water and sewer systems, F.S. Chapter 367; Florida Safe Drinking Water Act, F.S. § 403.850 et seq.; water supply assistance, F.S. § 373.1961; environmental control, D.S. Chapter 403. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24.01. - Water and sewer systems combined. 
The existing water system and the existing sewer system of the city consisting of sanitary and stormwater sewer facilities, and including additions, extensions and improvements to be made to the water system and the sewer system, be and the same are hereby combined into a single utility system to be known as Water and Sewer System of the City of Safety Harbor. 
(Code 1970, § 26-1)  
Sec. 24.02. - Specified facilities combined. 
The water and sewer system shall include, but without being limited to, all wells, tanks, standpipes, pumps, pipes, mains, treatment plants, pumping stations, disposal plants, meters, stormwater sewers and drainage facilities and all other property, both real and personal, and equipment used in or connected with the operation or maintenance of such system or the furnishing of water for individual, commercial, industrial, municipal or other use to the residents and inhabitants of the city and the territory adjacent thereto, or used and connected with the removal of sewage and liquid waste and stormwater from the buildings, streets and other sewage and stormwater outlets in the city and the area adjacent thereto by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 26-2)  
Sec. 24.03. - Supervision and direction of combined system. 
The water and sewer system shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager, but the city manager may appoint with the approval of the commissioners a superintendent of the water and sewer system who shall have general supervision of the water and sewer system under the direction of and who shall report to the city manager. Any such superintendent so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager and may be removed by him with the consent of the commissioners. 
(Code 1970, § 26-3)  
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS 
 
Sec. 24.04. - Sanitary sewer system declared a public utility. 
The present sanitary sewage system now in existence in the city, together with any and all extensions thereof and replacements thereto, and the sanitary sewerage disposal systems are hereby established and declared to be a public utility, for the use and benefit of the city in the maintenance of public health and general conditions throughout the city. 
(Code 1970, § 26-4)  
Sec. 24.05. - Authorized personnel only to enter public sewer or make connections thereto; fee. 
(a)  No person, other than an authorized city employee, shall enter any public sewer or appurtenance thereof or make any connections thereto without a written permit from the proper municipal authority. 
(b)  All such connections shall be in accordance with rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the commission, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any connection, in such amount as the commission may fix and establish, and shall be made only with the permission of the commission or their duly authorized representative and shall be made only by a licensed plumber. 
(Code 1970, § 26-5)  
Sec. 24.06. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall make or maintain any connection with any public or private sewer or appurtenance thereof whereby they may be conveyed into the same suffocating, corrosive, inflammable or explosive liquid, gas, vapor, substance or material, or car-washing wastes. 
(b)  No person shall do any act or thing which may impair or obstruct the flow of any public sewer or clog up any appurtenance thereof, or place therein any substance, solid or liquid, other than the waste products for which sewers are provided. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1970, § 26-6)  
Sec. 24.07. - Interceptors; when required; expense of maintaining. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city sewer inspector and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection; and all costs with regard to the interceptor, including but not limited to purchase and installation, shall be borne by the user. 
(Code 1970, § 26-6.1)  
Sec. 24.08. - Written permit required to tap, cut or use sanitary system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tap, cut or in anywise use any line, branch or part of the sanitary sewage system or utility without a written permit issued by the building official of the city and without the payment of all rates and charges required by the city for the use of such utility. 
(Code 1970, § 26-7)  
Sec. 24.09. - Sewer development fees. 
(a)  Sewer development fees for all sewer service connections to the municipal sewer system (except as herein noted) installed pursuant to building permits for units issued after December 20, 1976, shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00) for the first water closet plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional water closet in each unit. 
(b)  There shall be no distinction made as to single-family living units or multifamily living units. 
(c)  All structures erected pursuant to building permits issued prior to December 20, 1976, but subsequent to June 3, 1974, and which were unable to connect to the municipal sewer system due to the unavailability of such service by the city shall pay the following sewer development fee: 
(1)  For the residential units, the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first water closet plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional water closet. 
(2)  For commercial units, the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each water closet or urinal. 
(d)  All structures erected pursuant to a building permit issued prior to June 3, 1974, and which were unable to connect to the municipal sewer system due to the unavailability of such service by the city shall pay the following sewer development fee: 
(1)  Single-family units and multiple units, up to three (3) units, shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  For all multiple units in excess of three (3) units, there shall be an additional charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) per unit. 
(Code 1970, § 26-8)  
Sec. 24.10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-34, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed § 24.10 of the City Code. Formerly, such section pertained to sewage connection and notice requirements and derived from § 26-9 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 24.11. - Private sewerage systems. 
No repairs may be made to any existing septic tank or similar private sewerage disposal unit after sewerage service shall be made available to the owner of the property on which such private disposal system is located, and the making of any repairs shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 26-10)  
Sec. 24.12. - Schedule of rates and charges. 
(a)  There is hereby established a monthly schedule of rates, fees and charges for the use and availability of sewer service. These rates, fees and charges shall become due upon final inspection and approval of the facility by the building official, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or occupancy, whichever shall first occur, and shall be as follows: 
Residential Rates 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge per ERU 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$13.74 	$15.32 	$17.08 	$19.04 	$21.23 
 
Residential Usage Charges 
Usage charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
Per thousand gallons of metered water use (residential customers capped at 15,000 gallons per month per living unit) 	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$4.85 	$5.41 	$6.03 	$6.72 	$7.49 
 
Commercial Rates 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
Meter Size 	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
5/8" 	$13.74 	$15.32 	$17.08 	$19.04 	$21.23 
1" 	34.35 	38.30 	42.70 	47.61 	53.09 
1.5" 	68.71 	76.61 	85.42 	95.24 	106.19 
2" 	109.92 	122.56 	136.65 	152.36 	169.88 
3" 	219.86 	245.14 	273.33 	304.76 	339.81 
4" 	343.53 	383.04 	427.09 	476.21 	530.97 
6" 	686.94 	765.94 	854.02 	952.23 	1,061.74 
8" 	1,099.30 	1,225.72 	1,366.68 	1,523.85 	1,699.09 
					
USAGE CHARGE 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Per thousand gallons of metered water use (no cap for non-residential accounts) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$4.85 	$5.41 	$6.03 	$6.72 	$7.49 
 
  
(b)  For purposes of definition, each physical connection to the public sewage system shall constitute a separate account. 
(c)  For purposes of definition, each single-family residence, trailer or mobile home, apartment (whether owned or rented), and each hotel or motel room shall be considered a single dwelling or living unit. Commercial shall include all businesses or operations not included under the residential category. 
(d)  In cases where a business combines living accommodations with business or commercial occupations and the business occupations are not served by a separate connection to the sewerage system, the monthly service charge shall be the base unit fee (determined by multiplying the total number of living units times the base monthly living unit charge) or eighty (80) percent of the water bill, whichever is greater. 
(e)  Cases in which the above are not applicable shall be treated as special situations and the monthly charges therefor shall be established by the city manager on an equitable basis. 
(f)  The rates for all accounts outside the city limits shall be the same as set forth above plus twenty-five (25) percent. Charges for service outside the city limits, in proper instances, may be established by ordinance under the provisions of Chapter 180.191(b), Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1970, § 26-11; Ord. No. 82-24, § 1, 9-7-82; Ord. No. 88-27, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. 90-22, § 1, 10-1-90; Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 94-26, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 95-41, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2016-29, § 1, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 24.13. - Charges effective date. 
The sewer service charge as set forth in section 24.12 shall be effective to all properties which are presently connected or hereafter connected to the public sewage collection system and shall be terminated only upon physical disconnection of units from the collection system. Whenever sewer service is made available to previously unsewered areas, the same service charges set forth in section 24.12 shall become effective ninety (90) days after notification of the availability of the service or upon connection to the system, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1970, § 26-12)  
Sec. 24.14. - When bills due and payable; discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
(a)  All bills for sewer charges shall be payable within twenty (20) days after the original date of billing, and if the amount of such sewer service charge shall not be paid within twenty (20) days from the rendition of such bill, the city shall discontinue furnishing water to such premises, and shall disconnect the same from the waterworks system, and shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewer service charge in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable. 
(b)  If any bill for sewer service charges rendered in connection with any premises not connected with the waterworks system of the city shall not be paid within twenty (20) days from the rendition of the original bill, the owner, tenant, or occupant of such premises shall cease, if ordered to do so by the city, from disposing of sewage or industrial wastes originating from or on such premises by discharge thereof directly or indirectly into the sewer system of the city until such sewer service charge shall be paid. If such owner, tenant or occupant shall not cease such disposal, then the city manager may disconnect such premises from the sewer system. Additionally the commission shall proceed forthwith to recover the amount of such sewer service charge in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable. 
(c)  In addition, should such owner, tenant, or occupant not cease such disposal or not pay the sewer service charge at the expiration of such twenty-day period, it shall be the duty of any public or private corporation, board, body or person supplying water to, or selling water for the use of, such premises, to shut off the supply of water to such premises within five (5) days after the receipt of notice of the sewer service charge delinquency from the municipality. 
(d)  If the public or private corporation, board, body or person shall not, at the expiration of such five-day period, cease to supply water to, or sell water for the use of, such premises, then the municipality may shut off the supply of water to those premises. 
(Code 1970, § 26-13)  
ARTICLE III. - WATER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Florida Safe Drinking Water Act, F.S. § 403.850 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24.15. - Due date for payment. 
All water billings are due when rendered and are payable monthly. The bill for water usage will be mailed to consumers monthly, either as a separate bill or in conjunction with other city utility billings. The failure to receive a bill will not constitute a claim for nonpayment of same nor release the customer from any penalties charged for such nonpayment. 
(Code 1970, § 26-14; Ord. No. 81-35, § 2(§ 26-14), 9-21-81)  
Sec. 24.16. - Delinquent accounts; cut-off; service charge. 
(a)  All water accounts will become delinquent twenty (20) days after the due date as shown on the billing. Water service will be disconnected after five (5) days' notice to the customer. Such notice will also be provided to the tenant, if the tenant is not the customer and if the city knows the customer is not the occupant of the premises. After an account has become delinquent, it will not be reconnected until the delinquent account has been paid in full and the following service charge has been collected: 
Service charge ..... $15.00 
(b)  The service charge will be imposed on all delinquent accounts not paid one (1) day prior to disconnection. 
(c)  Water will be turned on as soon as practicable within reasonable hours as established by the city manager, after the delinquent bill and service fee has been paid. 
(d)  In order to discourage delinquent payment and encourage prompt payment of water bills, the service charge for a second delinquency within ninety (90) days shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for subsequent delinquencies within one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Code 1970, § 26-15; Ord. No. 81-35, § 3, 9-21-81; Ord. No. 85-03, § 1, 4-1-85; Ord. No. 87-18, § 1, 6-15-87; Ord. No. 93-10, § 1, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 5-4-98)  
Sec. 24.17. - Water meters, installation. 
(a)  All meters shall be installed and all connections made only by the duly authorized agents and employees of the city water department. 
(b)  All damages to meters or meter boxes caused by the negligence of the consumer shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which such damage occurs. 
(Code 1970, § 26-16)  
Sec. 24.18. - Water rates within the city. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The following schedule of monthly charges will apply to all residential accounts within the city limits served by the city water system. 
RESIDENTIAL RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge per ERU 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Effective Date 	
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$12.79 	$14.26 	$15.90 	$17.73 	$19.77 
 
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—5.0 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
5.0—10.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
10.0—20.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 20.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
(b)  Commercial accounts. The following schedule of monthly charges will apply to all commercial accounts within the city limits by the city water system: 
5/8" RATES 
Customer charge 					
	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 	
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$12.79 	$14.26 	$15.90 	$17.73 	$19.77 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—5.0 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
5.0—10.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
10.0—20.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 20.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
1" RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$32.00 	$35.68 	$39.78 	$44.35 	$49.45 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—12.5 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
12.5—25.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
25.0—50.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 50.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
1.5" RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$64.00 	$71.36 	$79.57 	$88.72 	$98.92 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—12.5 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
12.5—25.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
25.0—50.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 50.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
2" RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$102.40 	$114.18 	$127.31 	$141.95 	$158.27 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—40.0 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
40.0—80.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
80.0—160.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	$20.53 
Over 160.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
3" RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$204.79 	$228.34 	$254.60 	$283.88 	$316.53 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—80.0 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
80.0—160.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
160.0—320.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 320.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
4" RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$300.17 	$334.69 	$373.18 	$416.10 	$463.95 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—125.0 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
125.0—250.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
250.0—500.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 500.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
6" RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$639.50 	$713.04 	$795.04 	$886.47 	$988.41 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—250.0 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
250.0—500.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	$8.18 	9.12 
500.0—1,000.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 1,000.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
8" RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1,023.96 	$1,141.72 	$1,273.02 	$1,419.42 	$1,582.65 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—400.0 	$2.36 	$2.63 	$2.93 	$3.27 	$3.65 
400.0—800.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
800.0—1,600.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 1,600.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
(c)  Categories. For the purposes of this article, each single-family residence, trailer or mobile home, apartment and each hotel or motel room shall be considered a single dwelling or living unit. Commercial shall include all businesses or operations not included under the residential category. In cases where a business combines living accommodations with business or commercial occupations and the business occupations are not served by a separate water meter, the unit shall be considered a commercial unit. Cases in which the above are not applicable shall be treated as a special situation, and the monthly charges shall be established by the city manager on an equitable basis. 
(d)  Irrigation water meters. The following schedule of monthly charges will apply to all irrigation accounts within the city limits served by the city water system: 
IRRIGATION RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base facility charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$12.79 	$14.26 	$15.90 	$17.73 	$19.77 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
0.0—10.0 	5.90 	6.58 	7.34 	8.18 	9.12 
10.0—20.0 	13.28 	14.81 	16.51 	18.41 	20.53 
Over 20.0 	19.18 	21.39 	23.85 	26.59 	29.65 
 
(e)  Water leaks. Where a customer can establish that more water was consumed during any month than the customer's average water consumption because of a water leak, water consumed above the average for that account will be billed at the current base or minimum rate. Any account can elect this option only once every twelve (12) months. The customer has the burden to establish that extra water consumption was a result of a water leak by producing a repair bill from a plumber or by other means satisfactory to the city manager or his designee. The average water consumption for an account will be calculated by using the water consumption for the account for the immediate past twelve (12) months. 
(f)  Revenues. Five (5) percent of the net revenues generated by the combined water and sewer funds annually shall be used to develop and implement an effluent system. 
(g)  Water intensive use. Water intensive customers, as hereinafter defined, shall be charged for water consumption based upon the following schedule: 
WATER INTENSIVE USER RATES 
Customer charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1.97 	$2.20 	$2.45 	$2.73 	$3.04 
Base Facility Charge 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$1,023.96 	$1,141.72 	$1,273.02 	$1,419.42 	$1,582.65 
					
USAGE CHARGES 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
Water used (thousand gallons) 	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
Over 0.0 	$5.90 	$6.58 	$7.34 	$8.18 	$9.12 
 
Customers shall be eligible for the water intensive rate upon meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Industries defined by SWFWMD as water intensive. 
(2)  Threshold consumptions will be defined by SWFWMD or a survey of other local water utilities. 
(3)  A water audit by a recognized firm must be done by the water customer at their expense. 
(4)  The recommendations of the water audit must be implemented within nine months by the water customer. 
(Code 1970, § 26-17; Ord. No. 81-35, § 4(26-17), 9-21-81; Ord. No. 85-40, § 2, 8-5-85; Ord. No. 87-21, § 2, 7-20-87; Ord. No. 89-35, § 2, 10-16-89; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-21-91; Ord. No. 91-18, § 2, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 93-10, §§ 2—4, 5-3-93; Ord. No. 94-24, §§ 1—3, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 95-40, §§ 1—3, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 98-12, § 2, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 2006-02, §§ 1—3, 2-6-2006; Ord. No. 2008-10, §§ 1—4, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2016-28, §§ 1—3, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 24.19. - Water rates outside city limits. 
(a)  The city expressly reserves the right to refuse to supply city water outside the corporate limits. 
(b)  The rates for all accounts outside the city limits shall be the same as set forth above plus twenty-five (25) percent. Charges for service outside the city limits, in proper instances, may be established by ordinance under the provisions of Chapter 180.191(b), Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1970, § 26-18)  
Sec. 24.20. - Water meters installed in all human habitations; exceptions. 
(a)  A separate water meter shall be installed for the purpose of measuring the water supplied by the water and sewer department of the city to each and every residence, dwelling or other human habitation, regardless of ownership, except as herein provided. Stores and offices shall also be bound by this provision. Out-buildings, sheds, and garages, and similar auxiliary buildings not used as habitations, and servants' quarters, may be attached to the same meter as the main dwelling. 
(b)  This rule shall not apply to hotels, apartments, multiple individual dwelling units or groups of commercial or industrial buildings under the ownership or management of one individual, firm or corporation. The water supplied to such groups of buildings may be measured through a single meter, but the city expressly reserves the right to specify a meter of appropriate size to properly handle the volume to be measured; and to charge for such meter and its installation under the terms and conditions set forth in section 24.22. 
(Code 1970, § 26-19)  
Sec. 24.21. - Meters property of city. 
Meters shall remain forever the property of the city. They shall not be moved, turned off or on, or in any way tampered with or molested, or their operation adjusted or interfered with except by an authorized agent of the city water department, except that in case of an accident or serious emergency from which damage to property or persons might result, the service valve may be operated if a city employee is not available in a reasonable time, provided further that such operation is reported at the earliest practicable time to the office of the city manager at city hall. 
(Code 1970, § 26-20)  
Sec. 24.22. - Water service, administrative and tap-in charges. 
(a)  When it is necessary to tap the city water mains to make a connection to a meter, the person, firm or corporation for whom the installation is made shall pay a fee to be known as a water connection charge. This charge shall not be refundable. 
(b)  Charges shall be as follows: 
Meter 
Size 	Inside 
City Limits 	Outside 
City Limits 
5/8 inch 	$225.00 	$280.00 
1 inch 	 280.00 	 350.00 
1½ inch 	 405.00 	 505.00 
2 inch 	 500.00 	 625.00 
4 inch 	Cost plus 20% but not less than $500.00 	Cost plus 30% but not less than $625.00 
 
(c)  Four (4) inch meters shall be installed by the developer under the supervision and inspection of the city. 
(d)  A service charge of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) shall be made for turning on water service; there shall be no charge for disconnecting water service. A request to read and leave on the water service in connection with a transfer of occupancy or ownership shall be construed as a turn-on charge. 
(e)  No water service shall be turned on until provision is made to pay all charges for all city utility services provided prior to the turn-on date. 
(Code 1970, § 26-21; Ord. No. 85-03, § 2, 4-1-85)  
Sec. 24.23. - Service deposits. 
(a)  All customers shall be charged service deposits according to the schedule of charges in the following chart in accordance with this section of Code. 
	Customer (Property Owner) Deposit 
Meter 
Size 	Inside 
City Limits 	Outside 
City Limits 
5/8 inch 	$  100.00 	$   125.00 
1 inch 	120.00 	150.00 
1½ inch 	180.00 	225.00 
2 inch 	240.00 	300.00 
4 inch 	1,500.00 	1,875.00 
 
All accounts in the name of a person or entity other than the owner of the property being served shall be charged a water service deposit double the amount shown in the above chart except that the deposit for a five-eighth ( 5/8 ) inch meter shall be one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00) inside city limits and two hundred dollars ($200.00) outside city limits. 
(b)  This deposit is in addition to the seven dollar and fifty cents ($7.50) "turn-on" charge provided for herein. This deposit shall be refunded when the service is discontinued, provided that all charges for water due to date shall have been paid. This provision shall not be retroactive, but if service is discontinued to any present user because of nonpayment, service shall not be resumed until such a deposit has been made and all debts due the water department from the party have been liquidated in full. 
(c)  On new construction accounts, water may be provided to the contractor subject to a deposit as specified in subsection (a) above, refundable on cancellation and upon payment of the construction account for water used, and provided further that this deposit shall be forfeited if the building is occupied prior to the cancellation and payment of the construction account for water used. 
(d)  (1)  The deposit for an owner occupied residential or commercial establishment, a nonprofit community service organization, or a registered condominium association account may be returned upon request after twenty-four (24) months of good account experience. For the purpose of this section "good account experience" means not more than two (2) past-due reminders in any twenty-four-month period, no disconnection of service for nonpayment, no dishonored checks, no evidence of meter tampering and no evidence of fraudulent use of the utilities system. 
(2)  Customers with a record of timely payments may have existing deposits transferred to a new premises or establishment without an increase in existing deposit amounts. This deposit shall be refunded after the service is permanently discontinued to a particular user provided that all charges or service due, up to and including date of discontinuance, shall have been paid. All deposits shall be applied to charges for services. 
(3)  Whenever any deposit shall have been made with the city, as required by this chapter, and service shall have been discontinued, and such deposit, or a balance thereof, shall be unclaimed by the person entitled to receive such deposit or balance thereof for a period of one (1) year, then any such deposit or balance thereof shall be deemed to be unclaimed and abandoned and shall become the property of the city. 
(e)  The city may increase the deposit requirement for an account previously cut off for non-timely payment, for an account that has presented a subsequently dishonored check, or for an account having a record of unpaid utility charges at a previous service location in the city. These accounts may be required to post a deposit of twice the stated deposit value or a deposit equal to four (4) months of average charges, whichever is greater. This recalculation will apply to all accounts regardless of whether the deposit has previously been refunded for "good account experience." 
(f)  Deposits pursuant to this section held by the city shall accrue interest, which shall be an index rate established as of October 1 each year and the index rate shall remain in effect to the next September 30. The interest rate shall be the average of the yearly rate on the interest earned on state board of administration local government system funds trust investment pool for the period October through September immediately preceding the October 1 adjustment date. The interest rate shall be adjusted annually on October 1. Annual payment will occur as a credit posted to the customer's account commencing with the first bill rendered on or after November 1. A customer who terminates service, whose service is terminated or whose deposit is returned will receive a prorated interest credit to the termination date on the final bill or the refund date. 
(Code 1970, § 26-22; Ord. No. 84-23, § 2, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 88-33, § 1, 11-7-88; Ord. No. 2003-16, §§ 1—4, 1-5-2004)  
Sec. 24.24. - Shutoff valve; specifications. 
(a)  Between the meter and the buildings to be supplied with water, a suitable shutoff valve shall be installed by the owner or user of the property with which the meter is connected in a location at all times easily visible and accessible to employees of the city water and sewer department. 
(b)  Such valve shall not be covered by shrubbery, lattices, boxes or other covering, nor shall it be beneath the house or in an outbuilding which at times may be locked. 
(c)  Failure to observe this provision shall justify the city in refusing water service until the rule is complied with. 
(Code 1970, § 26-23)  
Sec. 24.25. - Liability for repairs to service pipes. 
(a)  All repairs to water service pipes from the connections with the city water meter inward shall be at the expense of the property owner. 
(b)  All damages to meters and/or meter boxes caused by the negligence of the consumer shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which such damage occurs. 
(Code 1970, § 26-24)  
Sec. 24.26. - Steam boilers, etc., connected with water system. 
(a)  Wherever steam boilers, water heating plants of any and all kinds, or other similar apparatus or devices are connected to the waterworks system of the city by any user or owner whatsoever, damage caused by such connection to the property of the city water and sewer department shall be chargeable to such user or owner. 
(b)  Service pipes for such service must have a suitable check valve installed in the water line to prevent hot water from entering the city water mains or damaging the meter. Such check valves shall be installed with the approval of the city manager or his designee, but such approval shall not release the user from liability for damage due to the failure of such check valve to function. 
(c)  Five-eights-inch meters connected to residences, stores or offices need not have such check valves, but if a hot water heater in use in such edifices becomes overheated and back-pressures hot water into the meter, resulting damage shall be paid for by the user or owner of the property on which the meter is located. 
(Code 1970, § 26-25)  
Sec. 24.27. - Access to buildings by city employees. 
The city manager, or any employee designated by him, shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises served by the city water and sewer department for the purpose of inspecting piping and equipment. 
(Code 1970, § 26-26)  
Sec. 24.28. - Waterworks apparatus, not to be molested. 
Fire hydrants, service control valves, check valves, tanks, pumps and/or any other equipment used in connection with the waterworks system of the city shall not be molested or interfered with by any person whomsoever. The operation of all apparatus and equipment connected with the city water plant and distribution system shall be solely and exclusively in the charge of its duly authorized caretakers and operators. The premises and buildings in which pumps, water tanks, etc., are located shall not be trespassed upon by any person other than those legally in charge of operation and maintenance of the same. 
(Code 1970, § 26-27)  
Sec. 24.29. - Permit required for use of fire hydrants. 
A permit shall be required from the city manager or his designee before water is drawn from any fire hydrant or other service outlet, except by the fire department in the regular discharge of its duties, and only after arrangements have been made for payment to the city for water so drawn, at a just and reasonable rate. 
(Code 1970, § 26-28)  
Sec. 24.30. - Quantity of water recorded conclusive; exception. 
The quantity recorded by a water meter shall be taken to be the amount of water passing through the meter, which amount shall be accepted as conclusive by both the customer and the city except when the meter is found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register in accordance with section 24.31.1. In such cases the quantity will be determined by and the customer shall pay for an amount based on the customer's average water consumption. The average water consumption for an account will be calculated by using the water consumption for the account for the immediate past twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 3, 6-17-91) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-18, § 3, adopted June 17, 1991, amended § 24.30 to read as herein set out and added a new § 24.31. Section 24.31 already existed in the Code, and consequently, was renumbered as 24.31.1. Prior to such amendment, § 24.30 pertained to testing water meters and derived from § 26-29 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 24.31. - Water meter testing. 
The city's water department reserves the right to remove or test any water meter at any time and to substitute another meter in its place. In case of a disputed account involving the question of accuracy of the meter, such meter will be tested by the city upon written request of the applicant; provided, however, that the meter in question has not been tested by the city within the past year. In the event the meter so tested is found to have an error in registration in excess of three (3) percent as based upon the arithmetical average of one-fourth load and full load of the meter, to the prejudice of the customer, there will be no charge for the testing, but should the test show error in registration of less than three (3) percent or should the test show error to the prejudice of the city, there will be a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for testing meters. If a test shows an error to the prejudice of the customer, then the quantity of water shall be determined by and the customer shall pay for an amount based on the customer's average water consumption as defined in Section 24.31.1. If a test shows no error, then the quantity recorded by the water meter shall be the amount of water passing through the meter and the customer shall pay for such amount. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 4, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 24.31.1. - Consumption of water charges upon failure of meter to register. 
If the water meter on any premises becomes defective so that the amount of water consumed for the current month cannot be ascertained, the owner of the premises shall pay for that month an amount equal to the average amount charged for the month preceding and the month following the failure of the water meter. 
(Code 1970, § 26-30) 
Note— See editor's note, § 24.30.  
ARTICLE IV. - BILLING 
 
Sec. 24.32. - Service charges. 
(a)  Service charges for the following water meter services shall be as follows: 
Service 	Charge 
First reading of water meter on new 
accounts 	$7.50 
Returned check charge 	25.00, if the face value does not exceed $50.00 
	30.00, if the face value is more than $50.00 but does not exceed $300.00 
	40.00, if the face value is more than $300.00 
Services rendered after business hours 	50% surcharge on regular service charge 
 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Code 1970, § 26-41; Ord. No. 84-43, § 3, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 84-51, § 1, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 98-12, §§ 3, 5, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 2008-28, § 1, 12-15-2008)  
Sec. 24.33. - Penalty for nonpayment; disconnection; reconnection charges. 
(a)  If a water and sewer bill remains unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days after the bill is rendered and mailed, the following shall apply: 
(1)  A five (5) percent penalty shall be added to the outstanding balance of each month's delinquent bill. 
(2)  The penalty percentage shall only be applied to the cumulative outstanding monthly bill each month but shall not be compounded as to penalties rendered on the preceding delinquent months. 
(3)  Upon a lien being filed with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Pinellas County, there shall be no more penalties levied upon the amount for which the lien is claimed after the same has been recorded. Upon recordation occurring, the amount of the lien shall draw legal interest as set by the city manager from the date it has been recorded. 
(Code 1970, § 26-42; Ord. No. 84-51, § 2, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 2011-14, § 3, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 24.34. - Lien for unpaid water charges. 
(a)  Charges for water and sewer shall constitute a lien upon the premises served if the bill for water and sewer service remains unpaid twenty (20) days after it has been rendered and the city clerk may file with the clerk of the circuit court of the county a claim of lien; however, charges incurred by a former occupant will not be the basis for a lien against rental property if the former occupant contracted for the services or if the city provided the services with knowledge of the former occupant's name and the period the occupant was provided the services. The claim of lien shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water and sewer served subsequent to the period covered by the bill, plus interest, administrative fees, penalties, and attorney's fees. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The failure of the city clerk to record such lien claim or to provide notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills. 
(Code 1970, § 26-43; Ord. No. 84-51, § 3, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 98-12, §§ 4, 6, 5-4-98)  
Sec. 24.35. - Foreclosure; sale of property for unpaid charges. 
Property subject to a lien for municipal services (including but not limited to water, sewer and garbage charges) shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting costs, interest, penalties and reasonable attorney's fees, as in the case of foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 26-44)  
Sec. 24.36. - Priority of liens for municipal services. 
All liens for municipal services (including, but not limited to, water, sewer and garbage charges) are hereby imposed as special assessment liens against the real property upon which such services are rendered and, until fully paid and discharged, shall remain liens superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved, including liens of mortgages, mechanics liens and all other liens of whatever type or nature and shall be of equal dignity to the liens of ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1970, § 26-45; Ord. No. 91-02, § 2, 1-21-91; Ord. No. 2011-14, § 4, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 24.37. - Liability for violation of this chapter. 
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expenses, loss, penalty or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation, including a reasonable attorney's fee, for defending or prosecuting any action with regard to this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 26-46)  
ARTICLE V. - WATER RESTRICTIONS AND CONSERVATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-32, adopted July 1, 1985, amended Art. V of this chapter in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to the enactment of said Ord. No. 85-32, Art. V was composed of §§ 24.38—24.45, relative to water restrictions and conservation, which provisions derived from Ord. No. 81-38, §§ 1—6, and 8, adopted Oct. 5, 1981. 
State Law reference— Water supply assistance, F.S. § 373.1961. 
 
Sec. 24.38. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
District is the Southwest Florida Water Management District. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Water resource means any and all water on or beneath surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
Water shortage condition is a condition when sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resources from serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought. 
Water shortage plan means Chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, the codification of the water shortage plan adopted and published by the Southwest Florida Water Management District, or any modification or derivative of Chapter 40D-21 which may be current at the time a water shortage or water shortage emergency is declared. 
(Ord. No. 85-32, § 1(1), 7-1-85; Ord. No. 90-19, § 1, 9-4-90)  
Sec. 24.39. - Application. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons using the water resource, whether public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This article shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater. 
(Ord. No. 85-32, § 1(2), 7-1-85)  
Sec. 24.40. - Declaration of water shortage; water shortage emergency. 
The declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of Safety Harbor by the governing board or the executive director of the district or by resolution of the city commission of the City of Safety Harbor shall invoke the provisions of this article. Upon such declaration all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district pursuant to Chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, applicable to Pinellas County and Safety Harbor, shall be subject to this article. Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 40D-21, Florida Administrative Code, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-32, § 1(3), 7-1-85)  
Sec. 24.41. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement officers in Safety Harbor shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. In addition, the city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this article to agencies and departments of the City of Safety Harbor, in accordance with state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 85-32, § 1(4), 7-1-85)  
Sec. 24.42. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions contained herein shall constitute a civil offense, and violators will be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment in jail not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties in paragraph (a), the provisions of this article may be enforced by appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction in order to prevent or abate violations of this article. 
(c)  Each day a violation of this article is committed shall constitute a separate offense. During the first thirty (30) days of a declared water shortage or water shortage emergency, violators may be provided with no more than one (1) written warning at the discretion of the city manager, the city manager's designees or law enforcement officers in Safety Harbor. 
(d)  The city manager shall make efforts to publicize the declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency under section 20-40 which invokes the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-32, § 1(5), 7-1-85; Ord. No. 90-19, §§ 2—4, 9-4-90)  
Sec. 24.43. - Water users to accept provisions of this article. 
Water service shall not be furnished to any person or utility if such person refuses to accept the provisions of this article. The acceptance of water service or the withdrawal of water from a private source after the declaration of a water shortage or water shortage emergency shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 90-19, § 5, 9-4-90)  
Sec. 24.44. - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-32, § 1(6), 7-1-85; Ord. No. 90-19, § 6, 9-4-90)  
ARTICLE VI. - CROSS CONNECTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-6, §§ 1—13, adopted Feb. 18, 1991, amended Chapter 24 by adding a new Article IV, §§ 24.40—24.52. Inasmuch as Article IV and §§ 24.40—24.44 already existed in the Code, the provisions of Ord. No. 91-6 were codified as Article VI, §§ 24.45—24.57 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 24.45. - Intent. 
The city commission does hereby find that it is necessary for the protection and promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the people within that portion of the county, served by the city water system, to adopt cross connection control standards which establish minimum requirements for the design, construction and maintenance of connections to the public water supply. Said standards supplement, but do not supersede or modify the Standard Plumbing Code. Authority is pursuant to Florida Administrative Codes 17-555.360 and 17-610.420. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 1, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.46. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To provide standards for the protection of the public potable water supply; 
(2)  To protect the public potable water system at the service connection by isolating within the consumer's premises actual or potential pollution or contamination which may result from backflow through cross connection; 
(3)  To provide means whereby the consumer may segregate his domestic and industrial uses into separate systems to prevent possible pollution or contamination of his private potable water system; 
(4)  To provide a continuous program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination of the public potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 2, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.47. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the listed meanings as used in this article only: 
Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water source or system, other than the public water supply, that may be available in the building or premises. 
Backflow shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than its intended source. 
Backflow preventer shall mean a device or means to prevent backflow. 
Back pressure shall mean backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or other means which creates pressure within the system greater than the supply pressure. 
Back siphonage shall mean a form of backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric pressure within a water system. 
Consumer (customer) shall mean any person, firm or corporation using or receiving water from the water purveyor's potable water system. 
Contaminant containment shall mean total control or containment of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiologic, or biologic) that tends to degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or to impair its potability or usefulness. 
Cross connection shall mean any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one (1) of which contains potable water and the other water, or other fluid of unknown or questionable quality. 
Double check valve assembly shall mean an assembly composed of two (2) single, independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
Health department shall mean the health authority having jurisdiction in Pinellas County. 
Interconnection (direct cross connection) shall mean any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, other waste or liquid which would be capable of importing contamination. 
Nonpotable water shall mean water which is not safe for human consumption, or which is of questionable potability. 
Plumbing official shall mean the individual, board, department, or agency established and authorized by the city, to administer and enforce the provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code as adopted. 
Point of delivery (service connection) shall mean the terminal end of services from the public potable water system at the meter installation which shall include the backflow prevention device when said device is installed adjacent to the water meter. In other words, it is that point where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its delivery to the consumer. 
Potable water shall mean water from any source which has been investigated by the health department, and which has been approved for human consumption. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall mean a device containing within its structure a minimum of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply. The unit shall include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
Reuse shall mean the deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with D.E.R. rules, for a beneficial purpose. 
Standard Plumbing Code shall mean the latest revised edition of the Standard Plumbing Code as governed by the Standard Building Code Congress International, Inc. published in Birmingham, Alabama, as adopted by the city. 
Water purveyor shall mean the City of Safety Harbor Water System. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 3, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.48. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  The plumbing official shall enforce the provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code so as to insure the potability of the consumer's water supply from the point of entrance of the public water supply at the consumer's service connection, to the extremities of the consumer's water system. The plumbing official shall have primary enforcing responsibility of new installations, alterations or repairs of water supply systems. The plumbing official shall provide the health department and the water purveyor with the assistance required to enforce the provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code on existing water supply systems. 
(b)  The water purveyor shall be primarily responsible for the prevention of contamination and pollution of the public water mains. Such responsibility begins at the point of origin of the public water supply and includes adequate treatment facilities and water mains, and ends at the point of entrance to the consumer's water system; provided adequate backflow and back siphonage protection is maintained on all water supply systems directly connected to the public system. The water purveyor shall have secondary supervisory responsibility to the plumbing official for new installations, alterations or repairs of water supply systems and shall have secondary supervisory responsibility to the health department for existing water supply systems. 
(c)  The health department is responsible for supervising the prevention of contamination and pollution of the public water mains, all water supply systems and all water sources. Such responsibility extends from the point of origin of the public water supply to and including all extremities of the consumer's supply and its actual use. 
(d)  The consumer shall have the prime responsibility of preventing contaminants and pollutants from entering the water supply system, and from entering the public water main or water source from his water supply system. The consumer shall protect his water supply system against actual or potential cross connection, backflow or back siphonage, as required by the Standard Plumbing Code and other applicable regulations. The consumer shall assure that all internal protective devices are tested and maintained in working condition. The consumer shall assure the necessary plumbing permits are obtained for new water supply system installations, and for alterations or repair to existing systems. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 4, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.49. - Operational criteria. 
It is the primary responsibility of the water purveyor to evaluate the hazards inherent in supplying a consumer's water system, i.e., determine whether solid, liquid or gaseous pollutants or contaminants are, or may be handled on the consumer's premises in such a manner as to possibly permit contaminations of the public water system. When a hazard or potential hazard to the public water system is found on the consumer's premises, the consumer shall be required to install an approved backflow prevention device at each public water service connection to the premises in accordance with this article's requirements. The type of device shall depend on the degree of hazard involved. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 5, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.50. - Protective devices. 
The type of protective device required shall depend upon the degree of hazard as described in AWWA Manual M-14 or as described below, and shall comply with F.A.C. 17-555.360. Where more than one (1) type of protection is possible, the actual method utilized shall be at the discretion of the water purveyor subsequent to physical inspection of the hazard. Approvals of devices are decided by the water purveyor. 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply, there shall exist an approved backflow prevention device. There shall be no physical connection between said auxiliary water supply and the consumer's water system which is served by the public water supply system. Where such connections are found, disconnections shall be accomplished and the public water system shall be protected against the possibility of future reconnection by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or a substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to the health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include, but are not limited to, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are cross connection(s), either actual or potential, physical disconnection shall take place followed by installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected by the installation of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 6, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.51. - Facilities requiring backflow protection. 
(a)  The following is a partial list of facilities which will require reduced pressure principle backflow preventers at the service connection. Requirements are based upon the degree of hazard afforded the public potable water system. In addition to the list below, all potable water connections entering properties served by a reclaimed water system, per F.A.C. Section 62-610.412 shall be supplied with double check valve assemblies. 
(1)  Automatic car washes. 
(2)  Automotive plants. 
(3)  Auxiliary water systems. 
(4)  Beverage bottling plants, regional breweries, brewpubs, microbreweries, micro-distilleries, and nanobreweries. 
(5)  Canneries, packing houses and reduction plants. 
(6)  Chemical plants. 
(7)  Dairies and cold storage plants. 
(8)  Exterminators. 
(9)  Facilities with commercial boilers or chilled water systems. 
(10)  Fertilizer manufacturing plants. 
(11)  Film laboratories. 
(12)  Fire systems. 
(13)  Heating or cooling coils submerged in contaminants. 
(14)  Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities, nursing and convalescent homes and clinics. 
(15)  Irrigation systems. 
(16)  Laboratories (industrial, commercial, medical and school). 
(17)  Laundries and dye works. 
(18)  Metal manufacturing, cleaning, plating, processing and fabricating plants. 
(19)  Motion picture studios. 
(20)  Nuclear and radioactive materials production facilities. 
(21)  Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties. 
(22)  Paper and paper products plants. 
(23)  Plating plants. 
(24)  Portable water trucks used for lawn maintenance, pest control or other potential hazardous functions, when water is received from city fire hydrants or other filling devices. 
(25)  Power plants. 
(26)  Radiator shops. 
(27)  Radioactive materials or substances, plants or facilities handling. 
(28)  Restricted, classified or other closed facilities. 
(29)  Rubber plants. 
(30)  Sand and gravel plants. 
(31)  Schools and colleges equipped with laboratories. 
(32)  Travel trailer and mobile home parks. 
(33)  Wastewater treatment plants, pump stations and stormwater pumping facilities. 
(34)  Waterfront facilities and industries. 
(35)  Water treatment plants. 
(36)  Others, as found with high hazards. 
(b)  The following is a partial list of facilities which will require at a minimum, double check valve assemblies: 
(1)  Apartments. 
(2)  Beauty parlors and barber shops. 
(3)  Buildings three (3) stories in height. 
(4)  Doctors and dental offices. 
(5)  Greenhouses and nurseries. 
(6)  Hotels and motels. 
(7)  Laundries and cleaners. 
(8)  Restaurants and food handlers. 
(9)  Service stations. 
(10)  Swimming pools. 
(11)  Others, as determined to be low hazards. 
(c)  Where it is found that the facilities in the above-referenced and other establishments are designed and constructed to eliminate all cross connections, and that no backflow potential exists or is likely to be created, the plumbing official may waive the requirement of a backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 7, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 9-16-2019)  
Sec. 24.52. - Approval of backflow prevention devices. 
Any backflow prevention device required by this article shall be of a type approved by the water purveyor, and the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation or the Standard Plumbing Code, and as defined in the latest addition of AWWA C506-78. All devices required shall be approved by the plumbing official prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 8, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.53. - Noncompliance; service to be discontinued; notice; consent to entry. 
(a)  In an emergency situation when the public potable water supply is being contaminated or is in immediate danger of contamination, water service will be discontinued by the water purveyor. Prior notice will be given consistent with the degree of hazard. 
(b)  No water service connection shall be installed on the premises of any consumer unless the public potable water system is protected as required by this article or approved by the water purveyor and plumbing official. 
(c)  Delivery of water to the premises of any consumer may be discontinued by the water purveyor if any protective device required by this article has not been installed, or is defective, or has been removed or bypassed. Discontinued water service shall not be resumed until conditions at the consumer's premises have been abated or corrected to the satisfaction of the plumbing official. 
(d)  Upon discovery of a violation which does not present an immediate hazard to the public potable water system, written notice thereof shall be given to the consumer. The notice shall be given by delivering the same to the premises and a copy thereof mailed to the billing address as it appears on the water purveyor's billing records. The notice shall state: 
(1)  Date and time of violation. 
(2)  The condition or defect which must be corrected. 
(3)  The manner in which the stated conditions are to be corrected. 
(4)  Date for reinspection. 
(5)  The date on or after which delivery of water will be discontinued, which shall not be less than fifteen (15) nor more than ninety (90) days following the date of delivery or mailing of the notice, if the violation is not corrected. The water purveyor may grant the consumer an extension of an additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the water purveyor determines the consumer, for justifiable reasons, has been unable to comply with the notice within the time originally allowed. 
(e)  For the purpose of making any inspections or discharging the duties imposed by this article, the water purveyor, the health department, and/or the plumbing official, shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any consumer. Each consumer, as a condition of the continued delivery to his premises of water from the public water supply, shall be considered as having stated his consent to the entry upon his premises of the water purveyor, the health department, and/or the plumbing official, for the purpose stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 9, 2-18-91)  
Sec. 24.54. - Ownership. 
The water purveyor shall purchase, own and maintain all backflow prevention devices installed at the point of delivery to the consumer's water system. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 10, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 92-31, § 1, 11-2-92)  
Sec. 24.55. - Installation. 
Customers of the city water system requiring backflow prevention devices shall pay the costs associated with type and size of device needed in accordance with the fee schedule approved by the city commission. Devices up to and including two-inch may be installed by the applicant's contractor, if desired. Devices installed under private contract will require inspection. New connectors requiring backflow prevention devices will pay the associated fees at the time of application for water service, while existing customers will be allowed up to ninety (90) days from the date of installation of the backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 11, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 92-31, § 2, 11-2-92)  
Sec. 24.56. - Testing and maintenance. 
The water purveyor will be responsible for the testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention devices. The consumer on whose premises any such device is installed shall permit access to the water purveyor to test each such device. If tests by the water purveyor's inspector disclose failures in the operation of any device, the device shall be repaired by the water purveyor. Records of such inspections and repairs shall be kept by the water purveyor and made available to the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 12, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 92-31, § 3, 11-2-92)  
Sec. 24.57. - Areas embraced. 
All territory within the city, served by the city water system, shall be embraced by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-6, § 13, 2-18-91)  
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ordinance No. 91-24, adopted October 7, 1991, amended Ch. 24 by adding a new Art. VI, to consist of §§ 24.44—24.53. Inasmuch as such article and sections already existed in the Code, the provisions of § 1 were codified as Art. VII, §§ 24.58—24.67 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 24.58. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to establish stormwater management as a city utility enterprise in accordance with Section 403.0893, Florida Statutes, and to establish utility fees for stormwater management service to be levied against all developed property within the city to provide for the planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance, regulation, surveying, and inspection of the stormwater management facilities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 24.59. - Definitions. 
Department shall mean the public works department of the city. 
Developed property shall mean any property which has been altered from its natural state of clearing, excavation, change of grade or landscaping, or by the addition of any improvements such as a building, structure or impervious surface. The term includes all properties within the city, including those properties classified as nonprofit or tax-exempt for ad valorem tax purposes. The term includes all government properties, including properties of the city. For new construction, a property shall be considered developed pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued; or 
(2)  Where construction is at least fifty (50) percent complete and construction is halted for a period of six (6) months. 
Discharge shall mean any direct and indirect entry or any fluid, liquid or gaseous material. 
Equivalent residential unit or ERU shall mean the statistical average impervious area for residential parcels within the city. The numerical value of one (1) ERU shall be one thousand eight hundred sixty-five (1,865) square feet of impervious area. 
Illicit discharge shall mean any discharge to municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the separate municipal stormwater) and discharges resulting from firefighting equipment. 
Impervious area shall mean that part of any parcel of land that has been modified in a manner which results in the reduction of the land's natural ability to absorb and hold rainfall, including but not limited to, any area which has been paved, graveled or compacted, or covered with a structure. The term excludes uncovered areas such as lawns, landscape areas, gardens, farming areas or stormwater pond areas. 
Multifamily residential property shall mean a building in which two (2) or more living units exist. 
Nonresidential property shall mean developed property which is not classified as residential property. 
Receiving water shall mean those creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, sinkholes, and other bodies of water into which surface waters are directed by the stormwater management system.; 
Residential property shall mean any lot or parcel of land developed and designated exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, apartment buildings, and condominiums. 
Site of industrial activity shall mean any area or facility used for manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage as defined under 40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(A)(14) of the regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Stormwater shall mean any stormwater runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management plan shall mean the plan for receiving, treating, handling, and transporting stormwaters and surface waters within the city as adopted by the city commission. 
Stormwater management system shall include all natural and manmade elements used to convey stormwater from the first point of impact with the surface of the earth to a suitable receiving water or location internal or external to the boundaries of the city. The stormwater management system includes all pipes, channels, streams, ditches, wetlands, utility detention/retention basins, ponds, and other stormwater conveyance and treatment facilities. 
Stormwater system shall mean the system of conveyance used for collecting, storing, and transporting from water owned by the city, but not including any facility intended to be used in accordance with applicable laws for collecting and transporting sanitary or other wastewater. 
Undeveloped property shall mean property which is not developed property, as that term is defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 93-25, § 1, 9-7-93)  
Sec. 24.60. - Utility established; utility fees. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the city a stormwater management utility, which shall be responsible for the city's stormwater management system and which shall be part of the combined utility system as defined in section 24.02 of this code. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed a stormwater management utility fee against all developed property in the city, as set forth in section 24.64. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 24.61. - Stormwater utility fund. 
(a)  All stormwater management utility fees collected by the city shall be paid into the stormwater management utility fund and accounted for separately therein. Such fund shall be used for the purpose of paying the cost of operation, monitoring, enforcement, administration and maintenance of the stormwater drainage facilities of the city. To the extent that the stormwater management fees collected are insufficient to operate or maintain stormwater management facilities, such costs may be paid from such city funds as may be determined by the city commission, but the city commission may order the reimbursement of such funds if additional and sufficient fees are thereafter collected. 
(b)  The fees collected shall not be used for general or other governmental or proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management, administration and government thereof. Other than as described above, the fees and charges shall be used for stormwater management purposes to include, but not be limited to, paying the cost of planning, operation, repair, maintenance, improvement, renewal, and replacement of the stormwater management system and monitoring, regulatory enforcement, property acquisition and other costs incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 24.62. - Adjustment of fees. 
(a)  Any utility customer who has paid the stormwater management utility fee and who believes that the fee is in error may, subject to the limitations set forth in this section, submit an adjustment request to the director of public works. 
(b)  Adjustment requests shall made in writing and shall set forth, in detail, the grounds upon which the request is made. A survey prepared by a registered surveyor showing total property area and impervious area shall be provided by the customer if the adjustment request is based upon an alleged error in the impervious area of the property. 
(c)  The director of public works shall review the adjustment request and shall either deny or grant the request in writing within sixty (60) days following receipt of the request. A copy of the decision, including the reasons for the decision, shall be furnished to the customer. 
(d)  The rate adjustment, if granted, shall apply retroactively to the date upon which the erroneous information was applied to the customer's fee but shall not exceed one (1) year prior to the adjustment request. 
(e)  The director of public works shall base his decision on an adjustment request for nonresidential property upon the total impervious area of subject property divided by one thousand eight hundred sixty-five (1,865) square feet in accordance with the provisions of section 24.64(3) of this article. 
(f)  The director of public works, upon discovering an error or oversight in the calculation of a stormwater management utility fee, may initiate an adjustment request. The request shall be made in writing, documenting the reasons for the adjustment. In the event that the adjustment would require an increase in the fee for a customer, the director of public works shall provide the adjustment request to the affected customer not less than thirty (30) days prior to adjusting the fee and shall provide the customer an opportunity within the thirty-day period to furnish one (1) or more reasons why the adjustment should not be made. A customer may request, in writing, a review by the city manager of the director of public work's decision. Such request shall cite specific errors made by the director of public works and the calculation which the customer thinks is correct. The city manager shall review the proposed adjustment request, the request for review, and the director of public work's response to the request for review, and shall render a written decision as soon as is practicable. He may request additional information from the director of public works or from the customer before rendering a decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 24.63. - Customer. 
Any owner or tenant who owns, rents, leases or operates developed property within the city limits shall be considered a stormwater management utility customer. Any applicant who is accepted subject to the conditions specified in this section or any customer as defined by section 24.32(a) shall also be considered a stormwater management utility customer. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 24.64. - Stormwater management utility rates. 
The stormwater management utility rates shall be based upon the revenue requirements for the administration, management, engineering, operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system. For the purposes of these rates, the terms shall have the meanings set forth in section 24.12(c). 
(1)  The following schedule of monthly charges will apply to all residential accounts within the city limits served by the city's stormwater system: 
STORMWATER RATES 
Monthly stormwater rate per ERU (1 ERU equals 1,865 SF of impervious area) 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 	Rate 
	Effective Date 
	1/1/2017 	10/1/2017 	10/1/2018 	10/1/2019 	10/1/2020 
	$8.50 	$10.00 	$10.30 	$10.61 	$10.93 
 
(2)  Residential property fees: The monthly fee for each residential property shall be: 
Property 	ERU per dwelling unit 
Single-family 	1 
Duplex units 	1 
Condominium units 	1 
Apartments 	1 
Mobile homes 	1 
 
(3)  Nonresidential property fees: Nonresidential property shall be charged on the basis of the impervious area of the property in accordance with the following formula: Impervious Area (sq. ft.) divided by one thousand eight hundred sixty-five (1,865) square feet equals Number of ERU's. A minimum value of one (1.0) ERU shall be assigned to each nonresidential property. The impervious area of each nonresidential property shall be as determined by the director of public works. ERU's shall be rounded to the nearest tenth (0.1) of a unit. 
(4)  Undeveloped property: Stormwater management utility fees shall not be levied against undeveloped property. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 10-1-2001; Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 10-20-2008; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 9-20-2010; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 2016-27, § 1, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 24.65. - Collection methods. 
(a)  The stormwater management utility fee shall be billed and collected with the monthly utility bill for those parcels of land utilizing any other city utilities and sent monthly bills under this chapter. All such bills shall be rendered monthly by the finance department and shall become due and payable within twenty (20) days of the date of the bill. Those properties that do not receive monthly utility bills for other utility services under this chapter shall be billed for the stormwater management utility fee by a monthly bill sent to the owner of the property determined from the property tax appraiser's rolls. The city may make collection arrangements with other governmental entities or other utilities for areas that are not served by city utilities other than the stormwater management utility. 
(b)  If a stormwater management utility fee remains unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days after the bill is rendered and mailed, the following shall apply: 
(1)  A five-percent penalty shall be added to the outstanding balance of each month's delinquent bill. 
(2)  The penalty percentage shall only be applied to the cumulative outstanding bill each month, but shall not be compounded as to penalties rendered on the preceding months. 
(3)  Upon lien being filed with the clerk of the circuit court of the county as provided below, there shall be no more penalties levied upon the amount for which the lien is claimed after the same has been recorded. Upon recordation occurring, the amount of the lien shall draw legal interest as set by the city manager from the date it has been recorded. 
(c)  If the amount of the stormwater management utility fee shall not be paid within twenty (20) days from the rendition of the bill, the city may discontinue all city utility services being furnished to the premises and may proceed to recover the amount of such stormwater management utility charge in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable. Prior to terminating any city utility services pursuant to this provision, the city shall provide five (5) days' written notice of the intent to terminate, which shall be mailed or hand delivered to the customer advising that the account is delinquent and of the intent to terminate city utility services. The notice shall state the amount past due, including any penalty, and shall advise the customer that the service will be terminated not less than five (5) days after such notice is rendered unless the customer, within such time, pays such amount, agrees with the director of public works to terms for the payment of the delinquent charges and charges for future service, or appeals the decision to terminate the service to the city manager. An appeal to the city manager shall be commenced by the customer's filing written request with the director of public works within five (5) days of the date the notice was rendered. No agreement for payment of delinquent charges shall operate to forgive or discharge such delinquency until the charges are paid in full and a breach of such agreement shall give the city the right to terminate service immediately without further notice to the customer. 
(d)  Charges for stormwater management utility fees shall be a lien upon the premises. Whenever a bill for stormwater utility fees remains unpaid twenty (20) days after it has been rendered, the city clerk may file with the clerk of the circuit court of the county a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for the stormwater management utility for the period covered by the bill. If the consumer of stormwater management utility services whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the city clerk has notice of this, then notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address is known to the clerk, whenever such bills remain unpaid for a period of twenty (20) days after having been rendered. The failure of the city clerk to record such lien claim or to provide notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid stormwater management utility bills. 
(e)  At any time after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the statement of lien claim, the city may proceed to foreclose such lien or liens in the same manner as provided for the foreclosure of a mortgage by the laws of the state. 
(f)  All liens for stormwater utility management fees are hereby imposed as liens against the real property upon which such services are rendered and, until fully paid and discharged, shall remain liens superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved, including liens of mortgagees, mechanic's liens and all other liens of whatever type or nature and shall be of equal dignity to the liens of ad valorem taxes. 
(g)  Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expenses, loss, penalty or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, including a reasonable attorney's fee for defending or prosecuting any action with regard to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 2011-14, §§ 5, 6, 11-7-2011)  
Sec. 24.66. - Flood liability. 
Floods from stormwater may occur which exceed the capacity of the stormwater system constructed, operated, or maintained by funds made available under this article. This article shall not be construed or interpreted to mean that property subject to the fees and charges established herein will always, or at any time, be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage, or that stormwater systems capable of handling all stormwater events can be cost effectively constructed, operated, or maintained. Nor shall this article create any liability on the part of, or cause of action against, the city or any official employee thereof, from any flood damage that may result from such storms or the runoff thereof. Nor does this article purport to reduce the need or the necessity for obtaining flood insurance by individual property owners. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 24.67. - Annual review. 
The city commission shall review the stormwater management utility rates annually. 
(Ord. No. 91-24, § 1, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 24.68. - Industrial activity. 
(a)  Any discharge into the stormwater system in violation of any federal, state, water management district, county, municipal or other law, rule, regulation or permit is prohibited. 
(b)  By adoption of industrial activity stormwater regulations or by issuance of industrial activity stormwater permits, or both, the city manager or his/her designee may impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of stormwater (including, without limitation, the designation of maximum levels of pollutants) discharged into the stormwater system from sites of industrial activity. Any promulgation of such regulations and issuance of permits by the city manager or his/her designee shall be in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city manager or his/her designee may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(d)  Any person who holds a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit shall provide a copy of such permit to the city manager or his/her designee no later than the later of sixty (60) calendar days after the effective date of this section [September 7, 1993] or sixty (60) calendar days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 93-25, § 2, 9-7-93)  
Sec. 24.69. - Illicit discharges. 
(a)  Except as set forth under subsection (c) or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(b)  Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders of permits, is prohibited. 
(c)  Unless the city manager or his/her designee determines that it is not properly managed or otherwise is not acceptable, the following discharges are exempt from the general prohibition set forth under subsection (a): Flows from firefighting, water line flushing and other contributions from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, direct infiltration to the stormwater system, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming pool contributions. 
(d)  No person may maintain, use or establish any direct or indirect connection to the stormwater system that results in any discharge in violation of this article. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit, or other authorization, or whether permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time any connection was made. 
(e)  The city manager or his/her designee may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or any connection to the stormwater system, determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-25, § 3, 9-7-93)  
Sec. 24.70. - Spills and dumping. 
(a)  Except as set forth under section 24.69(c) or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(b)  Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste materials, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(c)  As soon as any person has knowledge of any discharge to the stormwater system in violation of this article, such person shall immediately notify the city manager or his/her designee, and if such person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then such person shall also take immediate action to ensure the containment and cleanup of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in writing to the city manager or his/her designee within three (3) calendar days. 
(d)  The city manager or his/her designee may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or connection to the stormwater system, determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be in violation of any connection to the stormwater system, determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-25, § 4, 9-7-93)  
Sec. 24.71. - Inspections and monitoring. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, or whenever an authorized official has reasonable cause to believe there exists any condition constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this section, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, any authorized official may enter any property, building or facility at any reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty related to enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulations or permits issued hereunder; provided that if such property, building or facility is occupied, such authorized official shall first present proper credentials and request permission to enter, and if such property, building or facility is unoccupied, such authorized official shall make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, building or facility, and shall request permission to enter. Any request for permission to enter made hereunder shall state that the owner or person in control has the right to refuse entry, and that in such event that entry is refused, the authorized official may enter to make inspection only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the owner or person in control refuses permission to enter after such request has been made, the authorized official is hereby authorized to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry. Routine or area-wide inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including, but not limited to, random sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, nonstormwater discharges, or similar factors. 
(b)  Any authorized official may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of discharges to the stormwater system. During any inspections made to enforce the provisions of this article, or regulations or permits issued hereunder, any authorized official may take any samples deemed necessary. 
(c)  The city manager or his/her designee may require any person engaging in any activity or owning any property, building or facility (including, but not limited to, a site of industrial activity) to undertake such reasonable monitoring of any discharge(s) to the stormwater system and to furnish periodic reports. 
(Ord. No. 93-25, § 5, 9-7-93)  
Sec. 24.72. - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this article or any permit or approval granted or authorized hereunder shall constitute a violation of this article. Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-25, § 6, 9-7-93)  
Sec. 24.73. - Civil remedies. 
In addition to the penalties provided in section 24.72, the city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding, including suit for the injunctive relief, in order to prevent or abate violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-25, § 7, 9-7-93)  
Secs. 24.74.—24.100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-28, § 1, adopted November 15, 1999, pertained to industrial pretreatment of wastewater and was designated as Art. VIII, sections 1—15. In order to conform to the numerical system established in this Code, the editor has redesignated sections 1—15 as divs. 1—15. See the history notes following each section and the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume for the complete derivation of this article. Material added by the editor for clarity was included in brackets [ ]. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 24.101. - Purpose and policy. 
(1)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater facility for the City of Safety Harbor (the city) and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the Pretreatment Requirements for Existing and New Sources of Pollution (Florida Administrative Code FAC 62-625). The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater facility that will interfere with its operation; 
(b)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater facility that will pass through the wastewater facility, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(c)  To protect both wastewater facility and personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(d)  To maximize, promote and continuously improve opportunities to beneficially use reclaimed water and residuals. To protect these resources for future uses, which may not yet be identified, for the maximum beneficial use by the community; 
(e)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the wastewater facility; and 
(f)  To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which wastewater facility is subject. 
(2)  This article shall apply to all users of the city's wastewater facilities. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits or general permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(3)  Any pretreatment program under this chapter shall be based upon the following legal authority and the procedures set forth in this article. These authorities and procedures shall at all times be fully and effectively exercised and implemented. 
(4)  Wastewater facility(ies) shall operate pursuant to legal authority enforceable in federal, state or local courts, which authorizes or enables the wastewater facility to apply and to enforce the requirements of sections 307(b) and (c), and 402(b)(8) of the Act, and any regulations implementing those sections. Such authority may be contained in a statute, ordinance, or series of contracts or joint powers agreements which the wastewater facility is authorized to enact, enter into or implement, and which are authorized by state law. At a minimum, this legal authority shall enable the wastewater facility to: 
(a)  Deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the wastewater facility by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the city to violate its NPDES permit; 
(b)  Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial users; 
(c)  Control through permit, order, or similar means, the contribution to the wastewater facility by each industrial user, to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 1.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.102. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works director (director), or his appointee, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to the pretreatment coordinator (coordinator) or other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 1.2), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.103. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
• BMP - Best Management Practice 
• BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report 
• BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand (5 Day Carbonaceous) 
• CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
• CIU - Categorical Industrial User 
• COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand 
• EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
• FAC - Florida Administrative Code 
• FDEP - Florida Department of Environmental Protection 
• gpd - gallons per day 
• IU - Industrial User 
• mg/l-milligrams per liter 
• MIU - Minor Industrial User 
• NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
• NSCIU - Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User 
• POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
• RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
• SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
• SIU - Significant Industrial User 
• SNC - Significant Non-Compliance 
• TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
• U.S.C. - United States Code 
• WRF - Water Reclamation Facility 
• WWF - Wastewater Facility 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 1.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.104. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  Responsible corporate officer to include the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit [or general permit {optional}] requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastewater streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Best management practices or BMPs means: 
(1)  The schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in subsections 62-625.400(1)(a); and 
(2)  FAC BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, industrial sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Categorical industrial user. An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under Rule 62-625.410, FAC, including 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, as of July 1, 2009, hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(1)  Non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU): The control authority may determine that an IU subject to categorical pretreatment standards under § 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N is a NSCIU rather than a SIU on a finding that the IU never discharges more than one hundred (100) gpd of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard). 
(2)  Middle tier category of CIU: Considered SIU yet are eligible for reductions in reporting and control authority monitoring and inspections. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
City. The City of Safety Harbor. [Note: elected city commissioners act on behalf of the citizens of the City of Safety Harbor]. 
Coordinator. The person designated by the city to oversee permitting and compliance with the city's pretreatment ordinance. 
Control authority. The public utility that administers a pretreatment program that has been approved by the department in accordance with the requirements of Rule 62-625.510, FAC. For purposes of this chapter, the control authority is the City of Safety Harbor's Public Works Department. 
Daily maximum. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
Department or FDEP. The Florida Department of Environmental Protection or FDEP or other authority delegated by the EPA to regulate wastewater treatment programs under 62-625 FAC, as may be amended or modified. 
Director. The individual charged with directing the industrial pretreatment program. For purposes of this chapter, the director is the City of Safety Harbor's Public Works Department. 
Duly authorized representative. An individual or position authorized to act on behalf of another by the following qualifications: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by the authorized representative of the user; 
(2)  The written authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, (such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility) or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(3)  The written authorization is current. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph (3) must have been submitted to the director. 
(4)  The written authorization is submitted to the director. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge that is not a new source. 
Grab sample. An individual, discrete sample collected at a specific time. A grab sample includes all sub samples or aliquots (e.g. individual containers for specific analytes or analyte groups), sample fractions (e.g. total and filtered samples), and all applicable field quality control samples (e.g. field sample duplicates or split samples) collected at the same locations within a time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the wastewater facility from any non-domestic source. 
Instantaneous limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the wastewater facility, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's wastewater NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Local limit. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b), and 62-625.500 and in this chapter, to protect the wastewater facility against pass through, interference, physical hazards, and to allow for compliance of the wastewater facility discharge permit and beneficial use of reclaimed water and residuals. 
Maximum allowable industrial loading. The total mass of a pollutant that all industrial users and other controlled sources may discharge without causing pass through or interference. 
Method detection limit or "MDL". The estimate of the minimum amount of a substance that an analyte process can reliably detect. A mdl is analyte- and matrix-specific and is laboratory dependent. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
Middle tier categorical industrial user. A significant industrial user that based on flow characteristics and compliance record may be designated as such by the control authority; if such user is eligible for reduced monitoring and reporting. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection 24.104(1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
i.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
ii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU). Industrial user that discharges one hundred (100) gallons per day (gpd) or less of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The industrial user, prior to the control authority's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(2)  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in subsection 62-625.600(17) FAC, together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
(3)  The industrial user never discharges any untreated categorical process wastewater. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the wastewater facility. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as specified in section 24.121 of the City Code, as may be amended. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city and includes the northeast water reclamation facility. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a water reclamation facility. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  Categorical industrial users; except when the control authority has determined that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) rather than a significant industrial user; and 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the wastewater facility (excluding domestic wastewater, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the water reclamation facility; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the cit y on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater facilities' operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Section 24.104(2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater facilities' operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in FAC 62-625.500(3)(e), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 24.121 of this article. 
Slug discharge. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the wastewater facilities' regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater facility (WWF). Any facility which discharges wastes into waters of the state or which can reasonably be expected to be a source of water pollution and includes any or all of the following: the collection and transmission system, the water reclamation facility, the reuse or disposal system, and the residuals management facility. 
Wastewater reclamation facility (WRF). That portion of the WWF which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 1.4), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2002-19, § 1, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 1, 12-2-2013)  
Secs. 24.105—24.120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 24.121. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the WWF any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the WWF whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the WWF the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the WWF, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60) degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the WWF or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the WWF resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than three-eighths ( 3/8 ) of an inch or ninety-five-one-hundredths of a centimeter (0.95 cm) in any dimension; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the WWF; 
(5)  Wastewater having an average temperature greater than one hundred twenty-two (122) degrees F (fifty (50) degrees C), at the point of connection with the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the WWF in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the coordinator in accordance with section 24.134 of this article; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the WRF's effluent, thereby violating the city's wastewater NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, excluding stormwater that has been in contact with an approved industrial process, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the coordinator; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the coordinator in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater, alone or in conjunction with other sources, causing the WWF effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the WWF; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in excess of the established local limit, or in quantities which can impede or impair flow. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the WWF. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 2.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2002-19, § 2, 10-7-2002; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 2, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.122. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(1)  The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated into this article. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with Chapter 62-625.410(4) FAC. 
(b)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the coordinator may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users Chapter 62-625.410(4) FAC. 
(c)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in Chapter 62-625.410(6) FAC. Only those industrial subcategories listed in Chapters 62-625.880(1) FAC will be considered eligible for the combined wastestream formula. 
(d)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in Chapter 62-625.700 FAC, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. The user requesting variance must file a formal request to the city, along with the permit application for a wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with the procedures in division 5, sections 24.151—24.158 of the article. 
(e)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with Chapter 62-625.820 FAC, with approval from the city. 
(2)  All industrial user files must contain documentation of how equivalent limits were determined. 
(3)  Categorical industrial user (CIU) designations and criteria. These designations and the reduction of permitting, sampling and reporting shall be at the discretion of the control authority. Regardless of designation, all CIU shall be tracked and the list of CIU shall be submitted to FDEP as part of the annual report in accordance with [Section] 62-625.600(8) [FAC]. 
(a)  To qualify as a non-significant categorical industrial user (NSCIU) the user must demonstrate that: 
1.  It has never discharged one hundred (100) gpd or more of total categorical wastewater discharged (no averaging); 
2.  It has consistently complied with all applicable pretreatment standards; and 
3.  It has never discharged any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(b)  To qualify as a middle tier categorical industrial user designation, the user must demonstrate that: 
1.  Discharge does not exceed 0.01 percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of the WWF or five thousand (5,000) gallons per day whichever is smallest; 
2.  Discharge does not exceed 0.01 percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of the WWF; 
3.  Discharge does not exceed the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant for which approved local limits were developed; 
4.  CIU has not been in significant non-compliance any time in the past two (2) years; and 
5.  Reduced reporting requirements would still result in data that is representative of the conditions occurring at the facility and in the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 2.2), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 2, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.123. - State pretreatment standards. 
(1)  Chapter 62-625.410 FAC identifies pretreatment standards (by reference) for industries, and is applicable in the determination of categorical industrial discharges within the city's jurisdiction. 
(2)  The industrial pretreatment program shall develop and implement procedures to ensure compliance, and at a minimum enable the program to: 
(3)  Identify and locate all possible industrial users which might be subject to the pretreatment program; 
(a)  Identify the character and volume of pollutants contributed to the WWF by the industrial users identified under subsection (1) above; 
(b)  Notify industrial users identified under subsection (1) above of applicable pretreatment standards and any applicable requirements under F.S. Ch. 403, Parts I and IV, regarding disposal of sludge. Within thirty (30) days of approval of a list of significant industrial users, in accordance with subsection 24.141(d) and notify each significant industrial user of its status as such and of all requirements applicable to it as a result of such status; 
(c)  Receive and analyze self-monitoring reports and other notices submitted by industrial users in accordance with the self-monitoring requirements in Rule 62-625.600 FAC; and 
(d)  Randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing non-compliance with pretreatment standards. Inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year, except as specified in subparagraphs 1. through 3. below. 
1.  Where the control authority has authorized a categorical industrial user to waive sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with paragraph 62-625.600(4)(b), FAC, the control authority must sample for the waived pollutant(s) at least once during the term of the categorical industrial user's control mechanism. In the event that the control authority subsequently determines that a waived pollutant is present or is expected to be present in the industrial user's wastewater based on changes that occur in the user's operations, the control authority must immediately begin at least annual inspection and effluent monitoring of the user's discharge; 
2.  Where the control authority has determined that an industrial user meets the criteria for classification as a non-significant categorical industrial user, the control authority must evaluate, at least once per year, whether an industrial user continues to meet the criteria in paragraph 62-625.200(25)(c), FAC; or 
3.  In the case of industrial users subject to reduced reporting requirements under paragraph 62-625.600(4)(d), FAC, the control authority must randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct inspections at least once every two (3) years. If the industrial user no longer meets the conditions for reduced reporting in paragraph 62-625.600(4)(d), FAC, the control authority must immediately begin sampling and inspecting the industrial user at least once a year; 
(e)  Evaluate significant industrial users plan to control slug discharges as set forth in section 24-133. 
(f)  Investigate instances of non-compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements, as indicated in the reports and notices required under Rule 62-625.600, FAC, or indicated by analysis, inspection, and surveillance activities described in subparagraph (d) above. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 2.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 2, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.124. - Local limits. 
Local limits shall be established, using standard procedures, calculations and methods acceptable to FDEP, to protect against pass through and interference. A "Plan of Study" must be submitted to the department prior to beginning sampling necessary to determine local limits. No industrial user shall discharge process wastewater, individual regulated wastestreams, unregulated wastestreams, or dilute wastestreams in excess of the concentrations set forth by the director, or his/her designee. Local limits shall be included as permit conditions and attached to each significant industrial user (SIU) permit issued. 
The established local limits are subject to change and shall be modified as needed based on regulatory requirements and standards, WWF operation, performance and processes, the industrial user base, potable water quality and domestic wastewater characteristics. Modifications to the established local limits must be reviewed and approved by FDEP prior to implementation. Implementation of the modified limits shall be accomplished through the development and issuance of an addendum to each SIU permit. 
The established local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the WWF. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The coordinator may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration based limitations set forth by the director, or his/her designee. 
The pretreatment program may develop best management practices (BMPs). BMPs may be implemented by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits these BMP's shall be considered local limits and pretreatment standards pursuant to section 24.121 and shall be enforced as such. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 2.4), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 2, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.125. - The city's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, or by the director, individual wastewater discharge permits, or general permits, more stringent standards or requirements for discharges to the WWF consistent with the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 2.5), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 2, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.126. - Dilution. 
Dilution is hereby prohibited as substitute for treatment, except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The coordinator may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 2.6), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 2, 12-2-2013)  
Secs. 24.127—24.130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 24.131. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 24.121 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State of Florida's Chapter 62-625 FAC, or the coordinator, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans and specifications describing such facilities, along with operating procedures shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Florida, submitted to the coordinator for review, and shall be acceptable to the coordinator before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 3.1), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.132. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the coordinator may require users, at their expense, to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the WWF and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The coordinator may require any person discharging into the WWF to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user and at the user's expense when, in the opinion of the coordinator, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of fats, grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the coordinator shall comply with the city's fats, oil and grease management ordinance and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired, as determined by the city's grease management ordinance by the user at its expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter, by the user at its expense. 
(e)  All expenses for construction, operation, maintenance, inspection, calibration and certification of pretreatment measures required herein are incumbent upon the user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 3.2), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 3, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.133. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
The coordinator shall evaluate at least once every two (2) years whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. New significant industrial users must be evaluated within one (1) year of being designated a significant industrial user. The results of such evaluations shall be made available to the control authority upon request. Significant industrial users are required to notify the control authority immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. If the control authority decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority and the WWF of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under section 24.121, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five (5) days, as required by section 24.166 of this article; and 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 3.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 3, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.134. - Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Waste from liquid waste haulers such as: chemical toilets, domestic septic tanks and grease interceptors may be introduced into the WWF only at locations designated by the coordinator, and at such times as are established by the coordinator. Such waste shall not violate division 2, sections 24.121 through 24.126 of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The coordinator may require waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  No hauled industrial wastewater will be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 3.4), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 3, 12-2-2013)  
Secs. 24.135—24.140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 
 
Sec. 24.141. - Permit application. 
Wastewater discharge permit applications: Any new or existing business, or industry within the city whom must apply for a license to do business must also make application for wastewater discharge into the city's sanitary sewer system under the guidelines below: 
(a)  Industrial user survey: When requested by the coordinator any new or existing industrial user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater by completing an industrial user survey. The coordinator may prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(b)  Significant industrial user permits: Any new or existing business meeting the definition of an SIU as defined in this article on or after the effective date of this article is considered an SIU and is required to obtain an SIU permit. 
(c)  Septic tank wastes: Any hauler whom proposes to discharge septic tank waste must fill out and submit to the coordinator the appropriate hauled domestic waste permit application. Liquid waste haulers may be regulated by either an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit. Each load of liquid waste to be disposed of shall be individually manifested which describes the origin, type, stabilization method, and volume of wastes. 
(d)  Significant industrial users. The control authority shall prepare and maintain a list of its industrial users meeting the criteria in the definition as stated [in section] 24.104. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, changed the title of § 24.141 from "Permitting program" to "Permit application."  
Sec. 24.142. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the coordinator, any user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) calendar days of the request. The coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.2), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.143. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the WWF without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the coordinator, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 24.146 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The coordinator may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the permittee to the sanctions set out in divisions 10 through 12 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.144. - Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) calendar days after said date, apply to the coordinator for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 24.146 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the WWF to continue after one-hundred-eighty (180) calendar days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.4), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.145. - Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the WWF must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for the permit, in accordance with section 24.146 of this article, must be filed at least forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.5), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.146. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The coordinator may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(a)  All information required by subsection 24.161(b) of this article; 
(b)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the WWF; 
(c)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(d)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(e)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(f)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(g)  Time, duration and variability of discharges; 
(h)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of priority pollutants, as well as any other regulated pollutants in the discharge from the facility. The sample(s) shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with the procedures set out in section 24.170 of this article. Sampling must be performed in accordance with the procedures set out in section 24.171 of this article. 
(i)  List of hazardous materials stored, manufactured, or discharged at the premises; and 
(j)  Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge governed by division 5 of this chapter. 
(k)  Any request to be covered by a general permit under division 5 of this chapter; and 
(l)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the coordinator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision, completion and resubmittal within thirty (30) calendar days, or other deadline as specified by the coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.6), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.147. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user, as defined in 24.104, and contain the following certification statement: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.7), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.148. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) working days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the coordinator will determine whether or not to issue a permit. The coordinator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 4.8), 11-15-99)  
Secs. 24.149, 24.150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT AND GENERAL PERMIT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, changed the title of Div. 5 from "Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process" to "Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit and General Permit." 
 
Sec. 24.151. - Wastewater discharge permit types. 
(a)  Individual— Issued to a SIU, except in the instance that a general permit criteria is qualified for, as listed in subsection (b) below and issued. The director may not control an SIU through a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the combined wastestream formula of FAC 62-625.410(6) or net/gross calculations of FAC 62-625.820. 
(b)  General permits— The option to issue general permits in lieu of individual permits is authorized under [FAC] 62-625.500(2)(a)7. 
(1)  The director may use general permits to control SIU discharges to the WWF if the following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must: 
a.  Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations; 
b.  Discharge the same types of wastes; 
c.  Require the same effluent limitations; 
d.  Require the same or similar monitoring; and 
e.  In the opinion of the director, are more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a written request for coverage that identifies its contact information, production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance with section 62-625.600(4)(b) FAC for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present, nor expected to be present, in the discharge, and any other information the WWF deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present, nor expected to be present, in the discharge is not effective in the general permit until after the director has provided written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted. 
(3)  The coordinator will retain a copy of the general permit, documentation to support the WWF's determination that a specific SIU meets the criteria as listed in subsection 24.151(b)1 of this chapter. 
(4)  The control authority shall maintain a copy of the user's written request for coverage for three (3) years after the expiration of the general permit. 
(5)  The director may not control a SIU through a general permit where the facility is subject to production based categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the combined wastestream formula of FAC 62-625.410(6) or net/gross calculations of FAC 62-625.820. 
(Ord. No. 2013-26, § 5, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.152. - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the coordinator. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate specific dates upon which it becomes effective and will expire. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 5, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 5, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.151 as § 24.152.  
Sec. 24.153. - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the coordinator to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the WWF's effluent, protect worker health and safety, protect future beneficial uses of resources such as reclaimed water and bio-solids and other residuals, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the WWF, and comply with state and federal permits regulating the WWF. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits shall contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
(2)  A statement that the permit is nontransferable in accordance with section 24.157 of this article, and includes provisions that the new owner or operator apply for a new wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  A requirement that the permittee file a notice of termination when terminating facility operations, or selling or otherwise transferring ownership of the facility to a new owner or operator; 
(4)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable general pretreatment standards set forth in this chapter, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(5)  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants or best management practices to be monitored, sampling location(s), sampling frequency, and sample type based on general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, federal, state, and local law; 
(6)  The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with paragraph 62-625.600(4)(b), FAC, or a specific waived pollutant in the case of an individual control mechanism; 
(7)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; 
(8)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the coordinator to be necessary; and 
(9)  Any grant of the monitoring waiver and/or reduction of monitoring or reporting by the director, as listed in subsection 24.151(b)(4) must be included as a condition in the user's permit. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits or general permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum volume, average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time(s) of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the WWF; 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the WWF; 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection, flow monitoring and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(7)  Requirements for the submittal of copies of monitoring logs and records; 
(8)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
(9)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the coordinator to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.2), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 5, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 5, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.152 as § 24.153.  
Sec. 24.154. - Wastewater discharge permit waivers and reduced reporting criteria. 
(1)  The director may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to waive sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user demonstrates the following through sampling and other technical factors: 
(a)  The pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or the pollutant is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user; and 
(b)  The pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
(2)  This authorization of the monitoring waiver is subject to the following conditions and does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as specified in the categorical pretreatment standard: 
(a)  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the permit or other equivalent individual control mechanism, but in no case longer than five (5) years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent control mechanism; 
(b)  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one (1) sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. Non-detectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the department approved method from Rule 62-4.246, FAC, with the lowest method detection limit for that pollutant was used in the analysis; 
(c)  The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with subsection 24.147; 
(d)  The authorization must be included as a condition in the industrial user's control mechanism. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the control authority for three (3) years after expiration of the waiver. 
(e)  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the industrial user's control mechanism by the control authority, the industrial user must certify each report with the following statement 62.625.600(4)(c)5: "Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR [specify applicable national pretreatment standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under paragraph 62-625.600(4)(a), FAC."; and 
(f)  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present, or is expected to be present, based on changes that occur in the industrial user's operations, the industrial user must immediately notify the control authority and comply with the monitoring requirements of paragraph (4)(a) above or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the control authority. 
(3)  Waiver administration: Where the control authority has authorized a categorical industrial user to waive sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with paragraph 62-625.600(4)(b), FAC, the control authority must sample for the waived pollutant(s) at least once during the term of the categorical industrial user's control mechanism. In the event that the control authority subsequently determines that a waived pollutant is present or is expected to be present in the industrial user's wastewater based on changes that occur in the user's operations, the control authority must immediately begin at least annual inspection and effluent monitoring of the user's discharge. 
(4)  Reduced reporting for categorical industrial user: 
(a)  Non-significant categorical industrial user: Where the control authority has determined that an industrial user meets the criteria for classification as a non-significant categorical industrial user, the control authority may decide not to permit the designated NSCIU. The NSCIU shall be evaluated, at least once per year, whether an industrial user continues to meet the criteria in section 24.104 definitions - significant industrial user (3) and section 62-625.200(25)(c), FAC. 
(b)  NSCIU compliance reporting requirements: Facilities shall report annually and submit an annual certification. An industrial user determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user in accordance with paragraph 62-625.200(25)(c) FAC, must annually submit the following certification statement, signed in accordance with the signatory requirements of authorized representative of the user as defined in the definition section 24.147. The certification must accompany any alternative report required by the control authority. 
(c)  Middle tier categorical industrial user: The control authority may reduce the reporting requirement to no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard(s) or by the director, where the industrial user meets all of the following conditions: 
1.  The industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not: 
i.  Exceed 0.01 percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of the WRF, or five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches; 
ii.  Exceed 0.01 percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of the WRF; and 
iii.  Exceed 0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed for a WWF in accordance with subsection 62-625.400(3), FAC. 
2.  The industrial user has not been in significant non-compliance in the past two (2) years; and 
3.  The industrial user does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(d)  Control authority middle tier CIU compliance requirements: At the director's discretion, the control authority's obligation to inspect and sample middle tier CIU's may be reduced to not less than once every two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2013-26, § 5, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.155. - Wastewater discharge permit appeals. 
The coordinator shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the coordinator to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within ten (10) working days of notice of its issuance. 
(a)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(b)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the permit. 
(c)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(d)  If the coordinator fails to act within ten (10) working days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit, or not to modify a permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(e)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Circuit Court of Pinellas County. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.153 as § 24.155.  
Sec. 24.156. - Wastewater discharge permit modification. 
The coordinator may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in either the POTW or its federal and/or state operating permits that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to Chapter 62-625.700 FAC; 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.4), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.154 as § 24.156.  
Sec. 24.157. - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
A wastewater discharge permit may NOT be transferred to a new owner or operator of a previously permitted facility. The permit application process must be repeated by the new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.5), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.155 as § 24.157.  
Sec. 24.158. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The coordinator may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to notify the coordinator of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(b)  Failure to provide prior notification to the coordinator of changed conditions pursuant to section 24.165 of this article; 
(c)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(d)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Refusing to allow the coordinator timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(g)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(h)  Failure to pay fines; 
(i)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(j)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(k)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(l)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; 
(m)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article; or 
(n)  Failure to timely file self-monitoring reports. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user for a specific facility and/or discharge are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user for that facility. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.6), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.156 as § 24.158.  
Sec. 24.159. - Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 24.146 of this article, a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.7), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 6, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.157 as § 24.159.  
Sec. 24.160. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  The City of Safety Harbor has entered into a multijurisdictional agreement with the City of Clearwater, which contributes wastewater to the city's northeast water reclamation facility. All industrial users in Safety Harbor which contribute wastewater to the City of Safety Harbor's water pollution control facilities are subjected to the provisions of this article under the agreement. 
(b)  The multijurisdictional agreement contains the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for Safety Harbor to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 24.124 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for Safety Harbor to annually update and submit a revised industrial user inventory; 
(3)  A provision specifying that the city reserves the right for permit issuance, inspection and sampling and enforcement; 
(4)  A requirement for Safety Harbor to provide the coordinator with access to all information that Safety Harbor obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of Safety Harbor's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the city's collection system; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring Safety Harbor's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the coordinator access to the facilities of users located within Safety Harbor's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the coordinator; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the multijurisdictional agreement. The city reserves the right to take any necessary legal action to enforce the terms and standards of the city's pretreatment ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 5.8), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 7, 12-2-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-26, § 7, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, renumbered former § 24.158 as § 24.160.  
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 24.161. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision made upon on a category determination request under Chapter 62-625.410(2)(d) FAC, whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the WWF shall submit to the coordinator a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the coordinator a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. New sources shall include in this report information on the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards. New sources shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow (daily and maximum) and concentration or mass of pollutants to be discharged. 
(1)  The industrial user may submit a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
(2)  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling; methods of analysis; and test results for each component and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the WWF. 
(b)  Industrial users shall submit the pertinent information as set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications (SIC code and/or NAICS code) of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the WWF from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the WWF from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in Chapter 62-625.410(6) FAC. 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
i.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources. 
ii.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
iii.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
iv.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 24.170 of this article. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the coordinator or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
v.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 24.171 of this article. 
(6)  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this division must meet the requirements set out in section 24.162 of this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 24.147 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 8, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.162. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 24.161(b)(7) of this article: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(b)  No increment referred to above shall exceed six (6) months; 
(c)  The user shall submit a progress report to the coordinator no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(d)  In no event shall more than six (6) months elapse between such progress reports to the coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.2), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.163. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the WWF, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the coordinator a report containing the information described in subsections 24.161(b)(4)—(6) of this article. 
(a)  For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 62-625.410(4) FAC, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. 
(b)  For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 24.147 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 8, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.164. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users (SIUs) shall at a minimum submit biannually a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. SIUs with best management practices (BMPs) in lieu of numerical limits are required to submit, at a minimum, bi-annual reports. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 24.147 of this article. 
(b)  Middle tier CIUs as designated by the coordinator may be excluded from the bi-annual reporting requirement when granted by the control authority reduced submission of self-monitoring reports once per year. 
(c)  All reports submitted at reduced frequency must be representative of the conditions occurring during the entire reporting period consistent with [section] 24.161. 
(d)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(e)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this division monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the coordinator, using the procedures prescribed in section 24.171 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.4), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 8, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.165. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the coordinator of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) calendar days before the change. 
(a)  The coordinator may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 24.146 of this article. 
(b)  The coordinator, at his discretion, may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 24.148 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 24.154 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(c)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to; 
1.  Flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater; or 
2.  The discharge of any previously unreported pollutant(s). 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.5), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.166. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the WWF, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the coordinator of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the coordinator, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.6), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 8, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.167. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All nondomestic users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide timely and appropriate reports to the coordinator in the format and frequency that the coordinator may require. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.7), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.168. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. 
(a)  The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis within seven (7) days of notifying the coordinator and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the coordinator within fifteen (15) days of the collection of the repeat sample. 
(b)  The coordinator may, at his sole discretion, direct sampling and reporting at different frequencies with alternate reporting periods as may be necessary to protect and maintain the WWF effluent quality. 
(c)  The user is not required to resample if the coordinator monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the coordinator samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.8), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 8, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.169. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
Discharge of hazardous waste shall NOT be allowed. Any hazardous waste that is accidentally discharged shall be reported immediately per section 24.166 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.9), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.170. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in Chapter 62-160 FAC and Chapter 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If either of the above techniques does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.10), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.171. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(c)  Sample taking and analyses shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible in enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions; DEP-SOP-001/01 or its successors shall be applied procedures for all samples. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.11), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 8, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.172. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.12), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.173. - Record keeping. 
(a)  Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements and documentation associated with best management practices established under section 24.124. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years beyond the expiration date of the permit for which the records were created. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the coordinator. 
(b)  All sampling and analysis activities shall be subject to the recordkeeping requirements specified in Chapter 62-160 FAC. 
(c)  The control authority must retain documentation to support the control authority's determination that a specific industrial user qualifies for reduced reporting requirements under paragraph 24.154(d), above, for a period of three (3) years after the expiration of the term of the permit or control mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 6.13), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 8, 12-2-2013)  
Secs. 24.174—24.176. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
Sec. 24.177. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
The coordinator shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the coordinator ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(a)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the coordinator will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(b)  The coordinator shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(c)  The coordinator may require the user to install, at its expense, monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated by a certified technician as often as the manufacturer of the equipment recommends to ensure their accuracy, or upon the coordinator's direction. 
(d)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the coordinator and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(e)  Delays, which the coordinator considers unreasonable, in allowing the coordinator access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 7.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 9, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.178. - Search warrants. 
If the coordinator has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the coordinator may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court of Pinellas County. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 7.2), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.179. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 
 
[Sec. 24.180. - Availability; restrictions.] 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the coordinator's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the coordinator, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. 
(a)  Formal request deadline: Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data; 
(b)  Protection of confidential information: When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report; 
(c)  Disclosure of wastewater discharge characteristics: Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, § 8), 11-15-99)  
DIVISION 9. - SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANT USERS 
 
[Sec. 24-181. - Newspaper publication.] 
The coordinator shall comply with the public participation requirements of F.S. Ch. 120, in enforcement of pretreatment standards. In addition, these procedures shall include provision for at least annual public notification of industrial users who were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous twelve (12) months. Public notification shall include being published in a newspaper(s) of general circulation within the jurisdiction served by the WWF that meets the requirements of F.S. §§ 50.011 and 50.013, for the purpose of this provision. An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude), a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits; 
(b)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOC, TSS, total oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(c)  Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of WWF personnel or the general public; 
(d)  Any discharge that has resulted in the control authority's exercise of its emergency authority under sections 24.190 and/or 24.192 to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(h)  Any other violation or group of violations including a violation of best management practices, which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, § 9), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 10, 12-2-2013)  
Secs. 24.182—24.185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 24.186. - Notification of violation. 
When the coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the coordinator may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within fourteen (14) calendar days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this division shall limit the authority of the coordinator to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.1), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.187. - Consent orders. 
The coordinator may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 24.189 and 24.190 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.2), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.188. - Show cause hearing. 
The coordinator may order a user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the coordinator and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(a)  Notice shall be formally served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fourteen (14) calendars days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. 
(b)  A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.3), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.189. - Compliance orders. 
When the coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the coordinator may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. 
(a)  Compliance orders shall include specific action(s) to be taken by the user, a compliance reporting requirement and a milestone schedule for completion of compliance activities and reporting. 
(b)  Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional selfmonitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. 
(c)  A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
(d)  If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. 
(e)  Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.4), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.190. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the coordinator may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(a)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(b)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.5), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.191. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the coordinator may fine such user in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of eighteen (18) percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of eighteen (18) percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the coordinator to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within fourteen (14) calendar days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the coordinator may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The coordinator may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.6), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.192. - Emergency suspensions. 
The coordinator may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The coordinator may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the WWF, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(a)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the WWF, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the coordinator that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 24.193 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(b)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the coordinator prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 24.188 or 24.193 of this article. Nothing in this division shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this division. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.7), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 11, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.193. - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in section 24.156 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(a)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(b)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(c)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(d)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(e)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2, §§ 24.121—24.126 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 24.188 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 10.8), 11-15-99)  
Secs. 24.194—24.210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 24.211. - Injunctive relief. 
When the coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the coordinator may petition the Circuit Court of Pinellas County through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The coordinator may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 11.1), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.212. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a minimum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The coordinator may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 11.2), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 12, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.213. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a minimum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the WWF which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a felony of the third degree and be subject to a minimum penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day or be subject to imprisonment for not more than five (5) years, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a minimum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 11.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 13, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.214. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The coordinator may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the coordinator may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the coordinator is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 11.4), 11-15-99)  
Secs. 24.215—24.220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION 
 
Sec. 24.221. - Performance bonds. 
The coordinator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the coordinator to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 12.1), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.222. - Liability insurance. 
The coordinator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the WWF caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 12.2), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 14, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.223. - Water supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 12.3), 11-15-99)  
Secs. 24.224—24.230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 24.231. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the coordinator within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the upset if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 13.1), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.232. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 24.121(a) of this article or the specific prohibitions in sections 24.121(b)(3) through 24.121(b)(18) of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(a)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(b)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 13.2), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.233. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the WWF which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  Required notification for bypass. 
(1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the coordinator, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  User shall submit oral notice to the coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The coordinator may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  Bypass is prohibited unless specifically authorized as set forth herein. 
(1)  The coordinator may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the coordinator determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 13.3), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 15, 12-2-2013)  
Secs. 24.234—24.240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES 
 
Sec. 24.241. - Surcharged wastewater service fees. 
Any business or industry that discharges five thousand (5,000) gpd or more of wastewater in excess of the allowable concentrations of the following parameters may be subjected to a surcharged service fee to cover the increased costs associated with treatment. These fees shall be added to the monthly service charge as follows: 
Parameter 	Explanation 	Surcharge Rate 
BOD 5 	Fee is based on the excess concentration above two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. Fee is computed as the total volume of metered water over the billing period, expressed in millions of gallons (MG) multiplied by the average day BOD 5 in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, the conversion factor of 8.34 and the surcharge rate. 	$ 0.32/lb 
TSS 	Fee is based on the excess concentration above two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. Fee is computed as the total volume of metered water over the billing period, expressed in millions of gallons (MG) multiplied by the average day TSS in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, the conversion factor of 8.34 and the surcharge rate. 	$ 0.32/lb 
Nitrogen (TN) 	Fee is based on the excess concentration above thirty-five (35) mg/l. Fee is computed as the total volume of metered water over the billing period, expressed in millions of gallons (MG) multiplied by the average day TN in excess of thirty-five (35) mg/l, the conversion factor of 8.34 and the surcharge rate. 	$ 0.50/lb 
Fats Oil & Grease (FOG) 	Fee is based on the excess concentration above one hundred (100) mg/l. Fee is computed as the total volume of metered water over the billing period, expressed in millions of gallons (MG) multiplied by the average day FOG in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l, the conversion factor of 8.34 and the surcharge rate. 	$ 1.46/lb 
 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 14.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 16, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.242. - Fees for hauled liquid wastes. 
Septic tank wastes will be accepted at the WRF. Other hauled liquid waste may be accepted as authorized by the director. 
(a)  The director or designee has the right to reject introduction of septic tank wastes and/or other hauled liquid waste into the WRF at any time. 
(b)  See Appendix A for fees for septic tank wastes for up to the first one thousand (1,000) gallons and then a per gallon price thereafter. 
(c)  See Appendix A for fees for hauled liquid waste other than septic. A fee will be charged for the first one thousand (1,000) gallons of hauled wastewater, and then a per gallon price thereafter. 
(d)  The director will periodically review and adjust fees for septic tank wastes based on the strength and/or volumes of septic tank wastes received at the WRF and other considerations. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 14.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 16, 12-2-2013)  
Secs. 24.243—24.250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 24.251. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
The city may adopt reasonable fees, as set by the director, for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(a)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(c)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(d)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(e)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 15.1), 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 17, 12-2-2013)  
Sec. 24.252. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-28, § 1(Exh. A, 15.2), 11-15-99)  
Sec. 24.253. - Hauled liquid waste. 
The fees for disposal of haul liquid waste at the designated disposal location(s) are as follows: 
(a) Septic tank waste 	$27.50 for first 1,000 gallons or part thereof 
	$0.0275 for each gallon thereafter 
(b) Hauled liquid waste other than septic 	$125.00 for first 1,000 gallons or part thereof 
	$0.125 for each gallon thereafter 
 
(Ord. No. 2013-26, § 18, 12-2-2013)  
Chapter 25 - YACHT BASIN AND WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; finance, Ch. 7; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 8; flood prevention and control, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; licenses, Ch. 14; parks and recreation, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Florida boat registration and safety law, F.S. Ch. 327; liens and sale of boats pursuant to agreement, F.S. §§ 328.15, 328.17. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25.01. - Mooring of boats. 
(a)  Permission shall be obtained from the city manager or his duly appointed agent before any boat may be anchored, tied or occupy space in the city yacht basin. The city reserves the right to use any slip during the temporary absence of a boat or tenant for transient boats. However, when the lessee returns the original boat to the slip, any such transient boat shall be moved. 
(b)  The number of slips for commercial boats used for such activities as fishing, netting or collection of traps, whose primary purpose is to sell their products, shall be established by motion of the city commission and may be so amended from time to time. 
(Code 1970, § 27-1; Ord. No. 88-12, § 2, 5-16-88)  
Sec. 25.02. - Schedule of rental fees. 
The basis of payment and the terms of payment for use of the yacht basin shall be set by the commission by resolution. 
(Code 1970, § 27-2)  
Sec. 25.03. - Boats to occupy assigned spaces. 
No entity or person shall cause a boat to occupy more than the one (1) space assigned to the boat without first obtaining permission from the city manager or his agent. The assigned space may not be subleased nor may there be more than one (1) boat per slip. 
(Code 1970, § 27-3)  
Sec. 25.04. - Mooring specifications with regard to mooring boats within the city yacht basin. 
The following specifications shall apply: 
(1)  All lessees of space shall furnish their own equipment to properly secure boats to mooring cable and pier; 
(2)  When all boat slips are filled, and with the authorization of the city manager, a boat may be tied to the shore of the basin; 
(3)  Lessees are responsible for the proper security of their boats, using only approved lines and weights and being moored in a manner as directed by the city manager or his agent; 
(4)  No boat shall be left in the basin when it has become filled with water to the extent that it is partially or totally submerged; 
(5)  No boat shall be moored in such a manner that it swings in a circle or in any way to cause damage to the basin, pier or any other boat; 
(6)  No boat shall be moored or attached to the city pier in any manner; 
(7)  No major repairs shall be made upon any boat within the basin if such repairs shall necessitate the removal of the boat from the basin. 
(Code 1970, § 27-4)  
Sec. 25.05. - Damage to boats. 
The city shall not be held liable for any damage, fire or theft of any boat, article or articles left in a boat, while moored in the city yacht basin. Use of a slip by any person or entity shall mean by such act that such person accepts all provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations prescribed with regard to the yacht basin, and agrees to hold the city and its officers and employees harmless for any acts taken pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 27-5)  
Sec. 25.06. - Prohibited acts. 
In addition to the prohibitions found in section 16.07.1 of this Code, the following shall be prohibited acts within the city yacht basin: 
(1)  No boat shall be launched other than at the boat ramp; 
(2)  No boat shall exceed a speed limit of five (5) miles per hour within the basin; 
(3)  No garbage, trash, fish carcasses, etc., shall be deposited in the water or on the shore adjacent to the water within the basin; 
(4)  No person or entity shall fish, swim, net or castnet from the dock or seawall, or within the basin; 
(5)  No one shall park a trailer or car on the shore of the basin except that cars shall be permitted to park on the south side of South Boulevard and cars with trailers shall be permitted to park on the north side of South Boulevard; 
(6)  Except for lessees, their families and their guests, the general public shall be prohibited from all docks and catwalks; 
(7)  No boat shall be occupied as living quarters while moored in the yacht basin; 
(8)  Selling bait or seafood products from the boat basin or pier shall be prohibited except in a licensed bait and tackle shop; 
(9)  No boat or boat owner shall be allowed to dump, spill or drop or in any other way deposit any type of fuel oil, kerosene, gasoline, waste fuel, flammable liquid or any other type refuse into the yacht basin; 
(10)  All walks and docks adjacent to slips occupied by boats or other watercraft are to be left clear by the owner/operator of such craft. 
(Code 1970, § 27-6; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 95-50, § 1, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 25.07. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city manager shall be empowered to promulgate rules and regulations for the use, operation and maintenance of the yacht basin. Such rules and regulations shall be posted in city hall and one (1) conspicuous location at the yacht basin. 
(b)  The rules and regulations shall be construed as being supplementary to this chapter, and shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Safety regulations and precautions; 
(2)  Usage and hours of operation; 
(3)  Payment of rentals; 
(4)  Assignment of slips; 
(5)  Handling of flammable substances; 
(6)  Conditions of vessels using the facility; 
(7)  Conduct of persons and noise; and 
(8)  Regulations of vessels and equipment during hours of normal rest. 
(Code 1970, § 27-7)  
Sec. 25.08. - Vacancy. 
If a slip owner shall fail to keep his boat in his slip for a period of thirty (30) days, the assignment of the slip shall revert to the city and may be considered vacant and subject to reassignment. However, if the owner of such vessel shall notify the city manager or his agent in writing prior to his leaving, stating the reason for his absence, then the slip assignment shall not be forfeited. 
(Code 1970, § 27-8)  
Sec. 25.09. - Lien of the city. 
The city shall have a lien on any boat for delinquent rental charges or penalties incurred, including interest, cost of resale and attorney's fees under the provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to law, the city may sell or dispose of the boat if such charges or penalties are not paid within the time prescribed by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 27-9)  
ARTICLE II. - IDLE SPEED ZONES 
 
Sec. 25.10. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
City shall mean the City of Safety Harbor, Florida. 
Idle speed shall mean the minimum speed necessary for a vessel to maintain steerageway. 
Person, as used in this article, shall mean any person, firm, corporation, county, municipality, township or any other public agency. 
(Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 91-03, § 1, 2-4-91)  
Sec. 25.11. - Criteria for establishing zones; actions regulated. 
(a)  Idle speed zones may be established in waterways where, by virtue of their shape, size or normal traffic levels, hazards are created to persons unless certain limitations are placed upon the operation of vessels. 
(b)  Within an idle speed zone, it shall be a violation of this article to operate a vessel at a speed in excess of idle. 
(Ord. No. 90-12, § 2, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 91-03, § 2, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 91-29, § 1, 12-2-91)  
Sec. 25.12. - Location. 
(a)  The following described waterway area is hereby established as an idle speed zone: All of the Safety Harbor Marina Basin lying within the entrance to the basin, said entrance being defined by a line lying between an intersection of two (2) seawalls and the southeast corner of a dock as further described below. Also the entrance channel to said marina basin described as follows: 
That part of the Southeast ¼ of Section 3, Township 29 South, Range 16 East, Tallahassee Meridian, lying within Pinellas County, Florida, and more particularly described as follows: 
Commence at the Northwest Corner of the Southeast ¼ of said Section 3; thence run S 00° 25' 50? E, 30.60 feet along the centerline of First Avenue (C.R. 30); thence, S 57° 52' 20? E, 460.38 feet along the southerly right-of-way line of South Boulevard; thence, S 32° 02' 00? W, 188.31 feet to an intersection of two (2) seawalls for a point of beginning. Thence run S 22° 08' 48? W, 65.04 feet to channel marker #10; thence run S 38° 07' 44? E, 58.62 feet to channel marker #8; thence run S 63° 30' 46? E, 301.04 feet to channel marker #6; thence run S 80° 40' 38? E, 242.23 feet to channel marker #4; thence run S 80° 44' 57? E, 255.59 feet to channel marker #2; thence run S 25° 46' 51? W, 96.60 feet to channel marker #1; thence run N 77° 46' 42? W, 247.09 feet to channel marker #3; thence run N 78° 17' 02? W 238.21 feet to channel marker #5; thence run N 64° 46' 50? W, 310.51 feet to channel marker #7; thence run N 25° 17' 28? W, 172.51 feet to channel marker #9; thence run N 23° 33' 43? E, 70.41 feet to the southeast corner of a dock; thence run across the entrance of the marina basin S 57° 13' 45? E, 84.19 feet to the intersection of the seawall which is the point of beginning. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 90-12, § 3, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 91-03, § 3, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 98-13, § 1, 4-20-98)  
Sec. 25.13. - Restrictions to be posted. 
The restrictions of this article are to be posted at each end of the affected channel area encompassed and at intervals between as deemed appropriate. The restrictions include navigable channel areas and those areas [described in section 25.12]. 
(Ord. No. 90-12, § 4, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 25.14. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to section 1.12 of the Safety Harbor City Code and Sections 327.70 through 327.74, Florida Statutes, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with Sections 327.72 and 327.73, Florida Statutes. 
(b)  In any prosecution under this article for the establishment of idle speed zones, each separate operation, regardless of the fact that such may occur on the same day, will constitute a separate offense. The provisions of this article shall not apply to law enforcement personnel or public officials acting in their official capacity. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) herein, any violation of this article shall be subject to appropriate civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Enforcement will begin thirty (30) days after completion of the posting of each area. 
(Ord. No. 90-12, § 5, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 91-03, § 4, 2-4-91)  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 96-40, adopted December 2, 1996, repealed §§ 25.15—25.19 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to restricted zones in waterways and derived from Ord. No. 94-17, § 3, adopted June 20, 1994. 
 
Secs. 25.15—25.19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BUFFER ZONES 
 
Sec. 25.20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
Person shall mean any person, firm, corporation, county, municipality, township or any other public agency. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § 2, 8-1-94)  
Sec. 25.21. - Purpose. 
Buffer zones are intended to protect birds and wildlife from human disturbance in order to prevent significant negative effects on wildlife and bird colonies, such as, but not limited to, egg and nestling mortality and premature fledging or nest evacuation. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § 2, 8-1-94)  
Sec. 25.22. - Establishment; actions regulated. 
(a)  A buffer zone may be established by the city commission where it is determined, based on evidence presented, that such a zone is necessary for the protection of birds and/or wildlife. 
(b)  The size of a buffer zone shall be as determined by the city commission. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person and/or vessel to encroach into a buffer zone. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § 2, 8-1-94)  
Sec. 25.23. - Restrictions to be posted. 
The restrictions of this article are to be posted within affected areas and at intervals as deemed appropriate by the city manager or designee of the city manager. Posting of these restrictions within affected waterways shall be as may be approved by the appropriate state regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § 2, 8-1-94)  
Sec. 25.24. - Enforcement; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to section 1.12 of the City Code and governing sections of the Florida Statutes, and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the City Code and Florida Statutes. 
(b)  In any prosecution under this article, each separate violation, regardless of the fact that such may occur on the same day, will constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) herein, any violation of this article shall be subject to appropriate civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to law enforcement personnel, emergency personnel, or public officials acting in their official capacity. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § 2, 8-1-94)  
Chapter 26 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; code enforcement board, § 2.10.01 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; animals, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 5; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 8; flood prevention control, Ch. 9; garbage and refuse, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 11; junked, abandoned or wrecked property, Ch. 12; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 21; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 24; yacht basins, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Ordinance adoption procedure for rezoning, F.S. § 166.041(3)(c). 
 
Sec. 26.01. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-34, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992, adopted the Safety Harbor Land Development Code. Section 8.00 of such LDC repealed § 26.01 of the City Code. Formerly, such section pertained to adoption of the zoning ordinance and derived from § 28-1 of the 1970 Code.  
APPENDIX A - SAFETY HARBOR CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-12, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 2003, repealed § App. A, which pertained to Safety Harbor Cable Television Ordinance and derived from Ord. No. 84-54, §§ 1—16, adopted Nov. 19, 1984. 



LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 

____________ 
Date of Publication: 2011 
____________ 

> 

Effective Date: December 7, 1992 Ord. 92-34 Revision Dates: August 16, 1993 Ord. 93-22 February 21, 1994 Ord. 94-06 October 17, 1994 Ord. 94-34 January 17, 1995 Ord. 95-04 August 21, 1995 Ord. 95-35 April 5, 1996 Ord. 96-15 October 7, 1996 Ord. 96-26 December 16, 1996 Ord. 96-45 May 5, 1997 Ord. 97-07 June 2, 1997 Ord. 97-09 August 18, 1997 Ord. 97-14 October 20, 1997 Ord. 97-22 July 20, 1998 Ord. 98-17 April 19, 1999 Ord. 99-10 December 18, 2000 Ord. 2000-31 June 18, 2001 Ord. 2001-12 October 15, 2001 Ord. 2001-26 December 2, 2002 Ord. 2002-25 April 21, 2003 Ord. 2003-06 November 15, 2004 Ord. 2004-24 September 18, 2006 Ord. 2006-12 January 16, 2007 Ord. 2007-03 October 15, 2007 Ord. 2007-21 November 19, 2007 Ord. 2007-22 January 22, 2008 Ord. 2008-01 March 17, 2008 Ord. 2008-03 March 17, 2008 Ord. 2008-05 June 16, 2008 Ord. 2008-06 September 3, 2008 Ord. 2008-17 September 15, 2008 Ord. 2008-19 September 15, 2008 Ord. 2008-20 December 15, 2008 Ord. 2008-24 January 5, 2009 Ord. 2008-26 May 18, 2009 Ord. 2009-05 October 19, 2009 Ord. 2009-09 November 16, 2009 Ord. 2009-10 February 15, 2010 Ord. 2010-02 September 20, 2010 Ord. 2010-12 June 6, 2011 Ord. 2011-04 June 20, 2011 Ord. 2011-05 August 15, 2011 Ord. 2011-09 August 15, 2011 Ord. 2011-10 May 7, 2012 Ord. 2012-07 May 21, 2012 Ord. 2012-09 August 6, 2012 Ord. 2012-11 August 6, 2012 Ord. 2012-13 October 1, 2012 Ord. 2012-16 December 17, 2012 Ord. 2012-19 August 19, 2013 Ord. 2013-22 December 16, 2013 Ord. 2013-32 January 21, 2014 Ord. 2014-01 March 17, 2014 Ord. 2013-31 March 17, 2014 Ord. 2014-03 May 5, 2014 Ord. 2014-04 May 19, 2014 Ord. 2014-09 October 6, 2014 Ord. 2014-16 March 16, 2015 Ord. 2015-02 March 16, 2015 Ord. 2015-03 March 16, 2015 Ord. 2015-04 March 16, 2015 Ord. 2015-05 March 16, 2015 Ord. 2015-06 March 16, 2015 Ord. 2015-07 May 4, 2015 Ord. 2015-09 May 18, 2015 Ord. 2015-12 January 19, 2016 Memo August 1, 2016 Ord. 2016-06 June 6, 2016 Ord. 2016-07 June 6, 2016 Ord. 2016-09 June 6, 2016 Ord. 2016-10 June 6, 2016 Ord. 2016-14 June 6, 2016 Ord. 2016-15 June 6, 2016 Ord. 2016-16 June 6, 2016 Ord. 2016-18 August 1, 2016 Ord. 2016-19 January 17, 2017 Ord. 2016-25 February 6, 2017 Ord. 2017-05 March 6, 2017 Ord. 2017-03 June 19, 2017 Ord. 2017-15 June 19, 2017 Ord. 2017-17 December 18, 2017 Ord. 2017-37 April 2, 2018 Ord. 2018-04 May 7, 2018 Ord. 2018-05 May 7, 2018 Ord. 2018-06 May 23, 2018 Ord. 2018-07 May 23, 2018 Ord. 2018-08 June 18, 2018 Ord. 2018-11 August 20, 2018 Ord. 2018-12 August 20, 2018 Ord. 2018-13 August 20, 2018 Ord. 2018-15 October 1, 2018 Ord. 2018-14 November 19, 2018 Ord. 2018-18 December 17, 2018 Ord. 2018-17 January 22, 2019 Ord. 2019-01 March 18, 2019 Ord. 2019-02  
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.00 - Title. 
This Ordinance shall be entitled the "Safety Harbor Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code" and may be referred to herein as the Code, the Land Development Code, or LDC. 
2.00 - Authority. 
This Land Development Code is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of Chapter 163.3202, Florida Statutes, the City Charter and the general powers for municipal corporations in Chapter 166, Florida Statutes. 
3.00 - Purpose and intent. 
This Ordinance is adopted to: 
(A)  Promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents and property owners of the City of Safety Harbor. 
(B)  Implement the adopted Comprehensive Plan through a set of specific and detailed land development provisions. 
(C)  Combine various types of City regulations and laws dealing with the development of land into one comprehensive land development code. 
(D)  Guide the future growth, development, and redevelopment of the City. 
(E)  Maintain and improve the quality of life in the City. 
(F)  Establish a development review process to ensure compliance with the Code and consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
4.00 - Relationship to Comprehensive Plan. 
Land Development regulations shall be consistent with and implement the adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
All requests for development order approval must comply with the Land Development Code, must further the adopted Comprehensive Plan, and shall be reviewed for consistency with the goals, objectives, and policies contained within the following elements of the adopted Comprehensive Plan: 
(1)  Future Land Use Map. 
(2)  Future Land Use Element. 
(3)  Infrastructure Element. 
(4)  Coastal Management and Conservation Element. 
(5)  Transportation Element. 
(6)  Capital Improvements Element. 
(7)  Housing Element. 
(8)  Recreation and Open Space Element. 
(9)  Intergovernmental Coordination Element. 
5.00 - Applicability. 
5.01   General Applicability.
The provisions of this Code shall apply to all development activity within the municipal boundaries of the City of Safety Harbor, Florida. No development activity, as defined herein, shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this Code. 
5.02   General Effect.
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, located, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located, and in conformity with all other applicable provisions of this Code. 
5.03   Exceptions.
(A)  The provisions of this Code and any subsequent amendments shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective construction permit or site plan approval if: 
(1)  The development activity authorized by the permit has commenced or was authorized prior to the effective date of this Code and said permit does not expire. Extensions to said permit or site plan shall not be granted if there is conflict with any of the provisions of this Code; and 
(2)  The development activity commences under the permit or approval obtained prior to the effective date of this Code and continues without interruption until the development is complete. If the construction permit expires, any further development activity shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code. Interruption shall be defined as a cease in construction activity for a period greater than one year or a cease of construction activity which does not follow an approved Phasing Plan. 
(3)  Application for building permit has been made prior to the effective date of this Code and said permit is granted and does not expire. 
(B)  Any development activity that is excepted from the provision of this Code pursuant to Section 5.03 must meet only the requirements of the regulations in effect at the time the development order was approved. If the development order expires for any reason, any further development activity shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
6.00 - Rules of Interpretation. 
6.01   General Interpretation.
The interpretation and application of this Code shall be considered as the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; shall be liberally construed in favor of the City; and shall not be deemed to limit any other powers granted by state statute. 
6.02   Abrogation.
This Code is not intended to abrogate any existing legally enforceable easement, covenant, or restriction. 
6.03   Conflicts.
Where the provisions of this Code conflicts with the requirements of any other applicable regulation or provision of applicable law, whichever imposes the more stringent provision shall prevail. 
6.04   Relationship of specific to general.
The more specific provisions of this Code shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions that are more lenient and conflict with the more specific provisions. 
6.05   Language interpretation.
(A)  All time requirements shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; except that if the last day is a Sunday or legal holiday that day shall be excluded. 
(B)  The use of the plural shall include the singular, and vice versa. 
(C)  Words imparting the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
(D)  The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(E)  Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well. 
(F)  The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise indicated. 
(G)  The word "day" shall mean a calendar day, unless working day is indicated. 
7.00 - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining portions of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, and the comparable provision or portion of the immediately preceding development regulations shall be in full force and effect, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code. 
8.00 - Repeal of prior provisions. 
Upon the effective date of this Code, Ordinance 210, Comprehensive Zoning Regulations for the City of Safety Harbor, as amended; and Sections 2.36, 2.37, 2.38, 2.39, 2.40, 3.02, 3.03, 3.04, 7.33, Chapter 19, Sections 20.26, 20.27, 20.28, 20.29, 20.30, 20.31, 20.32, 20.33, 20.34, 20.35, 20.36, 20.37, 20.38, 20.39, 20.40, 20.41, 20.42, 20.43, 20.44, 20.45, 20.46, 20.47, 20.48, 20.49, 20.50, 20.51, 20.52, 20.53, 20.54, 20.55, 20.56, 20.57, 20.58, 20.59, 20.60, 20.61, 20.62, 20.63, 20.64, 20.65, 20.66, 20.67, 20.68, 20.69, 20.70, Chapter 21, Section 24.10, and Section 26.01 of the Safety Harbor City Code are hereby repealed, except as otherwise provided herein. In the event any portion of this Code is declared invalid, the comparable provision or portion of the immediately preceding development regulations shall be in full force and effect, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code. 
9.00 - Effective date. 
This Code shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
10.00 - Copy on file; distribution. 
A copy of this Code, as may be amended from time to time, shall be kept in the Planning and Zoning Department. Copies shall be made available for public sale. 
11.00-19.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

20.00 - Establishment of Districts. 
The following zoning districts are hereby established to carry out the provisions of this Code: 
(A)  Residential Districts. 
(1)  E-1 Estate Residential District 
(2)  R-1 Single-family Residential District 
(3)  RS-60 Single-family Residential District 
(4)  R-2 Single-family Residential District 
(5)  RS-50 Single-family Residential District 
(6)  R-2B One- and Two-family Residential District 
(7)  R-3 Conditional Mix Residential District 
(8)  RM Residential Multifamily District 
(9)  R-6 Mobile Home District 
(B)  Office District. 
(1)  GO General Office District 
(C)  Commercial Districts. 
(1)  C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District 
(2)  C-1A Restricted Commercial District 
(D)  Flex District. 
(1)  FBI, Flex Business/Industrial District 
(E)  Industrial Districts. 
(1)  M-1 Light Industrial District 
(2)  M-3 General Industrial District 
(F)  Planned Development Districts. 
(1)  PDD Planned Development District 
(G)  Special Purpose Districts. 
(1)  P Public and Conservation District 
(2)  CRD Community Redevelopment District 
(3)  HF Hospital Facilities District 
(H)  Special Purpose Overlay Districts (Pursuant to Article VIII of this Code). 
(1)  Designated Historic Districts 
(2)  Designated Historic Sites and Landmarks 
(Ord. No. 2013-32, § 1, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
21.00 - Official Zoning Atlas established. 
(A)  There shall be a map designated as the Official Zoning Atlas which shall show the boundaries of all zoning districts within the City jurisdiction. 
(B)  The Official Zoning Atlas dated October 1, 1992 is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this Code. 
(C)  The Official Zoning Atlas is composed of a series of sheets, identified by Section, Township, Range, and shall be kept on file in the Office of the Planning Department. 
(D)  Any map amendment change shall be posted on the Official Zoning Atlas by the Office of the Planning Department. Records shall be kept which identify the official action, the date of such action, the area involved, and the date of posting. 
(E)  No unauthorized changes shall be made to the Official Zoning Atlas. All changes, or amendments, shall be in accordance with the procedures established in this Code. 
(F)  The Office of the Planning Department shall retain copies of earlier maps or atlases for historical reference. 
(G)  In the event that the Official Zoning Atlas is lost, destroyed, or damaged the Planning Director shall have a new map made. No further action or authorization is required provided no district boundaries are changed in the process. 
22.00 - Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. 
In construing the Official Zoning Atlas the following rules shall be applied. 
(A)  A district symbol or name shown within a district shall extend or pertain throughout the whole area surrounded by the boundary line. 
(B)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of dedicated streets, alleys, highways, easements, railroads, and the like shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(C)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines, section, tract, or property lines shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(D)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundaries shall be construed as following such political boundaries. 
(E)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the shoreline at a body of water shall be construed as following such shoreline. In the event of a change to the shoreline, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. 
(F)  Boundaries indicated as following the center lines of streams, canals, or rivers shall be construed as to follow such center lines. 
(G)  Boundaries indicated as entering any body of water but not continuing to intersection with other zoning boundaries or with the City limits shall be construed as extending in the direction in which they enter the body of water to intersection with other zoning boundaries or City limit lines. 
(H)  Where physical or cultural features exist on the ground that are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Atlas the actual location shall govern. 
(I)  Where a public road, street, or alley is officially vacated the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply. 
(J)  Where areas have been excluded or unclassified the designation shall be classified E-1, Estate Residential until designated otherwise in accordance with the procedures established by this Code. 
(K)  In cases where the rules fail to clarify the status of land, the Planning and Zoning Director shall interpret the Official Zoning Atlas in such a manner as to carry out the intent of this Code. Appeal from an interpretation shall be to the Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established by this Code. 
23.00 - Application of district regulations. 
(A)  Permitted uses represent only those uses which are permitted by right in a given district. 
(B)  Conditional Uses may be permitted in a given district by the City Commission only upon a finding that such use in a specified location will comply with the criteria established in general or in specific for such use by this Code. 
(C)  Uses existing prior to the effective date of this Code shall only be expanded in accordance with the regulations and procedures established by this Code. 
(D)  In the event that a particular use is not listed anywhere in this Code, then it shall be interpreted that the use of this Code having the most similar characteristics as the use in question shall apply. The purpose and intent of the district where the use with the most similar characteristics shall also be consulted in this determination. 
23.01   Maximum density.
(A)  Maximum density shall be expressed in terms of number of dwelling units per gross residential acre. In determination of the maximum number of units to be allowed, any proportional fraction thereof shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
(B)  The maximum density permitted in non-residential districts shall not exceed 15 units per acre, except as provided by the Community Redevelopment District. 
23.02   Minimum lot or district size.
(A)  Where a minimum lot size or district size is given for a particular use or zone, no area of land of a lesser size may be rezoned or intensified in use except as follows: 
(1)  Such lands are contiguous to such existing zone or zoned land and will be combined to meet the minimum regulation required. 
(2)  The rezoning was initiated by the City as a part of a comprehensive rezoning. 
(3)  A waiver authorized under the Planned Development Districts is included. 
(B)  No lot existing on the effective date of this Code shall be thereafter reduced in size, dimension, or area below the minimum requirements set out herein, except by reason of a portion being acquired for public use. 
(C)  Lots created after the effective date of this Code shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements established herein. 
(D)  The resubdivision or alteration of the arrangements of dimensions or boundary locations for existing lots may be permitted provided the minimum dimensional regulations are complied with and the total number of lots is not increased. 
(E)  All uses shall be subject to the minimum lot size requirements specified for a given district unless other minimum requirements are specified elsewhere in this Code. 
23.03   Flag lots.
Flag lots shall be prohibited except in accordance with the requirements of the Planned Development Districts. 
23.04   Waterfront lots and yards.
No land below the shoreline shall be credited as a part of a lot for the purposes of determining lot area, nor shall such land be part of any required yard or setbacks. 
23.05   Corner lots.
Corner lots shall provide a front yard on each street frontage. Remaining yards shall be deemed to be side yards. 
23.06   Through lots.
Through lots shall provide a front yard adjoining the principal entrance to the structure. The opposite yard shall be deemed to be a rear yard. 
23.07   Lots abutting an alleyway.
Where the rear or side yard of a lot abuts an alleyway, one-half (1/2) of the alleyway width up to a maximum of ten (10) feet may be considered as a portion of the required yard for the primary structure. Provided, however, the required yard shall not be reduced to less than one foot from a rear property line and three (3) feet from a side property line. Attached garages with alley access are subject to Sec. 149.00(I) and may require a greater setback from the alley. This provision does not apply to accessory structures or accessory dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2016-14, § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 2, 5-23-2018) 
23.08   Height limitation exclusions.
The height limitations of this Code shall not apply to residential chimneys, flagpoles, radio towers, television antennae, water towers, transmission towers and cables, smokestacks, church spires and domes, cupolas, parapet walls, or other minor decorative architectural features, no more than five feet above the peak of the roof, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Director. 
23.09   Front yard setback reduction for unenclosed porch.
The Planning and Zoning Director may approve a front yard setback reduction of up to ten feet to accommodate an unenclosed front porch that is permanently affixed to a single-family detached dwelling provided all other code requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 2016-25, § 1, 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 3, 5-23-2018) 
23.10   Setback reduction for tree preservation.
The Community Development Director may administratively approve a reduced building setback of up to five (5) feet from any property line to preserve a protected existing tree with a minimum diameter at breast height of 15 inches or greater, and a mature canopy height of 30 feet or greater, determined to be in good health by an Approved Arborist. The tree must also be in a condition and location such that it will not present a hazard to life or property following site development. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1, 3-16-2015) 
23.11   Open space reduction.
No part of the open space required in any development may be subsequently reduced below the minimum requirement. 
23.12   Effect of annexation.
If an area annexed was subject to a county land use plan and county zoning or subdivision regulations, said regulations shall remain in effect until the area is rezoned by the City to comply with its Comprehensive Plan. (Chapter 171, F.S.) 
24.00 - Nonconformities. 
24.01   Intent.
Within districts established by the Code, there may exist lots, structures, and use of land or structures which were lawful prior to the adoption of this Code or amendment, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms established herein. It is the intent of this Code to permit such legal nonconformities to continue until they are removed by economic or other forces, but not to encourage their survival or replacement due to their inconsistency with the provisions established herein. It is further the intent of this Code eventually to require all uses of land or structures to conform to this Code. 
24.02   Nonconforming lots of record.
(A)  In any district in which residential dwellings are permitted, a lot which is nonconforming in terms of the minimum requirements for lot area or lot width, or both, may be constructed upon with a residential dwelling provided: 
(1)  The lot was a lot of record on the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  The lot was not created in violation of a previous zoning ordinance. 
(B)  Nonconforming lots of record shall not be further reduced by area or width. 
(C)  The other dimensional regulations of the district in which the lot is located, including, but not limited to, minimum yards, and maximum lot coverage shall apply. 
(D)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a nonconforming lot, a nonconforming lot of record opinion shall be obtained from the Planning Director. 
(E)  Any lot or parcel which is reduced in size by less than twenty-five percent (25%) as a result of eminent domain proceedings, or through a voluntary conveyance in lieu of formal eminent domain proceedings, shall be considered a buildable lot of record for the purposes of this Code. 
24.03   Nonconforming structures.
(A)  No nonconforming structures may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity except by variance approval from the Board of Appeals. The Planning and Zoning Director may allow minor encroachments into normally prescribed building setbacks in order to accommodate a building addition to a principal dwelling unit to align with the side of an existing nonconforming structure where no variance has previously been granted provided that: 
(1)  The total floor area of the encroaching portion of an addition does not exceed 100 square feet. 
(2)  The encroaching structure is not located closer than 5 feet to a property line. 
(3)  The encroaching structure does not enter any easement or interfere with the use of the easement for its intended purpose. 
(4)  The encroaching structure does not necessitate the removal of a protected tree or other significant environmental feature. 
(5)  A letter of no objection is provided from adjoining property owners. 
(B)  If a nonconforming structure is damaged by fire, natural elements, or force beyond control of the owner, to an amount greater than 50% of its appraised valuation for tax purposes on the day immediately preceding such loss, said structure shall only be rebuilt to conform to the regulations of this Code and the City's Building Code. 
(C)  If a nonconforming structure is moved for any reason any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 2, 3-16-2015) 
24.04   Nonconforming uses of land or of structures.
(A)  No nonconforming use of land or of a structure may be enlarged, intensified, changed, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land or of gross floor area than that use occupied on the effective date of this Code. Provided, however, a nonconforming use located in the Community Redevelopment District may be allowed to expand to occupy a greater area of land or gross floor area provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  No additional living unit is created; 
(2)  The required parking ratio for residential uses specified under Section 147.04(G)(1) is met; and 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Director determines the expansion is appropriate to the property in question and is reasonably compatible in terms of scale and character with the property and the adjacent uses; and 
(4)  Prior to issuing a building permit to allow the proposed expansion, the City shall send by first class mail, written notice of the pending approval to each property owner within 500 feet of the subject property based on the latest available tax records of the Pinellas County Appraiser's Office. The notice shall include the location, nature and extent of the proposed enlargement, where the permit application may be inspected by the public, and the procedure and timeframe for filing an appeal of the Planning and Zoning Director's compatibility determination pursuant to the following subsection. The City shall simultaneously post said notice in a conspicuous location on the subject property. 
(5)  The applicant or an affected property owner may appeal the Planning and Zoning Director's compatibility determination to the Board of Appeals by filing a letter to the City Clerk within thirty days from the date the public notice being issued. In exercising its powers under Section 234.00 of this Code, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly or may modify the compatibility determination of the Planning and Zoning Director. 
(B)  If the nonconforming use of a structure or land ceases for any reason, except where governmental action impedes access to the site, for a period of more than six (6) months or for any intermittent period amounting to six (6) months in any one year, use of the structure or land shall conform to the regulations of this Code. Provided, however, the City Commission, upon receiving a written request from the property owner or his or her representative, may authorize, at its sole discretion, a six-month extension to the six-month period prior to its expiration for properties in the Community Redevelopment District when the continuance of the nonconforming use is deemed not to be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, or welfare. The nonconforming use of a structure shall not be deemed to have ceased if the property is undergoing a renovation with an active building permit causing the structure to be uninhabitable during the renovation. 
(C)  There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of a nonconforming use provided there is no change in nature or character of such nonconforming use. 
(D)  If the nonconforming use of land or of a structure is replaced by a conforming use of land or of a structure, a nonconforming use shall not thereafter be re-established on the same site. 
(E)  If the nonconforming use of a structure is damaged by fire, natural elements, or force beyond control of the owner, to an amount greater than 50% of its appraised valuation for tax purposes on the day immediately preceding such loss, use of the site shall thereafter conform to the regulations of this Code. 
(F)  The casual, temporary, or illegal use of land or structures shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2012-16, § 1, 10-1-2012) 
24.05   General requirements.
(A)  Normal maintenance and incidental repair of a lawful nonconformity shall be permitted, provided that such maintenance and repair does not violate any other provision of this Code or the City's building codes. 
(B)  The burden of establishing that such nonconformity is lawful shall be upon the property owner. 
(C)  Nonconforming structures of significant cultural or historic value may be rebuilt to their original condition if destroyed, notwithstanding the other restrictions of this Section, provided the restoration is done to recreate the historical context of the original structure. Structures of significant cultural or historic value shall be structures which are either: 
(1)  Listed on the Florida Master Site File. 
(2)  Listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
(3)  Contributing structures located in a National Register Historic District. 
(4)  Contributing structures located in a Local Historic District. 
24.06   Nonconforming characteristics of use.
Characteristics of use, such as density, off-street parking and loading, landscaping, drainage, signs and other development regulations may be legally nonconforming in terms of this Code. Generally, the provisions governing specific characteristics of use and their expansion are found elsewhere in this Code. 
24.07   Nonconformities as a result of a taking.
Existing characteristics of use which become nonconforming or increase in nonconformity as a result of a taking, including, but not limited to, minimum lot size, setbacks, open space, off-street parking, landscape requirements, drainage and retention, shall not be required to meet code requirements as a result of the taking of real property for public use. Thereafter, the existing characteristics of use shall be deemed conforming. Any expansion or enlargement shall be in accordance with all applicable code requirements. 
25.00 - Schedule of district regulations. 
The schedule of district regulations is a summary of the uses permitted in each zoning district. The schedule only indicates whether the use is permitted; it does not indicate the nature of the approval required. No use is permitted unless it complies with the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located and the applicable development standards in Article X of this Land Development Code. The matrix below provides a chart correlating zoning districts with compatible future land use categories. 
(A)  Consistency matrix. 
Consistency Matrix Future Land Use Plan Consistent Zoning E-1 R-1 R-2 R-2B R-3 RS-50 RS-60 R-6 RM GO C-1 C-1A HF FBI M-1 M-3 P PDD CRD RR (Residential 
Rural) .5 UPA X RE (Residential 
Estate) 1 UPA X RS (Residential 
Suburban) 2.5 UPA X RL (Residential Low) 5 UPA X X X X X X RU (Residential 
Urban) 7.5 UPA X X X X X X RM (Residential 
Medium) 15 UPA X X X X X ROL (Residential 
Office Limited) X X ROG (Residential Office General) X X ROR (Residential Office Retail) X RFO (Resort 
Facilities Overlay) X CN (Commercial Neighborhood) X CG (Commercial General) X X IL (Industrial Limited) X X IG (Industrial 
General) X P (Preservation) X R/OS (Recreation/Open Space) X I (Institutional) X X T/U (Transportation/Utility) X CRD (Community Redevelopment 
District) X X Water/Drainage Feature X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
(B)  Other Standards. 
1.  Institutional, transportation/utility and ancillary non-residential uses shall not exceed 3 acres in size in the RR, RE, RS, RL, RU and RM land use plan categories and in the compatible zoning designations. 
2.  Institutional, transportation/utility and ancillary non-residential uses shall not exceed 3 acres in size in the ROL, ROG, ROR, and RFO land use plan categories and in the compatible zoning designations. 
3.  Institutional and transportation/utility uses shall not exceed 5 acres in size in the CN and CG land use plan categories and in the compatible zoning designations. 
4.  Institutional and transportation/utility uses shall not exceed 5 acres in size in the IL and IG land use plan categories and in the compatible zoning designations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-32, § 2, 12-16-13) 
25.01   E-1 Estate Residential District.
(A)  The E-1 District is established to identify areas where predominantly rural residential activities are conducted, to conserve open space, allow limited agricultural activities, and to protect areas from premature urban development due to the areas rural character or a lack of available public facilities. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings 
(2)  Public education facilities 
(3)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(4)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Agriculture (minimum lot area 1.25 acres) 
(2)  Light Utility Service 
(3)  Kennels 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density: Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area: 40,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet 
(4)  Minimum Lot Depth: 150 feet 
(5)  Maximum Height: 35 feet 
(6)  Minimum Yards: Front = 25 feet; Side = 10 feet; Rear = 15 feet 
(7)  Minimum Net Floor Area: 1800 square feet 
(8)  The intensity standards of nonresidential uses shall be in accordance with the requirements of the underlying Comprehensive Plan Category 
25.02   Single-family Residential Districts R-1, RS-60, R-2, RS-50.
(A)  The single-family residential districts are established to provide for detached dwellings in a variety of districts with a full range of dimensional and density standards compatible with the established development pattern of the area. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings 
(2)  Public education facilities 
(3)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(4)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities 
(2)  Churches (RS-60, R-2, RS-50 only) 
(3)  Day Care Centers (RS-60, R-2, RS-50 only) 
(4)  Community Residential Homes 
(5)  Light Utility Service 
(6)  Libraries, Museums, Galleries, Cultural Centers and similar uses 
(7)  Social/Public Service Agency 
(D)  R-1 District Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density = Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area = 10,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum Lot Width = 75 feet 
(4)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(5)  Minimum Yards: Front = 25 feet; Side = 8 feet; Rear = 25 feet 
(6)  Minimum Net Floor Area = 1,000 square feet 
(E)  RS-60 District Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density = Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area = 6,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum Lot Width = 60 feet 
(4)  Maximum Height = 25 feet 
(5)  Minimum Yards: Front = 25 feet; Side = 7.5 feet; Rear = 20 feet 
(6)  Minimum Net Floor Area = 900 square feet 
(F)  R-2 District Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density = Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area = 6,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum Lot Width = 50 feet 
(4)  Maximum Height = 25 feet 
(5)  Minimum Yards: 
(a)  For residential lots in a subdivision platted prior to 1950: 
Front: 
Building height at or below 18 feet = 20 feet 
Building height Above 18 feet = 25 feet 
Attached Garage On Primary Front Façade With Front Facing Garage Door = 25 feet 
Attached Garage on Secondary Front Façade = 15 feet 
Side: 
Minimum one side = 7 feet 
Total side yard requirement = 16 feet 
Minimum rear = 20 feet or 10 feet For an Attached Garage with Façade or Roofline at or Below 18 feet 
(b)  For residential lots in a subdivision platted in 1950 or later: Front = 25 feet; Side = 8 feet; Rear = 20 feet 
(6)  Minimum Net Floor Area = 900 square feet 
(G)  RS-50 District Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density = Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area = 5,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum Lot Width = 50 feet 
(4)  Maximum Height = 25 feet 
(5)  Minimum Yards: Front = 20 feet; Side = 7.5 feet; Rear = 15 feet 
(6)  Minimum Net Floor Area = 900 square feet 
(H)  The intensity standards of nonresidential uses shall be in accordance with the requirements of the underlying Comprehensive Plan Category. 
(Ord. No. 2013-32, § 3, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 2016-25, § 2, 1-17-2017) 
25.03   R-2B One- and Two-family Residential District.
(A)  The one- and two-family residential district is established to provide for a mixture of one- and two-family dwellings at a medium density where the mixture is determined to be compatible with development trends in the area. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings 
(2)  Two-family dwellings 
(3)  Public education facilities 
(4)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(5)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Churches 
(2)  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities 
(3)  Schools of General Education 
(4)  Community Residential Homes 
(5)  Day Care Centers 
(6)  Light Utility Service 
(7)  Libraries, Museums, Galleries, Cultural Centers and similar uses 
(8)  Social/Public Service Agency 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density = Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area = 6,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum Lot Width = 50 feet 
(4)  Maximum Height = 25 feet 
(5)  Minimum Yards: Front = 25 feet; Side = 8 feet; Rear = 20 feet 
(6)  Minimum Net Floor Area 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings = 900 square feet 
(b)  Two-family dwellings: 
Efficiency = 350 square feet 
One Bedroom = 600 square feet 
Two Bedrooms = 750 square feet 
Three or more = 900 square feet 
(7)  The intensity standards of non-residential uses shall be in accordance with the requirements of the underlying Comprehensive Plan Category. 
25.04   R-3 Conditional Mix Residential District.
(A)  The conditional mix residential district is established to provide for a mix of residential uses where a conditional use review for compatibility with existing development trends is necessary to analyze the potential for adverse impacts in accordance with established criteria. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings 
(2)  Public education facilities 
(3)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(4)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Two-family dwellings 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings 
(3)  Single-family semi-detached dwellings 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings 
(5)  Churches 
(6)  Schools of General Education 
(7)  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities 
(8)  Nursing Homes 
(9)  Boarding Homes 
(10)  Tourist Homes (not allowed within 1,200 feet of a pre-existing Tourist Home) 
(11)  Day Care Centers 
(12)  Community Residential Homes 
(13)  Congregate Care Facilities 
(14)  Emergency Shelters, Residential Treatment Facilities and Recovery Homes 
(15)  Light Utility Services 
(16)  Private Clubs 
(17)  Libraries, Museums, Galleries, Cultural Centers and similar uses 
(18)  Social/Public Service Agency 
(19)  Transient Accommodation Uses (except recreational vehicle parks) in conjunction with the Resort Facilities Overlay (RFO) Category and requirements of the Comprehensive Plan 
(20)  Single-family detached zero lot line subject to the dimensional regulations of the PRD District 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density = Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Lot Area: 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings = 7,000 square feet 
(b)  Single-family attached dwellings = 2,000 square feet 
(c)  Single-family semi-detached dwellings = 3,500 square feet 
(d)  Two-family dwellings = 9,000 square feet 
(e)  Multifamily dwellings = 11,000 square feet 
(3)  Minimum Lot Width: 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings = 60 feet 
(b)  Single-family attached dwellings = 20 feet 
(c)  Single-family semi-detached dwellings = 35 feet 
(d)  Two-family dwellings = no minimum 
(e)  Multifamily dwellings = 80 feet 
(4)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(5)  Minimum Yards: 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings: 
Front = 20 feet 
Side = 7.5 feet 
Rear = 15 feet 
(b)  Single-family attached dwellings: 
Front = 15 feet 
Side = 7.5 feet (end units only) 
Rear = 15 feet 
(c)  Single-family semi-detached dwellings: 
Front = 15 feet 
Side = 8 feet (end side only) 
Rear = 15 feet 
(d)  Multifamily, Two-family, and Transient Accommodation Uses: 
Front = 25 feet 
Side = 7.5 feet 
Rear = 20 feet 
An additional 2 feet shall be added for each story over two (2) 
(6)  Minimum Net Floor Area: 
(a)  Single-family Detached Dwellings = 900 square feet 
(b)  Single-family Attached Dwellings = 900 square feet 
(c)  Single-family Semi-detached Dwellings = 1,000 square feet 
(d)  Two-family and Multifamily dwellings = 600 square feet one bedroom, 750 square feet two bedrooms, three or more 900 square feet 
(7)  The intensity standards of nonresidential use shall be in accordance with the requirements of the underlying Comprehensive Plan Category. 
25.05   RM Residential Multifamily District.
(A)  The residential multifamily district is established to provide for multifamily dwellings at a mix of densities and to allow for other uses generally compatible with the character and intensity of multifamily dwellings. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings 
(3)  Single-family semi-detached dwellings 
(4)  Two-family dwellings 
(5)  Multifamily dwellings 
(6)  Boarding Homes 
(7)  Public education facilities 
(8)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(9)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Churches 
(2)  Schools of General Education 
(3)  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities 
(4)  Nursing Homes 
(5)  Day Care Centers 
(6)  Community Residential Homes 
(7)  Light Utility Service 
(8)  Private Clubs 
(9)  Transient Accommodation Uses (except recreational vehicle parks) in conjunction with the Resort Facilities Overlay (RFO) Category and requirements of the Comprehensive Plan 
(10)  Single-family detached zero lot line subject to the dimensional regulations of the PRD District 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area = 5,000 square feet 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width = 50 feet 
(c)  Minimum Yards: Front 25 feet; Side 7.5 feet; Rear 15 feet 
(2)  Two-family, Multifamily, and Transient Accommodation Uses: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area = 7,000 square feet 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width = 70 feet 
(c)  Minimum Yards: Front 25 feet; Side 0 feet; Rear 20 feet 
(d)  An additional 2 feet shall be added for each story over 3 
(e)  The minimum distance between structures shall be 15 feet 
(f)  The minimum net floor area shall be 600 square feet per unit 
(3)  Other dimensional regulations shall be as provided for by the R-3 District. 
25.06   R-6 Mobile Home District.
(A)  The R-6 District is established to provide areas for mobile home dwellings located in mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Mobile Home Parks 
(2)  Mobile Home Subdivisions 
(3)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(4)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Golf Courses 
(2)  Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds 
(3)  Light Utility Service 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Maximum Density = Per underlying Plan Category 
(2)  Minimum Project Size = 10 acres 
(3)  Minimum Lot Area: 
(a)  Mobile Home Parks = 4,250 square foot average, with a minimum lot area of 3,500 square feet 
(b)  Mobile Home Subdivisions = 6,000 square feet 
(4)  Minimum Lot Width: 
(a)  Mobile Home Parks = 20 feet 
(b)  Mobile Home Subdivisions = 60 feet 
(5)  Minimum Lot depth: 
(a)  Mobile Home Parks = none 
(b)  Mobile Home Subdivisions = 80 feet 
(6)  Maximum Height = 25 feet 
(7)  Minimum Yards: 
(a)  Mobile Home Parks: Front = 10 feet; Side = 7.5 feet; Rear = 7.5 feet 
(b)  Mobile Home Subdivisions: Front = 15 feet; Side = 5 feet; Rear = 7.5 feet 
(8)  Minimum Net Floor Area = 500 square feet 
(E)  Minimum Perimeter Buffers: 
(1)  Mobile Home Parks and Mobile Home Subdivisions shall be surrounded by a minimum landscaped buffer strip of 20 feet along all adjoining public rights of way and Residential Districts other than R-6, and 10 feet along all remaining boundaries. 
(2)  Buffers shall be landscaped in accordance with the screening requirements of Sections 154.00 et seq. of this Code, shall be maintained in accordance with the landscaping requirements of this Code, and shall otherwise be unoccupied except for permitted utility facilities, signs, entrance ornamentation or permitted screening material. 
(F)  Permitted Accessory Uses: 
(1)  Permitted accessory uses in mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall include the following: 
(a)  Private recreation facilities. 
(b)  Park offices, maintenance facilities, and laundry facilities. 
(c)  Enclosed storage facilities and outdoor storage yards for the recreational vehicles of park residents screened in accordance with Section 55.00 of this Code. 
(d)  A single-family residence or mobile home for a park manager or caretaker. 
(G)  Recreational Areas: 
(1)  Not less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site area shall be devoted to a combination of recreation facilities and area. Recreation facilities shall be defined as community centers, shuffleboard courts, play areas, swimming pools and other active facilities. The recreation area shall not be deemed to include required buffers. 
(2)  Public address systems shall not be audible beyond the site boundaries. 
(H)  Required Improvements: 
(1)  The development standards of this Code shall be complied with. 
(2)  Each mobile home site shall be connected to potable water and sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Each mobile home shall be placed on a foundation or tied down in accordance with the City's building codes. 
(4)  Park management shall be responsible for providing internal refuse collection. Centralized park collection points shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of Sections 159.00 through 159.04 of this Code unless individual can collection is permitted. 
(5)  Street lighting in accordance with the requirements of Section 183.11 of this Code shall be required. 
(6)  The construction of sidewalks along all adjoining streets shall be required unless a centralized and strategically placed common walk system which is convenient to all development areas is approved at the time of Site Plan Review. 
(7)  The internal easement width for private streets in Mobile Home Parks may be reduced to 35 feet with a minimum street width of 20 feet. However, the construction standards of this Code for streets shall be complied with. 
(I)  Recreational Vehicle Parks: 
(1)  The development standards of this Code shall be complied with. 
(2)  Each recreational vehicle site shall be connected to potable water and sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Each campground shall be provided with sanitary facilities in accordance with the requirements of the Pinellas County Health Department. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles with attachments shall only be allowed on recreational vehicle sites which are so designated on the approved site plan. Such attachments shall comply with the City's Building Codes and shall be designed to be removable. All recreational vehicle sites which are designated for attachments shall comply with the City of Safety Harbor Flood Prevention and Control Ordinance, the requirements of the FIRM maps, and the requirements of FEMA. 
(5)  All campground sites shall be designated on the approved site plan. Attachments to recreational vehicles located on designated campsites or recreational vehicle sites not designated or approved for attachments shall be limited to pop-out structures and awnings integral to the recreational vehicle as originally manufactured. 
(6)  Each recreational vehicle site shall contain a stabilized vehicular parking pad composed of shell, marl, paving or other suitable material. The removal of wheels and placement of the recreational vehicle on a foundation is prohibited. 
(7)  The internal street network shall be private, and shall be designed and constructed as a drive aisle in accordance with the requirements of Section 147.03 of this Code. 
(8)  Recreational Vehicle Parks shall only be permitted as designated by, and in accordance with, the requirements of the Resort Facilities Overlay (RFO) Category of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(J)  Existing Mobile Home Parks: 
(1)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prohibit mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions which existed on the effective date of this Code from continuing to operate. 
(2)  Any expansion of an existing mobile home park or of a mobile home subdivision which did not have a valid site plan approval on the effective date of this Code shall comply with the requirements of this Code. 
(3)  The replacement of any mobile homes in an existing mobile home park or subdivision shall comply with the setbacks in effect at the time the project was approved, the minimum standards of the Pinellas County Health Department, and the minimum installation requirements of the City's building codes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 3, 3-16-2015) 
25.07   GO General Office District.
(A)  The GO District is established to provide for areas where it could be compatible for residential uses to mix with professional, business and nonprofit organization offices. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Business and Professional Offices 
(2)  Financial Institutions 
(3)  Public education facilities 
(4)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(5)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Day Care Centers 
(2)  Churches 
(3)  Funeral Homes and Mortuaries 
(4)  Schools and General Education 
(5)  Schools of Special Education 
(6)  Community Residential Homes 
(7)  Congregate Care Facilities 
(8)  Emergency Shelters, Residential Treatment Facilities, and Recovery Homes 
(9)  Private Clubs 
(10)  Boarding Homes 
(11)  Post Office 
(12)  Light Utility Service 
(13)  Nursing Homes 
(14)  Assembly Halls and Convention Centers 
(15)  Libraries, Museums, Galleries, Cultural Centers and similar uses 
(16)  Other Community Service Uses not specifically listed 
(17)  Veterinary Clinics, provided that no boarding facilities may be allowed except as may be required for the short term treatment of sick or injured animals and when completely enclosed within a building 
(18)  Single-family attached dwellings 
(19)  Single-family semi-detached dwellings 
(20)  Multifamily dwellings 
(21)  Single-family detached dwellings 
(D)  Dimensional Requirements: 
(1)  Residential dimensional regulations as provided for by the R-3 District. 
(2)  All Other Uses: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area = 10,000 square feet 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width = 100 feet; 115 feet for corner lots 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth = 100 feet 
(d)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(e)  Minimum Yards: 
(a)  Front = 25 feet 
(b)  Side = 10 feet 
(c)  Rear = 20 feet 
(f)  Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR) = per underlying Plan category 
(g)  Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) = .75 
(3)  Mixed uses shall not exceed the number of units per acre and floor area ratio (FAR) permitted when allocated to their respective proportion of the total site area. 
(4)  Public/semi-public uses shall not exceed three (3) acres in size without an amendment to another appropriate Comprehensive Plan category. 
(5)  Residential equivalent uses shall not exceed 3.0 beds per allowable dwelling unit per acre. 
25.08   C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District.
(A)  The C-1 District is established to provide for areas where convenience shopping and personal services are oriented toward a surrounding neighborhood market. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Financial Institutions 
(2)  Retail Sales Establishments 
(3)  Retail Food Establishments 
(4)  Personal/Business Service Establishments 
(5)  Business and Professional Offices 
(6)  Eating Establishments, Sit Down and Taverns 
(7)  Shopping Centers 
(8)  Community Service Uses 
(9)  Veterinary Clinics, provided that no boarding facilities may be allowed except as may be required for the short-term treatment of sick or injured animals and when completely enclosed within a building 
(10)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(11)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Private Clubs 
(2)  Schools of Special Education 
(3)  Funeral Homes or Mortuaries 
(4)  Self-service Gasoline Stations 
(5)  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities, Indoor 
(6)  Repair Service Establishments 
(7)  Commercial Recreation Facilities, Indoor 
(8)  Light Utility Service 
(9)  Light Printing Establishments 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  All Other Uses: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Area = 5,000 square feet 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width = 50 feet 
(c)  Minimum Lot Depth = 80 feet 
(d)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(e)  Minimum Yards: 
Front = 5 feet; when fronting a Residential District the front yard of that District shall apply 
Side = Zero; 10 feet when adjoining a Residential District 
Rear = 10 feet; 15 feet when adjoining a Residential District 
(f)  Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR) = .30 
(g)  Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) = .80 
(2)  Mixed uses shall not exceed the number of units per acre and floor area ratio (FAR) permitted when allocated to their respective proportion of the total site area. 
(3)  Public/semi-public uses shall not exceed three (3) acres in size without an amendment to another appropriate Comprehensive Plan category. 
25.09   C-1A Restricted Commercial District.
(A)  The C-1A District is established to provide for commercial areas designed as a cohesive, unified and planned grouping of interrelated businesses. Access to a thoroughfare street is desired, with the mix of uses and access points designed to maintain the required level of service of the adjoining roadway. Access through residential neighborhoods shall be deemed inappropriate. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Retail Sales Establishments 
(2)  Eating Establishments, Sit down and Taverns 
(3)  Personal/Business Service Establishments 
(4)  Commercial Recreation Facilities, Indoor 
(5)  Business and Professional Offices 
(6)  Financial Institutions 
(7)  Funeral Homes or Mortuaries 
(8)  Veterinary Clinics, provided that no boarding facilities may be allowed except as may be required for the short term treatment of sick or injured animals and when completely enclosed within a building 
(9)  Community Service Uses* 
(10)  Shopping Centers 
(11)  Retail Food Establishments 
(12)  Schools of Special Education* 
(13)  Bowling Alleys, Billiard Halls, Arcades and Bingo Halls 
(14)  Distribution Electric Substations** 
(15)  Day Pet Boarding Establishment which is subject to the requirements of Section 68.00 of the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code 
(16)  Community Gardens 
(17)  Pet Grooming 
(18)  Brewpub 
(19)  Hotel*** 
* INSTITUTIONAL USES SHALL NOT EXCEED A MAXIMUM AREA OF 3 ACRES IN THE ROR LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY AND 5 ACRES IN THE CG LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY 
** TRANSPORTATION/UTILITY USES SHALL NOT EXCEED A MAXIMUM AREA OF 3 ACRES IN THE ROR LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY AND 5 ACRES IN THE CG LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY 
*** PERMITTED ONLY IN THE ROR LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Eating Establishments, Fast Food 
(2)  Retail Nurseries and Garden Supplies 
(3)  Self-Service Gasoline Stations 
(4)  Light Printing Establishments 
(5)  Repair Service Establishments 
(6)  Theaters, Indoor 
(7)  Car Wash 
(8)  Vehicle Repair, Minor 
(9)  Light Utility Service** 
(10)  Construction Material Establishments, provided all material shall be stored indoors 
(11)  Rental Service Establishments, provided all merchandise shall be stored indoors 
(12)  Day Care Centers* 
(13)  Private Clubs* 
(14)  Commercial Recreation Facilities, Outdoor 
(15)  Churches 
(16)  Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery 
* INSTITUTIONAL USES SHALL NOT EXCEED A MAXIMUM AREA OF 3 ACRES IN THE ROR LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY AND 5 ACRES IN THE CG LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY 
** TRANSPORTATION/UTILITY USES SHALL NOT EXCEED A MAXIMUM AREA OF 3 ACRES IN THE ROR LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY AND 5 ACRES IN THE CG LAND USE PLAN CATEGORY 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Minimum Lot Area = 4 acres for shopping centers; 60,000 square feet for hotels; 8,000 square feet for other individual uses, parcels or outlots 
(2)  Minimum Lot Width = 300 feet for shopping centers; 200 feet for hotels; 80 feet for other individual uses, parcels or outlots 
(3)  Minimum Lot Depth = 300 feet for shopping centers and hotels; 100 feet for other individual uses, parcels or outlots 
(4)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(5)  Minimum Yards: Front = 35 feet 
Side = 25 feet 
Rear = 25 feet 
(6)  Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR) = Per the underlying Comprehensive Plan category 
(7)  Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) = Per the underlying Comprehensive Plan category 
(8)  Minimum distance between buildings on the same lot or parcel = 20 feet 
(Ord. No. 2012-13, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 2, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 2, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 2, 6-19-2017) 
25.10   HF Hospital Facilities District.
(A)  The HF District is established to provide for various medical and ancillary support activities that are carried out in conjunction with hospital functions. The facilities are intended for design in a planned and cohesive manner. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Hospitals 
(2)  Medical Offices and Clinics 
(3)  Nursing Homes 
(4)  Medical Research Facilities 
(5)  Distribution Electric Substations 
(6)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Community Residential Homes 
(2)  Congregate Care Facilities 
(3)  Emergency Shelters, Residential Treatment Facilities, and Recovery Homes 
(4)  Day Care Centers 
(5)  Funeral Homes and Mortuaries 
(6)  Light Utility Service 
(7)  Community Service Uses 
(8)  Group Homes for medical students and employees 
(9)  Veterinary Clinics and Animal Hospitals, provided that all boarding facilities shall be completely enclosed within a building 
(10)  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities 
(11)  Churches 
(12)  Schools of General Education 
(13)  Schools of Special Education 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Minimum Lot Area = 2.5 acres for multi-use sites; 10,000 square feet for individual uses, parcels or outlots 
(2)  Minimum Lot Width = 200 feet for multi-use sites; 100 feet for individual uses, parcels or outlots 
(3)  Minimum Lot Depth = 200 feet for multi-use sites; 100 feet for individual uses, parcels or outlots 
(4)  Maximum Height = 35 feet; Conditional Use approval can be requested for up to 65 feet provided an additional 5 feet per setback is provided for each story over 3 
(5)  Minimum Yards: 
Front = 50 feet adjoining thoroughfare streets; 25 feet adjoining internal streets 
Side = 25 feet 
Rear = 25 feet 
(6)  Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR) = Per the underlying Comprehensive Plan category 
(7)  Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) = Per the underlying Comprehensive Plan category 
(8)  Maximum site size for public/semi-public uses = Per the underlying Comprehensive Plan category 
(9)  Maximum intensity for Residential Equivalent Uses = Per the underlying Comprehensive Plan category 
25.11   FBI, Flex Business/Industrial District.
(A)  The FBI District is intended to encourage a compatible mix of freestanding, flex, and/or research buildings arranged as single structures or groupings with minimal nuisance characteristics to form a landscaped, park-like setting. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Live-Work Dwelling 
(2)  Business and Professional Offices 
(3)  Personal/Business Service Establishments 
(4)  Repair Service Establishments 
(5)  Art Studio/Workshop/Gallery 
(6)  Research and Development 
(7)  Light Manufacturing 
(8)  Commercial Recreation, Indoor 
(9)  Pet Grooming 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Warehouses 
(2)  Mini-warehouses 
(3)  Retail Sales Establishments 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Minimum Site Area = 10,000 square feet 
(2)  Minimum Lot Frontage = 100 feet 
(3)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(4)  Minimum Yards: 
Front = 25 feet 
Side = 10 feet 
Rear = 25 feet 
(5)  A landscaped buffer strip of 25 feet along all adjoining public rights-of-way and residential districts is required, provided however, the City Commission may modify this requirement for existing developed sites with a lesser buffer. Buffers shall be landscaped in accordance with the screening requirements of Section 154.00 through 154.07 of this Code, shall be maintained in accordance with the landscape requirements of this Code, and shall otherwise be unoccupied except for permitted utility facilities, signs, entrance ornamentation or permitted screening material. 
(6)  Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR) = .40 
(7)  Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) = .65 
(8)  Minimum distance between buildings on the same lot or parcel = 20 feet. 
(E)  Performance Standards: 
(1)  Access to the site shall be from a collector or arterial roadway. 
(2)  The following building materials are prohibited: 
a)  glass curtain walls which occupy more than 25 percent of the total outside wall area of a building; and 
b)  corrugated metal siding. 
(3)  Chain link fencing is prohibited. 
(4)  Lighting shall be designed, located, aimed, shielded, and maintained to minimize light pollution. Luminaires for lighting horizontal surfaces shall be full cutoff fixtures and shall be aimed downwards and not exceed 25 feet in height. Floodlights except those activated by motion sensor are prohibited. 
(5)  All activity and uses except storage, loading and unloading operations, and parking shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Loading and unloading operations shall be screened from public view. 
(6)  Night operations, including loading and unloading, are prohibited within 300 feet of the property line of any residential zoning district or area which is shown for residential use on the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. Night operations are those conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The Board of Appeals may grant a waiver to this prohibition if the Board finds that the noise attenuation and screening being provided is sufficient to mitigate the adverse impacts of the night operations within 300 feet. 
(7)  Stormwater management systems shall be designed to maximize an integrated design among the various lots or tracts within the development. The aesthetic treatment of retention/detention facilities through the use of contour, landscaping and the incorporation of water features is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2013-32, § 4, 12-16-2013) 
25.12   M-1 Light Industrial District.
(A)  The M-1 District is established to provide for light industrial development, warehousing, wholesale distribution, and related intensive commercial uses. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Light Manufacturing 
(2)  Light and Heavy Printing Establishments 
(3)  Warehouses 
(4)  Mini-warehouses 
(5)  Light and Heavy Utility Service 
(6)  Construction Service Establishments 
(7)  Construction Material Establishments 
(8)  Landscape Service Establishments 
(9)  Vehicle Repair, Minor and Major 
(10)  Service Stations 
(11)  Motor Freight Terminal 
(12)  Motor Pool Facility 
(13)  Research and Development 
(14)  Rental Service Establishments 
(15)  Repair Service Establishments 
(16)  Industrial Workshops and Services 
(17)  Community Service Uses 
(18)  Transportation Terminals 
(19)  Wholesale Trade 
(20)  Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 
(21)  Community Gardens 
(22)  Pet Grooming 
(23)  Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery 
(24)  Regional Brewery 
(25)  Medical Marijuana Treatment Center Cultivating Facility 
(26)  Medical Marijuana Treatment Center Processing Facility 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Business and Professional Offices 
(2)  Retail Sales Establishments 
(3)  Personal/Business Service Establishments 
(4)  Self-Service Gasoline Stations 
(5)  Car Wash 
(6)  Vehicle Sales and Rental Establishments 
(7)  Eating Establishments, Sit Down and Taverns 
(8)  Impound yards and other Outdoor Storage Facilities provided screening in accordance with Section 55.00 is required 
(9)  Brewpub 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Minimum Lot Area = 10,000 square feet 
(2)  Minimum Lot Width = 75 feet 
(3)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(4)  Minimum Yards: Front = 25 feet 
Side = 10 feet 
Rear = 10 feet 
A buffer of 20 feet is required adjoining nonindustrial Uses 
(5)  Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR) = .50 
(6)  Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) = .85 
(E)  Public/Semi-public uses shall not exceed five (5) acres in size without an amendment to another appropriate Comprehensive Plan category. 
(Ord. No. 2013-32, § 5, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 3, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 3, 6-19-2017; Ord. No. 2017-37, § 4, 12-18-2017) 
25.13   M-3 General Industrial District.
(A)  The M-3 District is established to provide for areas where a broad range of industrial uses may locate and operate with minimal impacts on adjoining properties. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Light Manufacturing 
(2)  Light and Heavy Printing Establishments 
(3)  Warehouses 
(4)  Wholesale Trade 
(5)  Light and Heavy Utility Service 
(6)  Construction Service Establishments 
(7)  Construction Material Establishments 
(8)  Landscape Service Establishments 
(9)  Vehicle Repair, Major and Minor 
(10)  Motor Freight Terminal 
(11)  Motor Pool Facility 
(12)  Research and Development 
(13)  Rental Service Establishments 
(14)  Industrial Workshops and Services 
(15)  Heliports and Helistops 
(16)  Transportation Terminals 
(17)  Impound Yards and other outdoor Storage Facilities provided screening in accordance with Section 55.00 is required 
(18)  Community Gardens 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Heavy Manufacturing 
(2)  Correctional Institutions 
(3)  Community Service Uses 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Minimum Lot Area = 15,000 square feet 
(2)  Minimum Lot Width = 150 feet 
(3)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(4)  Minimum Yards: 
(a)  Front = 25 feet 
(b)  Side = 10 feet; 75 feet if adjoining a Residential District 
(c)  Rear = 10 feet; 75 feet if adjoining a Residential District 
(5)  Maximum Nonresidential Floor Area Ratio (FAR) = .50 
(6)  Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) = .85 
(E)  Public/semi-public uses shall not exceed five (5) acres in size without an amendment to another appropriate Comprehensive Plan category. 
(Ord. No. 2013-32, § 5, 12-16-2013) 
25.14   P Public and Conservation District.
(A)  The P District is established to provide for areas where public and semi-public facilities serve the needs of the community, to provide for areas where the preservation of property unsuitable for development is desirable, and to provide for the public and quasi-public ownership of land. 
(B)  Permitted Uses: 
(1)  Community Service Uses* 
(2)  Public Works Compounds** 
(3)  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities*** 
(4)  Cemeteries* 
(5)  Transfer of Development Rights pursuant to Sections 166.00 through 166.03 of this Code**** 
(6)  Preservation areas, open space, and conservation easements set aside in accordance with a Site Plan approval or development agreement**** 
(7)  Golf Courses, Public or Private*** 
(8)  Schools of General Education* 
(9)  Light Utility Service** 
(10)  Government Offices and Related Facilities* 
(11)  Public Marinas*** 
(12)  Libraries, Museums, Galleries, Cultural Centers and Similar Uses* 
(13)  Churches* 
(14)  Public education facilities* 
(15)  Community Gardens* and *** 
* COMPATIBLE WITH INSTITUTIONAL PLAN CATEGORY 
** COMPATIBLE WITH TRANSPORTATION/UTILITY PLAN CATEGORY 
*** COMPATIBLE WITH RECREATION/OPEN SPACE PLAN CATEGORY 
**** COMPATIBLE WITH PRESERVATION PLAN CATEGORY 
(C)  Conditional Uses: 
(1)  Heavy Utility Service** 
(2)  Correctional Institutions* 
(3)  Nursing Homes* 
(4)  Hospital and Medical Clinics* 
(5)  Emergency Shelters, Residential Treatment Facilities and Recovery Homes* 
(6)  Private Clubs*** 
(7)  Transportation Terminals** 
(8)  Offices for nonprofit organizations* 
(9)  Schools of Special Education* 
(10)  Congregate Care Facilities* 
(11)  Other Institutional Uses* 
* COMPATIBLE WITH INSTITUTIONAL PLAN CATEGORY 
** COMPATIBLE WITH TRANSPORTATION/UTILITY PLAN CATEGORY 
*** COMPATIBLE WITH RECREATION/OPEN SPACE PLAN CATEGORY 
**** COMPATIBLE WITH PRESERVATION PLAN CATEGORY 
(D)  Dimensional Regulations: 
(1)  Minimum Lot Area = None 
(a)  Maximum Height = 35 feet 
(b)  Minimum Yards = In accordance with the approved site plan. Buffers in accordance with the Screening Requirements of Section 154.00 et seq. of the Code shall be required. 
(c)  Other standards shall be in accordance with the requirements of the underlying Comprehensive Plan Category. 
(Ord. No. 2013-32, § 5, 12-16-2013; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 4, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 2-16-2017) 
26.00-35.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

36.00 - Accessory uses and structures. 
(A)  Accessory uses are permitted in all zoning districts in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(B)  An accessory use is a use or structure which complies with the following standards: 
(1)  Is clearly incidental to, customarily found in association with, and serves a primary use. 
(2)  Is subordinate in purpose, area, and extent to the primary use served. 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the primary use served. 
(4)  Is located on the same lot, tract, parcel, or property as the primary use. 
(C)  All accessory structures shall comply with the requirements of the City's building codes. 
(D)  An accessory type structure which shares a structural wall, or is attached, shall be deemed to be part of the primary structure and must comply with the setback requirement of the district in which it is located. Provided, however, an accessory-type structure that is connected to a primary structure by a breezeway or roofed passage no greater than 10 feet in width, shall not be considered to be part of the primary structure as long as the breezeway or roofed passage remains open or screened. 
(E)  Accessory uses or structures shall only be allowed simultaneously with, or following, establishment/ construction of the primary use or structure. 
(F)  Accessory structures shall be located as follows: 
(1)  No closer than ten (10) feet to the primary structure; and 
(2)  No closer than five (5) feet to a lot line; and 
(3)  No closer than six (6) feet to any other accessory structure; and 
(4)  Not forward of the front face of the primary structure; except that an arbor, trellis, pergola, or gazebo unenclosed by walls or other minor decorative landscape feature may be permitted in a front yard with prior approval of the Planning and Zoning Director; 
(5)  Detached garages with alley access are subject to Sec. 149.00(I) and may require a greater setback from the lot line to accommodate vehicle turning movements in accordance with AASHTO standards; 
(6)  Accessory structures, excluding swimming pools, may occupy not more than thirty-five (35%) percent of a required rear yard and not more than five percent (5%) of a front yard; and 
(7)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height except on property located inside the Community Redevelopment District where accessory structures may have a maximum building height of twenty-five (25) feet provided: 
(a)  The accessory structure is located on a lot with alleyway access; and 
(b)  Any windows above the ground floor are located to protect the privacy of adjacent residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 2016-14, § 2, 6-6-2016) 
36.01   Accessory dwelling units.
(A)  Applicability. Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in all single-family residential zoning districts located within the City. 
(B)  Location. The accessory dwelling unit may be added to or included within the principal dwelling unit, or located in a detached structure. Detached accessory units must be located on either a corner lot or on a lot with improved alley access. 
(C)  Approval Process. One accessory dwelling unit is permitted per eligible lot provided the Planning and Zoning Director first approves the proposed accessory dwelling unit and a standard building permit is issued. 
(D)  Permit Renewal. A Certificate of Occupancy issued for an accessory dwelling unit shall expire if the accessory dwelling unit is found in violation by the City of Safety Harbor Code Enforcement Board or other code enforcement entity. Once an affidavit of compliance is issued by the City of Safety Harbor Code enforcement Officer or other code enforcement entity and imposed fines are paid to the City of Safety Harbor, the owner may reapply for a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(E)  Enforcement. The City retains the right with reasonable notice to inspect the accessory dwelling unit for compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
(F)  Owner Occupancy. The principal dwelling on the lot in which an accessory dwelling unit is constructed must be occupied by the owner of the premises. Owner occupancy is defined as the property owner, as reflected in title records, who makes his or her legal residence at the site, as evidenced by homestead exemption status by the Pinellas County Property Appraiser. The accessory dwelling unit shall not affect the homestead exemption status while the accessory dwelling unit is being occupied. 
(G)  Subdivision. Accessory dwelling units shall not be subdivided or otherwise segregated in ownership from the principal dwelling unit. 
(H)  Recording Requirements. Approval of the accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the applicant recording a document with the Pinellas County Clerk of the Circuit Court which runs with the land and identifies the address of the property, states that the owner(s) resides in the principal dwelling unit, includes a statement that the owner(s) will notify any prospective purchasers of the limitations of this section, and provides for the removal of the accessory dwelling unit if any of the requirements of this Section are violated. 
(I)  Elimination/Expiration. Elimination of an accessory dwelling unit may be accomplished by the owner recording a certificate with the Pinellas County Clerk of the Circuit Court and the Planning and Zoning Director stating that the accessory dwelling unit no longer exists on the property. 
(J)  Number of Occupants. No more than two occupants may reside in an accessory dwelling unit. 
(K)  Affordable Rental. The application for a building permit to construct an accessory dwelling must include an affidavit from the applicant which attests that the unit will be rented at an affordable rate (not to exceed 30 percent of annual household income) to a one or two person household earning 30 percent to 80 percent of the Median Income for Pinellas County set forth by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development as may be adjusted from time to time. 
(L)  Annual Certification. The property owner must provide the Planning and Zoning Department with a copy of the executed lease agreement or other acceptable form of documentation on an annual basis no later than December 31 of each year to demonstrate that the accessory dwelling unit is being rented at an affordable rate. 
(M)  Basic Development Standards. 
(1)  Additions to an existing structure or a newly constructed detached accessory dwelling unit shall be designed consistent with the existing roof pitch, siding and windows of the principal dwelling unit. 
(2)  The building height of an accessory structure containing an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 25 feet in elevation. 
(3)  The orientation of the proposed accessory dwelling unit shall, to the maximum extent practical, maintain the privacy of residents in adjoining dwellings as determined by the physical characteristics surrounding the accessory dwelling unit, including landscape screening, fencing, and window and door placement. 
(4)  A single-family dwelling containing an accessory dwelling unit shall have only one entrance on each front or side street of the residence. 
(5)  Accessory dwelling units must comply with building setback standards for accessory structures. 
(6)  The square footage of the accessory dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 300 square feet and a maximum of 800 square feet, excluding any garage area; provided the square footage of the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 50 percent of the total square footage of the principal dwelling unit, excluding the garage area, as it exists or as it may be modified. 
(7)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not contain more than one bedroom. 
(8)  Only one electrical and one water meter shall be allowed to serve the principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit. 
(9)  At least one off-street parking space must be provided to serve the accessory dwelling unit. 
(N)  Public Health. The Public Works Director must certify that the water supply and sewage disposal facilities are adequate to serve the proposed accessory dwelling unit. 
(O)  Public Safety. The Fire Marshal shall certify that the proposed accessory dwelling unit will comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
36.02   Swimming pools.
(A)  All construction shall be in accordance with the City's building codes. 
(B)  All pools shall be completely enclosed with an approved wall, fence, cage, or other substantial structure not less than four (4) feet in height. All entryways to fenced or enclosed pools shall be equipped with locks or safety latches which shall remain locked when not used or supervised by the owner. 
(C)  Swimming pools and screened cages for swimming pools may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that no part, including pool decking and other customary accessory structures associated with swimming pools, is located closer than five (5) feet to a lot line. Pools, screened cages and decks may not be placed within an easement, unless documentation is provided with the permit application demonstrating that there are no utilities or storm sewers within the easement, and the improvements do not impede or restrict drainage flow. 
(D)  Accessory swimming pools shall maintain a three (3) foot separation from the water's edge to the primary structure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 4, 5-23-2018) 
36.03   Fences, walls and hedges.
(A)  All fences, walls and hedges shall conform to the requirements of this Code for visibility triangles. 
(B)  For all one- and two-family residences, no fence, wall, or hedge shall exceed four (4) feet in height when located within a front yard except as follows: 
(1)  For properties located in the E-1, Estate Residential District, a fence, wall, or hedge within a required front yard setback up to five (5) feet in height is permitted provided fencing over four feet in height shall not be of chain-link or wood construction. 
(2)  For the purposes of this Section, the front yard of a corner lot shall be the side of the property from which the property is addressed. The other side facing a street shall be considered a secondary front yard. The maximum fence height in the secondary front yard is six (6) feet. 
(3)  The City Commission may allow a fence, wall, or hedge up to six (6) feet in height within a required front yard setback in connection with any site plan approval for a one- or two-family subdivision. 
(4)  Decorative columns, posts or other integral architectural features that do not exceed one foot above the maximum fence or wall height shall be permitted. 
(5)  For properties fronting roads designated collectors or arterials, and except within the Community Redevelopment District, where the maximum height is six (6) feet. 
(C)  Except in industrial districts, no fence or wall shall exceed six (6) feet in height. The maximum height in industrial districts shall be eight (8) feet. 
(D)  Barbed wire shall be limited to three (3) strands at a minimum of six (6) feet above the ground. Barbed wire may be used only on security fences or walls in commercial and industrial districts or accessory to any utility installation. 
(E)  Chain-link fencing is prohibited within a required primary or secondary front yard on residentially zoned properties. On non-residentially zoned properties chain-link fencing within a required front yard shall be vinyl coated (including strands, poles, and rails) with a black, green or brown color. 
(F)  The finished side of a fence shall face outward toward abutting lots and right-of-way. 
(G)  No more than one (1) perimeter fence shall be permitted per lot. 
(H)  Fences shall be set back at least one (1) foot from a platted alleyway. 
(I)  Vehicular gates are permitted on driveways at a minimum set back of twenty (20) feet from the roadway, shall not block the sidewalk when open, and are subject to the same requirements as fences. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 1, 8-15-2011; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2014-16, § 2, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 2, 5-7-2018) 
36.04   Screened cages.
Screened cages or decks may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that no part is located closer than five (5) feet to a lot line. Screened cages or decks may not be placed within an easement, unless documentation is provided with the permit application demonstrating that there are no utilities or storm sewers within the easement, and the improvements do not impede or restrict drainage flow. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 5, 5-23-2018) 
36.05   Mechanical equipment.
No mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, generators, propane tanks, plumbing lines, ductwork, and transformers shall be located within a primary front yard. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment may be located within a secondary front yard if opaque screening is provided around all sides of the equipment. Screening shall include an opaque decorative fence or wall or a non-opaque fence with opaque vegetative screening. All screening shall be a minimum of one (1) foot higher than the height of the mechanical equipment being screened and a maximum of six (6) feet in height. For the purposes of this section, the front yard of a corner lot shall be the side of the property from which the property is addressed. The other side facing a street shall be considered a secondary front yard. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment not on single-family residential property shall be screened from public rights-of-way, pedestrian areas, and any adjacent residential property using landscaping or other acceptable material. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be completely screened from all ground level views by a parapet wall or other architectural feature integrated to the building. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 2, 1-22-2019) 
36.06   Pavers.
Interlocking pavers or a continuous grouping of pavers, not part of a driveway, are permitted within any yard, provided that no paver is located closer than three (3) feet to a lot line unless the applicant submits drainage data for review by the City Engineer demonstrating positive site drainage and that the improvements do not impede off-site drainage patterns. Pavers are subject to the impervious surface ratio maximum established in Section 40.00 and shall allow for positive site drainage. Pavers are not permitted within six (6) feet from the trunk of a protected tree. Pavers placed under a protected tree canopy are to be pervious and installed at existing grade over sand. Pavers shall not be within three (3) feet of a meter box and require a paver waiver if installed over a utility. Any pavers installed within the right-of-way shall require a maintenance agreement between the applicant and the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 6, 5-23-2018) 
37.00 - Required visibility triangles. 
(A)  Visibility triangles are aids in establishing rules relating to the unsafe obstruction of motorist's visibility by objects either in the street right-of-way or on private property. 
(B)  Excepting utility appurtenances, traffic control features common to public roadways, nonstructural mailboxes and other materials as may be specifically authorized by an approved site plan, other valid development order or contractual agreement, no structure, landscaping, trees, shrubbery, signs, monuments or object of any kind may be placed, constructed or installed, either permanently or temporarily in any portion of a public street or alley right-of-way. 
(C)  Unsafe sight obstructions are regulated on private property by the use of visibility triangles established on all street and alley intersections and at all driveways entering into a public street or alley. 
(1)  Street Intersections - The visibility triangles shall be as defined in Chapter 3, Section C-3 of the "Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction & Maintenance for Streets and Highways", commonly known as the "Florida Greenbook" and depicted hereinbelow as Drawing 3-1. 

(2)  Alley or Driveway Intersections with Streets - The visibility triangle's three sides shall be formed by a ten foot measurement along the driveway edge line, a ten foot measurement along the intersecting right-of-way line and a hypotenuse connecting the two as depicted herein below as Drawing 3-2. 

(D)  All visibility triangles on private property shall be kept open for sighting through a space between two feet and 8 feet above the ground. No material including limbs and foliage may occupy that designated space, except separate tree trunks and poles no greater than four inches in diameter are allowed when the City Engineer determines that the spacing of such trunks and poles does not compromise safe sighting. 
38.00 - Yard encroachments. 
(A)  Every part of every required yard shall be open and unobstructed from 30 inches above the final grade of a lot upward, except as provided for by the following: 
(1)  Structures less than 30 inches in height above finished grade are not considered yard encroachments; 
(2)  Cornices, awnings, eaves, gutters or similar features which are at least eight (8) feet above grade may extend (30) inches into any required yard; 
(3)  Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental features may extend thirty (30) inches into any required yard, but not over the lot line; 
(4)  Bay windows, oriels, balconies, and chimneys not more than ten (10) feet in width may extend thirty (30) inches into any required yard; 
(5)  An outside stairway or fire escape, unenclosed, may extend thirty (30) inches into any required yard; 
(6)  Air conditioning units and other similar accessory equipment may be located in any required side or rear yard; 
(7)  Awnings, canopies, or roof structures which are at least eight (8) feet above finished grade may extend up to five (5) feet into a required front yard abutting Main Street from Philippe Parkway west to 10th Avenue, provided there are no vertical obstructions including, but not limited to, trees and light poles, and no underground utilities within the encroachment area; and 
(8)  Except as elsewhere provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-06, § 3, 5-7-2018) 
39.00 - Required access. 
(A)  Every structure shall be constructed on a lot adjoining a dedicated public street or with access to a private street determined to be acceptable by the City Engineer and Fire Marshal. 
(B)  Easements for the sole purpose of providing access to new lots (not a lot of record) shall not be permitted. 
(C)  No land which is residentially zoned shall be used as access to any land which is located in a non-residential district, except to an existing use which does not abut a public street or an approved private street determined to be acceptable by the City Engineer and Fire Marshal. 
40.00 - Maximum residential impervious surface. 
(A)  The maximum impervious surface ratio (ISR) shall be .60 for one and two family dwellings, and .75 for multi-family dwellings. An additional impervious surface coverage up to a maximum of ten percent (10%) may be permitted for swimming pools. 
41.00 - Community gardens. 
(A)  No gardening activities may take place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(B)  The use of hand tools, and domestic gardening tools and equipment is encouraged; the use of small power equipment such as gas-powered tillers and edgers are allowed; however, gas-powered equipment of greater than 10 horsepower is prohibited. 
(C)  The property owner(s) on which the community garden is located shall be responsible for maintaining the property so that it does not become overgrown with weeds, infested by exotic plants or vermin, a source of erosion or stormwater runoff, polluted by fertilizer or pesticide, insecticide, herbicide, or other agricultural-use chemicals, or does not become a public nuisance. 
(D)  Application of fertilizer, pesticide, insecticide, herbicide, and/or agricultural use chemicals shall be consistent with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(E)  The property owner on which the community garden is located shall ensure that the garden complies with all applicable standards as set forth under Chapter 166, Environmental and Natural Resource Protection, of the Pinellas County Code of Ordinances. 
(F)  The produce and horticultural plants grown in a community garden shall not be offered for sale on the premises or sold for profit. 
(G)  In cases where a community garden is located within ten (10) feet of a residential structure, screening as defined under Section 153.01(V) is required in a manner determined to be acceptable by the Community Development Director. 
(H)  Community gardening shall not occur in the front yard of a developed lot that is residentially zoned. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 5, 3-16-2015) 
42.00 - Design of single-family detached residential units. 
(A)  Design of single-family detached residential dwellings on the same block face of either side of the street or within an adjacent block face on either side of the street shall be varied, such that a substantially similar primary front facade will not be replicated. There shall be a minimum separation of two lots next to and across from each dwelling before a substantially similar design can be repeated. (See Figure A below). This shall be applied to all subdivisions and building permit applications where four or more single-family residential dwellings are proposed to be developed as part of the application by the same individual or entity within a twelve-month period. 

(B)  Variation shall include differences in at least three (3) of the following elements on the primary front façade: 
(1)  Architectural style; 
(2)  Roof form (principal or porch); 
(3)  Form of unenclosed front porch; 
(4)  Form of recessed garage by a minimum of five (5) feet from primary front facade; 
(5)  Architectural features: 
a.  Columns; 
b.  Dormers; 
c.  Tower or turret; 
d.  Bay window; 
e.  Decorative shutters or awnings; 
f.  Exposed rafters; 
g.  Window sill and door trim a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) inches in width; 
h.  Recessed windows by a minimum of two and one-half (2.5) inches. 
Element 5 shall only count as one (1) of the three (3) required elements for variation, no matter how many architectural features (a-h) are included. Inclusion of only one (1) of the listed architectural features (a - h) is required to satisfy element 5. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18, § 2, 11-19-2018) 
43.00-50.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV - SPECIAL REGULATIONS 

51.00 - Home occupations. 
(A)  Home occupations shall be allowed in any residential district either permitted by right or as a Special Exception. 
(B)  Any person who engages in a home occupation shall be required to have a current occupational license from the City. 
(C)  All persons engaging in home occupations shall sign an affidavit at the time of occupational license application agreeing to comply with all standards contained herein. 
(D)  A home occupation shall mean the special use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment, provided the occupational use is incidental to the primary purpose of the dwelling unit as a residence and does not change its character. 
(E)  An address of convenience shall mean the accessory use of a dwelling unit primarily for telephone purposes related to the residence owner's business, provided no business activity, excluding phone calls or transactions occur on the premises. 
51.01   Prohibited home occupations.
(A)  The following occupations are prohibited as home occupations: 
(1)  Catering Services 
(2)  Vehicle Repair (Minor or Major) 
(3)  Beauty Salons 
(4)  Barber Shops 
(5)  Retail Sales 
(6)  Repair Service or Upholstering 
(7)  Professional Offices (except as allowed by Section 51.02) and Photographic Studios 
(8)  Medical/Dental Offices and Laboratories 
(9)  Massage Parlors. 
51.02   Home occupations permitted as an address of convenience.
(A)  The following home occupations which obtain a valid City occupational license and are in compliance with the standards of this Section are permitted by right as an address of convenience accessory to a residence as follows: 
(1)  A business or professional office used primarily for telephone purposes where no customer traffic is permitted. 
(2)  School of special education for tutoring limited to one (1) pupil at any given time. 
(3)  Home crafts or artists studios. 
(4)  Day Care Homes. 
(B)  Not more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the residence shall be utilized in the conduct of the address of convenience. 
(C)  No on-premises advertising signs shall be permitted. 
(D)  No sale of goods at the residence shall be permitted. 
(E)  Business related materials (except for those needed for artists and home crafts) shall be stored indoors and concealed from public view. No commercial vehicles or equipment shall be permitted. 
(F)  Only residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-21-2012) 
51.03   Conditional home occupations.
(A)  The following home occupations in compliance with the standards of this Section only may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as a Special Exception in any residential district as follows: 
(1)  A business office or home craft or artist studio where customer traffic, sales, the receipt of mail or deliveries, a sign, or in excess of ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the residence is required to conduct the occupation. 
(2)  A use is proposed at a location where an address of convenience has already been permitted. 
(3)  School of special education limited to not more than four (4) pupils at any given time. 
(4)  Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors. 
(B)  Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the residence shall be utilized in the conduct of the home occupation. 
(C)  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the residence and not within an accessory structure. 
(D)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation, except for allowable signage. 
(E)  Only residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(F)  Retail transactions shall be limited to articles produced on the premises. 
(G)  No outdoor display of goods or outdoor storage of materials, commercial vehicles or equipment shall be permitted. 
(H)  The home occupation shall not change the principal character of the site as a residence. 
(I)  The home occupation shall not generate traffic above that which would normally occur in a residential neighborhood or create a parking problem. 
(J)  No more than two (2) deliveries per week shall be permitted. 
(K)  A maximum of one (1) non-illuminated on-site wall sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in area on the principal residential building not more than two (2) feet from an entrance shall be permitted. 
52.00 - Residential living facilities. 
(A)  A family care home shall mean a dwelling unit licensed to serve residents who are clients of the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, the Department of Elder Affairs, the Agency for Persons with Disabilities, the Department of Juvenile Justice, or the Department of Children and Family Services or licensed by the Agency for Health Care Administration, which provides a group living environment for up to six (6) unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the residents. 
(B)  A community residential home shall mean a dwelling unit for 7 to 14 residents which otherwise meets the definition of a family care home. 
(C)  A congregate care facility shall mean a dwelling unit for 15 or more residents which otherwise meets the definition of a family care home. 
(D)  Residential living facilities shall not include nursing homes, emergency shelters, residential treatment facilities or recovery homes. 
(E)  Family care home, community residential home and congregate care home resident shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Aged person as defined in Section 400.618(3), Florida Statutes, as amended; or 
(2)  A physically disabled or handicapped person as defined in Section 760.22(7)(a), Florida Statutes, as amended; or 
(3)  A developmentally disabled person as defined in Section 393.001(2), Florida Statutes, as amended; or 
(4)  A non-dangerously mentally ill person as defined in Section 394.455(3), Florida Statutes, as amended; or 
(5)  A child as defined in Sections 39.01(8) and (10), as amended, Florida Statutes; or 
(6)  Persons who would not constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other persons or whose residency would not result in the substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(F)  All locational standards shall be measured from the nearest property line of the existing home to the nearest point of the proposed home. 
(G)  When notified of the siting of a residential living facility by an agency listed in subsection (A) above, the Planning Department shall respond within 60 days regarding the local community's zoning procedures and any necessary scheduling requirements, and in the case of a family care home, the approval status. 
(H)  To avoid unsafe or unhealthy conditions, residential living facilities shall be provided according to the following standards: 
(1)  A minimum of 35 square feet of common area per resident, live-in staff, and live-in family member. 
(2)  A minimum of eighty (80) square feet in each sleeping space for single occupancy and sixty (60) square feet per bed in multiple occupancy sleeping space. 
(3)  A minimum of one (1) full bathroom for each five (5) residents, and an additional toilet and sink for each additional group of four (4) persons or less. 
(4)  Common area shall mean the total of all usable areas of the interior of a building designated accessible to the resident excluding bathrooms, corridors, storage space, or screened porches which cannot be adapted for year round use; facilities with bedrooms which include living space may count the living space square footage and excess bedroom square footage. 
(I)  If the structure utilized is a dwelling unit in a residential district, the residential character of the area shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, §§ 1, 2, 12-17-2012) 
52.01   Emergency shelters, residential treatment facilities and recovery homes.
(A)  Emergency shelters, residential treatment facilities, and recovery homes shall also be required to comply with items (H) and (I) of 52.00. 
52.02   Standards of family care homes.
(A)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code to the contrary, family care homes shall be permitted by right in all residential districts provided that the proposed home meets the zoning district regulations for the applicable zoning district and the standard housing code uniformly applied to all single-family homes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-19, § 3, 12-17-2012) 
52.03   Standards for community residential homes.
(A)  Site plan review shall be required. The site plan shall show compliance with all applicable development regulations. 
(B)  All applications for community residential homes shall include a floor plan of the structure locating all bedrooms with the number of proposed residents in each bedroom indicated, all bathrooms indicating whether a full or half bathroom, all other rooms labeled and indicating whether the facilities are existing or proposed. 
(C)  All applications for community residential homes shall be accompanied by the results of an inspection by the Fire Marshall. 
(D)  The minimum lot area requirements of a community residential home shall be 15,000 square feet. 
(E)  All community residential homes shall comply with the required parking and landscaping regulations. 
(F)  The use of paver blocks to meet the parking requirements shall be preferred, and shall result in a parking credit of one (1) space for every four (4) spaces required. 
(G)  Community residential homes shall not be located within 1,200 feet of a pre-existing community residential home. 
(H)  The Board of Appeals may grant a variance to the locational standard provided a finding is made by the Board that the site is suitable in terms of compatibility, size, Comprehensive Plan policies, and such that the nature and character of the area would not be substantially altered. 
52.04   Standards for congregate care facilities.
(A)  The maximum intensity of a congregate care facility shall be calculated on the basis of 3.0 beds per allowable unit of residential density. 
(B)  Site plan review shall be required. The site plan shall show compliance with all applicable development regulations. 
52.05   Facilities established prior to the effective date of this Code.
(A)  Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to affect the authority of any Residential Living Facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Code to continue to operate. However, any Residential Living Facility that changes its classification to another type of Residential Living Facility or increases its number of residents shall be required to meet all applicable regulations in effect at that time. 
53.00 - Wetlands protection. 
(A)  Wetlands shall be defined in accordance with Section 373.421(1), Florida Statutes, and any corresponding sections of the Florida Administrative Code. 
(B)  The exact limits of wetlands shall be determined by a field-surveyed boundary line sealed by a Florida Registered Surveyor and approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE). 
(C)  For review purposes the applicant may utilize a qualified consultant to determine wetland boundaries in accordance with the identification requirements of the regulatory agencies. Each survey shall be sealed by a Florida Registered Surveyor and indicate the name of the consultant and date of the field survey. However, any wetlands boundary delineation intended for permitting purposes must have the prior approval of the applicable regulatory agencies as well as indicate the name of the individual and agency signing off on the boundary, and the date the field survey was conducted or the signoff made. 
(D)  No development activity shall be undertaken in a wetlands area unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code. 
(E)  Wetlands may be utilized as follows: 
(1)  Scenic, historic, wildlife, or scientific preserves. 
(2)  Catwalks and walking trails. 
(3)  Commercial or recreational fishing. 
(4)  Constructing fences where no fill activity is required. 
(5)  Stormwater discharge or treatment in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(6)  Dockage or marinas. 
(7)  New riprap or similar structures where all required State and County permits have been received. A combination of riprap and vegetation shall be the preferred shoreline stabilization design. 
(8)  Maintenance dredging, and maintenance or replacement of stormwater facilities. 
(9)  Construction, replacement, or widening of bridges. 
(10)  Installation of subaqueous transmission and distribution lines for water, wastewater, electricity, communication cables, oil or gas. 
(11)  The upland transfer of development rights where permitted by this Code. 
(12)  Recreational activities. 
(F)  The encroachment upon wetlands by development activity shall only be permitted under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The public benefits of the activity substantially outweigh the adverse environmental effects, as determined by the appropriate federal, state or local agencies, and 
(2)  The appropriate federal, state or local agency examines the alternatives and determines that strict denial would effectively deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the land due to its unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions, and location, or that an alternative would be technically impractical in terms of engineering, design and construction practices, and 
(3)  A compensatory wetland mitigation plan is approved by the appropriate federal, state or local agency. 
(G)  Compensatory wetland mitigation shall be performed in accordance with the Florida Uniform Mitigation Assessment Method as adopted in Chapter 62-345, Florida Administrative Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(H)  Other protective measures may be instituted or required as follows: 
(1)  Maintaining natural drainage patterns. 
(2)  Limiting the removal of vegetation to the minimum necessary to carry out the development activity. 
(3)  Stabilizing banks and other un-vegetated areas. 
(4)  Minimizing the amount of fill and requiring the use of pilings. 
(5)  Disposing of dredged soil at specified locations. 
(6)  Prohibiting the use of septic tanks in areas with a high groundwater table. 
(7)  Using deed restrictions and conservation easements to protect and maintain the wetland. 
(8)  The use of silt screens. 
(9)  Restoration of wetlands damaged during construction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 3-16-2105) 
53.01   Wetland and shoreline buffers.
(A)  A buffer shall be provided on all lands within 25 feet of any property designated on the Zoning Atlas as Preservation (P), or any property determined to be wetlands under the jurisdiction for the State of Florida ("jurisdictional wetlands"); and all lands within 15 feet to the top of the bank of any creeks, channels, or related waterways which contain jurisdictional wetlands. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, a buffer shall mean an area reserved as open space, free of structures, impervious surface, roadways, storage and other enclosures or appurtenances. 
(C)  The use of native vegetation as a buffer shall be used where such vegetation exists. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 2, 3-16-2015) 
54.00 - Temporary uses. 
(A)  All requests for temporary use permits shall require prior approval from the Technical Review Committee (TRC) prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(B)  All temporary structures shall comply with the requirements of the applicable building codes. 
(C)  Temporary structures are not required to comply with the district setback requirements. 
(D)  All requests for temporary use permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan or survey showing the nature of the activity and temporary improvements involved, and a time period for which the permit is requested. 
(E)  Adequate utility, drainage, refuse management, emergency services and access, parking, and similar necessary facilities and services shall be available for the use. Sanitary facilities shall be approved by the Pinellas County Health Department in writing. Tents in excess of 11' in length shall demonstrate compliance with tent permit requirements. 
(F)  Special Events on public property or right-of-way shall not require temporary use approval under this Section. 
(G)  Temporary Use permits may be issued for one day, ninety days, or six months. 
(H)  One day permits may be issued for up twelve events per year per applicant. 
(I)  Six-month permits may be issued for uses open up to two calendar days per week for up to six consecutive months. Thirty days after the permit expiration, the applicant may reapply for a permit for up to six consecutive months with no maximum number of requests. 
(J)  Ninety-day permits are for uses open daily (open six or more days a week) and may be approved for up to ninety days. 
(K)  Upon a showing of unusual circumstances, the City Manager or his (her) designee may grant one extension of the original approval period for ninety-day permits. No future extensions will be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
54.01   Construction trailers.
(A)  The use shall be located on the site of an active construction project. 
(B)  The area shall be maintained so as to prevent dust and debris from impacting adjoining property. 
(C)  The applicant shall obtain a building or construction permit prior to the issuance of a temporary permit. 
(D)  The temporary use may be permitted for a maximum period of twelve (12) months. 
54.02   Model homes, temporary real estate offices.
(A)  The use shall be located only in districts where the structures may be erected and occupied for residential purposes. 
(B)  The use shall be located on the same site as the units or project with which it is connected. Construction on the project shall be kept active and the sales office shall not be used to market off-site developments. 
(C)  At least five (5) off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot or a contiguous lot. The parking area shall be landscaped and mulched; wheel stops shall be utilized to delineate individual parking spaces. 
(D)  No more than ten percent (10%) of all units or a maximum of ten (10) units, whichever is less, may be permitted as model homes. 
(E)  The temporary use may be permitted for a maximum period of thirty-six (36) months, or upon the sale or lease of all the dwelling units in the project, whichever occurs first. 
54.03   Retail promotional activities.
(A)  Tents to be utilized for the temporary sales or display of retail items may be permitted in any commercial district provided the area is immediately adjacent to the place where such goods are usually sold. The sale of seasonal items may be allowed on vacant lots upon review by the Technical Review Committee. 
(B)  Sufficient area shall be provided for off-street parking and loading. 
(C)  Illuminating fixtures shall not emit glare or light which impacts adjoining residential properties. 
(D)  Ingress and egress from the use shall be provided in a manner which ensures sufficient vehicle maneuverability, and vehicle and pedestrian safety. 
(E)  All electrical connections shall meet the requirements of the applicable building codes. 
(F)  The temporary use may be permitted for a maximum consecutive period of fourteen (14) days, but shall be limited to three (3) consecutive periods per year. The sale of seasonal items may be permitted for up to forty-five (45) days. 
55.00 - Outdoor storage. 
(A)  No outdoor storage, sales, service, or display of merchandise, equipment or materials shall be permitted except as shown on an approved site plan and provided below: 
(1)  Sales or display necessary to a vehicle sales, service, or rental establishment. 
(2)  Sales, display, and storage of plant material at a plant nursery or garden center. 
(3)  Any outdoor storage area is completely enclosed by opaque screening no less than six (6) feet in height consisting of a fence and appropriate landscaping. 
55.01   Nonmobile outdoor independent storage units.
(A)  Shipping containers, truck beds or other vehicle or body parts, or similar equipment shall not be used for storage in any District, nor shall they be stored on any property unless located in an approved impound yard. 
(B)  Portable storage units, defined as an above ground container designed to be mobile and designed to be used for short-term storage, may be permitted under the following circumstances: 
(1)  No more than one (1) portable storage unit may be permitted per unit on residentially zoned property, or (1) per leased space on property zoned for nonresidential uses. 
(2)  Portable storage units shall be allowed for temporary storage not to exceed one (1) week in residential districts and 30 days in nonresidential districts without a permit, not to exceed twice per calendar year. Portable storage units that exceed these time limits must receive Temporary Use approval for a specified time, and subject to other conditions that the City deems necessary. No temporary use shall exceed 30 days in residential districts and 90 days in nonresidential districts unless there is an active building permit on the property, resulting in the need for temporary storage. 
(3)  Portable storage units shall not exceed 8 feet in width, 8 feet in height, and 16 feet in length. 
(4)  A sticker shall be affixed to all portable storage units indicating the date on which the unit is delivered to the property or, at the request of the City, the property owner shall produce a valid invoice indicated the date the unit was delivered to the property. 
(5)  No portable storage units shall not interfere with, or obstruct any right of way, drainage, traffic circulation, sidewalk, visibility for pedestrian or traffic circulation, or emergency access. Portable storage units in residential districts shall be located on a driveway or other paved surface. 
(6)  The Building Official in the event of a natural disaster may waive these requirements where the City or County has received a state or federal disaster declaration. 
56.00 - Docks, piers and shoreline stabilization structures. 
(A)  These uses shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Board. 
(B)  No construction shall occur without the approval of the Pinellas County Water and Navigation Board, Florida Department of Natural Resources (DNR), Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE), or other affected agency which has jurisdiction. 
(C)  The installation of accessory facilities requires the issuance of a Building Permit by the City. 
57.00 - Day care centers. 
(A)  A minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet is required in zoning districts principally zoned for residential use. 
(B)  Direct access to a public street is required. 
(C)  An on-site circular drive or other means of ingress and egress determined to be acceptable by the Technical Review Committee shall be required for the pick-up and delivery of children. 
(D)  One hundred (100) square feet of usable outdoor recreation area shall be provided for each child that may use the recreation area at any one time. 
(E)  The recreation area shall not be located in the front yard. 
(F)  The recreation area shall be fenced and screened from adjoining residential uses by a continuous hedge and trees, or an opaque fence with a tree spaced each twenty-five (25) linear feet. 
58.00 - Retail gasoline pumps. 
(A)  A minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet on all adjoining streets is required. 
(B)  A minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet is required. 
(C)  No pump island or pump island canopy shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of any street line or any residentially zoned or used property. 
(D)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, pursuant to section 553.79(20), Florida Statutes (as may be amended from time to time) to the extent any regulation contained in this Code conflicts with or impairs corporate trademarks, service marks, trade dress, logos, color patterns, design scheme insignia, image standards, or other features of corporate branding identity on real property or other improvements thereon used in activities conducted under chapter 526, Florida Statutes (Sales of Liquid Fuels; Brake Fluid) such regulation shall not be enforceable against such property so long as the property owner, or its duly authorized representative, first provides the City with evidence sufficient to demonstrate the conflict and/or impairment of the regulation at issue with the corporate trademarks, service marks, trade dress, logos, color patterns, design scheme insignia, image standards, or other features of corporate branding identity. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 2, 3-18-2019) 
59.00 - Excavation and fill. 
(A)  The fill, excavation, or alteration of the natural grade of land, or the construction or removal of a retaining wall shall require a permit issued through the Engineering Department. A retaining wall shall mean a structure constructed or designed to hold back or support an earthen bank. 
(B)  Excavation as the primary use of the site for the sole purpose of selling excavated material shall require Conditional Use approval from the City Commission and shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  No excavation shall occur within 100 feet of any road right-of-way or private street, and 50 feet of any remaining perimeter property line. 
(2)  Submission of a program for controlling fugitive dust originating from any areas disturbed by excavation. 
(3)  Submission of a haul route and the estimated number of trips per day. Prior to the shipment of excavated material on County roads the City Engineer shall request a review and sign off from the Pinellas County Public Works Department. Prior to the shipment of excavated material on City roads the City Engineer shall consider the impact on roadway stability resulting from such shipments. As a condition of approval, the City Engineer may require a roadway maintenance agreement or bonding to ensure repairs resulting from damage to such roads based upon the pre-existing roadway conditions are the responsibility of the excavator. Such agreement shall require the City Engineer to videotape the condition of the haul route prior to excavation and at the excavation's completion. 
(4)  Submission of a Master reclamation and drainage plan. 
(5)  Revegetation of all disturbed areas. 
(6)  A minimum excavation slope of 3:1. 
(7)  Fencing of the site at a minimum height of four (4) feet to restrain public access to the site during excavation. 
(8)  Submission of a site plan or engineered drawings sealed by a Florida Registered Engineer. 
(C)  No permit for the fill, excavation, or alteration of land shall be issued unless those applicable to the circumstance of the following have been obtained: 
(1)  Site plan approval. 
(2)  Construction or Right-of-Way and Easement Utilization permit approval. 
(3)  Approval of a drainage plan by the Public Works Director. 
(4)  Permits from other affected agencies or jurisdictions. 
(5)  A grubbing or preliminary land clearing permit has been obtained from Pinellas County. 
(6)  Approval of an Erosion Control Plan by the City Engineer. 
(D)  In the review and granting of administrative approval of an excavation permit, the Engineering Department may request compliance with any of the items under (B) above. 
(E)  The encroachment upon any associated wetlands shall require compliance with the wetlands protection provisions of this Code as set forth in Section 53.00. 
(F)  No net encroachment which will adversely affect either conveyance, storage, water quality or adjacent lands within the area encompassed by the 100-year flood event shall be allowed without supporting data provided by a licensed professional engineer demonstrating that the encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. Any required compensating storage will be equivalently provided between the seasonal high water level and the 100-year flood level to allow storage function during all lesser flood events. This shall apply to areas of special flood hazard and areas without established base flood elevations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 6, 3-16-2015) 
60.00 - Antennas. 
(A)  An antenna shall be defined to include all devices for sending or receiving radio waves or other audio or video signals, including all supporting hardware. 
(B)  A satellite antenna is an antenna that includes all parabolic or spherical antennas whose purpose is to receive and/or transmit satellite signals of both audio and video transmission. 
(C)  An antenna shall be considered an accessory structure and shall comply with the accessory use regulations of this Code, except for companies whose business involves the reception of transmission of satellite communications. 
(D)  All antennas shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the City's Building and Electrical Codes, and a valid building permit from the City shall be required for installation. 
(E)  All antennas and any part thereof shall maintain vertical and horizontal clearances from any electric lines in accordance with the National Electric Safety Code, and installation shall meet all FCC and manufacturer rules and requirements. 
(F)  All satellite antennas shall be nonreflective and neutral in color so as to blend in with the surroundings. 
(G)  No advertising shall be allowed on satellite antennas. 
(H)  All antennas shall be permanently mounted and nonportable. 
(I)  Pole-mounted antennas may only be mounted on a single pole affixed to the primary structure. 
(J)  Pole- or roof-mounted antennas exceeding eight (8) feet in diameter shall only of the mesh or perforated type. 
(K)  Associated guy wires shall meet all required setbacks and location limitations. 
(L)  There shall be permitted only one (1) accessory satellite antenna per lot or parcel of land for single-family and two-family residences. 
(M)  Roof-mounted accessory satellite antennas shall be prohibited on single-family, two-family and mobile home residences. Satellite antennas may be roof mounted on multifamily, commercial and industrial uses. 
(N)  There shall be no more than two (2) satellite antennas per lot or parcel of land for multifamily, mobile home park, commercial, and industrial uses. For multifamily and mobile home park (subdivision) uses more than one satellite antenna shall only be allowed for a master system installed for the purpose of serving the entire complex. 
(O)  Accessory satellite antennas shall be permitted in side and rear yards only, and shall conform to the setbacks required by the regulations for accessory structures. 
(P)  For the purpose of measurement of the dimensions of an antenna, the antenna shall be deemed to extend from its central point of location (post, pole or other fixture that supports the said antenna), a distance equal to the radius of the antenna dish or the maximum extension of any component part or other structure designed for the receiving of satellite or other transmissions. 
(Q)  The dimensional regulations shall be as follows: 
(1)  For single-family and two-family uses, the maximum height of ground mounted satellite antenna shall not exceed 15 feet including base, pedestal or other mounting devices, and the maximum height of all pole mounted antenna shall not exceed 12 feet above the highest point of the roof. The maximum size shall be 12 feet in diameter for satellite antenna, and shall be a cumulative surface area of 15 square feet for non-satellite antenna. 
(2)  For multifamily and mobile home park (subdivision) uses the maximum height of a ground-mounted satellite antenna shall not exceed 21 feet for a master system and 15 feet for an individual system including base, pedestal and other mounting devices. The maximum height of pole-mounted satellite antenna shall not exceed 12 feet above the highest point of the roof, and roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed 15 feet above the highest point of the roof. The maximum height of nonsatellite antenna shall not exceed 20 feet above the highest point of the roof. The maximum size shall be 161/2 feet in diameter for a master satellite antenna, 12 feet in diameter for an individual unit satellite antenna, and shall be a cumulative surface area of 20 square feet for nonsatellite antennas. 
(3)  For commercial and industrial uses the maximum height shall not exceed 21 feet for a ground-mounted satellite antenna, 12 feet above the highest point of the roof for a pole-mounted satellite antenna, 15 feet above the highest point of the roof for a roof-mounted satellite antenna, and 20 feet above the highest point of the roof for a nonsatellite antenna. The maximum size shall be 161/2 feet in diameter for a satellite dish antenna, 25 square feet of cumulative surface area for a nonsatellite antenna in conjunction with commercial uses, and 50 square feet of cumulative surface area for a nonsatellite antenna in conjunction with industrial uses. 
(R)  All requests for building permits shall be accompanied by engineering plans sealed by a Florida Registered Engineer certifying that the assembly meets or exceeds the wind velocity and structural loading requirements of the applicable building codes. 
60.01   Exemptions.
(A)  The following antennas are exempt from the requirements of Section 60.00: 
(1)  An antenna that is designed to receive direct satellite service, which is one (1) meter or less in diameter. 
(2)  An antenna that is designed to receive video programming services, which is one (1) meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement. 
(3)  An antenna that is designed to receive television broadcast signals. 
(4)  A satellite dish antenna that is located in conjunction with any commercial, industrial or public/semi-public use that is not residential in nature, which is two (2) meters or less in diameter. 
61.00 - Lodging facilities. 
(A)  Lodging facilities shall be allowed in any district subject to Conditional Use approval. 
(B)  Lodging facility shall be defined as a bed and breakfast facility which is an owner occupied residence which provides lodging on a transient basis in a structure which is listed on a recognized historic site inventory but which does not change the residential or historical character of the structure. The term does not include a hotel, motel or boarding house. 
(C)  The use shall only be allowed in residential structures that are listed on the Florida Master Site File, the National Register of Historic Places, the register of the local Historic Incentives Board, or a contributing structure located in a National Register or local historic district. 
(D)  The renovation or restoration shall preserve the historical context of the original structure and shall contribute significantly to the character and economic revitalization of the neighborhood. 
(E)  The individual rooms that are rented shall not contain cooking facilities. 
62.00 - Alcoholic beverages. 
(A)  The sale or dispensing of alcohol requiring a state beverage license shall not be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any pre-existing church or school except in the Main Street Marketplace Character District as delineated under Section 98.00 of this Code and in the C1-A, Restricted Commercial District as depicted on the Official Zoning Atlas as established under Section 21.00 of this Code. The distance shall be measured from property line to property line by the most direct route. 
(B)  The City Commission may grant a waiver to the requirements of this Section as follows: 
(1)  The sale of alcohol is solely for consumption off premises; 
(2)  The sale of alcohol is incidental to the use of the establishment as a restaurant which shall have a minimum seating capacity of fifty (50) seats and derives at least fifty-one percent (51%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages. 
(C)  Dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall mean a bottle club or other commercial establishment operated for a profit, whether or not a profit is actually made, wherein patrons consume alcoholic beverages which are brought onto the premises and not sold or supplied to the patrons by the establishment, whether the patrons bring in and maintain custody of their own alcoholic beverages or surrender custody to the establishment for dispensing on the premises, and which is located in a building or other enclosed permanent structure. This definition does not apply to sporting facilities where events sanctioned by nationally recognized regulatory athletic or sports associations are held, bona fide restaurants licensed by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business Regulation whose primary business is the service of full course meals, or hotels and motels licensed by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business Regulation. 
(D)  Any waiver made in accordance with this section may be revoked after notice to the owner, if it is found that the sale of alcoholic beverages is no longer incidental to the function of the restaurant business, or in the case of a waiver for sale off-premises, if it is found that alcohol is being consumed on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 8-15-2011; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 2, 8-6-2012) 
63.00 - Telecommunications antennas and towers. 
(A)  The purpose of Sections 63.00 through 63.08 is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals are to encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites; encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; establish review procedures to ensure that applications for telecommunications facilities are acted upon within a reasonable period of time; and enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunication services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
(B)  These requirements shall not have the effect of prohibiting the provision of telecommunications service; shall not have the effect of unreasonably discriminating among providers of functionally equivalent services; and shall not regulate the placement of facilities based upon the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, if the antennas comply with FCC rules on radio emissions. 
(C)  Facilities that are installed in accordance with the requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(D)  All facilities shall comply with the standards and regulations of the FAA and the FCC. 
63.01   Definitions.
(A)  Accessory antennas: A facility that is an accessory to an existing use or structure, and is clearly incidental to or subordinate in terms of purpose, area and extent. 
(B)  Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
(C)  Camouflage techniques: Sometimes referred to as a concealed or stealth facility. A tower or antenna designed to unobtrusively blend into the existing surroundings, be disguised so as to not have the appearance of a communications facility, or be designed or located in such a manner that the tower or antenna is not easily discernable from the ground. These types of facilities may be attached or freestanding. Attached facilities may be camouflaged through the use of paint to match the building or structure, and through the use of faux windows, dormers or other architectural features that blend in with the building or structure. Examples of freestanding facilities include the form and shape of a tree, bell tower, steeple, clock tower, light standard, flagpole and other techniques which serve to diminish the visual impact of the tower or antenna. 
(D)  FAA: Federal Aviation Administration. 
(E)  FCC: Federal Communications Commission. 
(F)  Height: The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if the highest point on the tower or structure is the antenna. 
(G)  Primary use: The predominant use of the land or structure. 
(H)  Substantial change: A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an existing support structure if it meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  The modification increases the height of a tower by more than 10% or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, or will protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet; or 
(2)  For any other support structure, the modification increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater, or will protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; or 
(3)  The modification would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four, or the installation of more than one new equipment shelter; or 
(4)  The modification entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site. 
(I)  Tower: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. 
(J)  Transmission Equipment: Equipment that facilitates the transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
63.02   Inventory of existing sites and geographic service area; other information required.
(A)  Every applicant for a telecommunications antenna and/or tower shall provide an inventory of its existing facilities within the City and within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the City. This inventory shall include specific information about location, height, design and service limitation of each facility. 
(B)  Each applicant shall also include a description of the geographic service area of the proposed facility. 
(C)  If requested by the City, the applicant shall provide whatever complex technical and other information the City deems necessary to determine issues such as whether these regulations prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting service to the community. At a minimum, this information should include a radio frequency propagation plot plan indicating the coverage of existing facilities, coverage prediction, and design radius, together with an analysis from the applicant's RF Engineer that the coverage cannot be provided by an existing telecommunications (including co-locations), structure, utility distribution tower or other site, including a review of existing structures within the proposed service area, and why they were found to be unacceptable. 
(D)  Each applicant shall state whether they intend to connect to a fiber optic network of a cable system provider or electric utility company. The applicant shall not be entitled to connect to the fiber optic network of a cable service provider or electric utility company if the cable service provider or electric utility company has not obtained a telephone franchise allowing for the provision of telecommunications service. 
63.03   Accessory telecommunications antenna.
(A)  An accessory telecommunications antenna shall be permitted by right in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The antenna is installed as accessory to any existing tower or other structure appropriate for antenna location; including, but not limited to, a building (with the exception of any single-family or two-family residence), sign, light pole, water tower, steeple, transmission tower or other freestanding structure; and 
(2)  The antenna shall not add more than twenty (20) feet in height to the existing tower or structure; and 
(3)  Other supporting equipment used in conjunction with the antenna shall be allowed as an accessory structure provided the equipment is appropriately screened or camouflaged; and 
(4)  The antenna and supporting equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure to make the facility as visually unobtrusive as possible. Where the antenna is attached to an existing structure other than a co-location on an existing communications or electric transmission tower, alternative materials, textures and camouflage techniques shall be utilized to conceal the facility; and 
(5)  Artificial lighting shall not be utilized unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. Any required lighting shall be designed to minimize disturbance to adjoining properties and views; and 
(6)  A building permit from the City shall be required; and 
(7)  For antenna that co-locates on existing towers, a licensed professional engineer shall certify that the tower can support the number of shared users without structural or technological interference; and 
(8)  For antenna that co-locates on existing towers, any request that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such existing tower shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 2, 6-6-2016) 
63.04   Telecommunications towers as a primary use.
(A)  Telecommunications Towers shall be classified as a light utility use, and shall be located and set back in accordance with the schedule of District Regulations of this Code. The requirements and provisions of Sections 63.00 through 63.08 shall be in addition to the provisions of the District regulations. In case of a conflict between the District regulations and a provision of Sections 63.00 through 63.08, the provisions of Sections 63.00 through 63.08 shall apply. 
(B)  Tower guys and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum setback requirements as set forth in this Code for the particular district. 
(C)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or subject to any standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Camouflage techniques shall be utilized where feasible and, and if determined infeasible, the applicant shall submit a written justification as to the reason. 
(D)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. 
(E)  Supporting equipment shall be designed to blend in with the natural setting or built environment through the use of color, screening, materials, textures or other technique. 
(F)  Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(G)  The perimeter of the tower site shall contain a vegetative buffer of native plants no less than four (4) feet wide and three (3) feet high. 
(H)  Towers shall not be used for advertising. 
(I)  Towers shall be engineered and constructed to encourage and allow for future co-location. 
(J)  Towers shall only be permitted where the applicant has provided substantial competent evidence demonstrating that existing towers or structures cannot accommodate and provide the proposed telecommunications service for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related requirements. 
(4)  Existing towers or structures would cause electromagnetic interference to existing or proposed antenna. 
(5)  The costs or contractual provisions to adapt an existing tower or structure exceed the development costs for a new tower. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable or unable to provide adequate telecommunications service. 
(K)  The City may require that the applicant submit a visual line of site analysis, including photo-simulated post construction renderings, to enable the City to assess the visual impact upon surrounding properties. 
63.05   Additional requirements for primary use telecommunications towers in residential districts.
(A)  In addition to the requirements of Section 63.04, the following shall apply to primary use telecommunications towers in residential districts: 
(1)  The applicant must demonstrate that the residential location is required to provide service, and that alternate locations are not available. 
(2)  Towers must be setback from property lines a distance equal to the height of the tower. 
(3)  The minimum lot size required shall be one (1) acre. 
(4)  Accessory equipment shall meet the minimum district setback requirements. 
(5)  Towers over sixty (60) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing tower that is over sixty (60) feet in height. 
(6)  In Residential Districts, the following height limits shall apply: 
(a)  For a single user, up to sixty (60) feet in height. 
(b)  For multiple users or towers that are engineered for multiple users, up to 120 feet in height. 
(B)  To the extent that any of the provisions of Section 63.05 are interpreted to be inconsistent with the provisions of Section 63.04, the provisions in Section 63.05 shall be controlling. 
63.06   Federal requirements and safety standards.
(A)  All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA and FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Code shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(B)  If upon inspection, the City Building Official at any time finds that the structural integrity of the tower or antenna constitutes a danger to persons or property, the owner of the tower or antenna shall be given written notice of the condition and shall have fifteen (15) days to make the tower or antenna structurally sound in accordance with the standard set forth in the applicable codes. 
63.07   Removal of abandoned towers and antennas.
(A)  Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such tower or antenna shall remove same within sixty (60) days of receipt from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such tower or antenna is not removed within sixty (60) days, the facility shall be in violation of this Code. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or antenna. 
63.08   Variance procedures.
(A)  Any request to deviate from the requirements for Telecommunications Antennas and Towers shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of Sections 234.00 through 234.05 of this Code. 
(B)  In addition to the standards of Section 234.02 of this Code, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that the regulation prevents the applicant from providing service to the area, and that other options for providing service are not available or reasonable. 
63.09   Approval process.
(A)  All applications for telecommunications antenna and towers shall be reviewed for completeness. If any item required by Sections 63.00 through 63.09, or as required elsewhere by this Code, is not provided, the application shall be deemed incomplete. 
(B)  Applicants shall be notified within 20 business days whether the application is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the City shall identify the missing items or deficiencies that the applicant must correct and/or resubmit. After the information is resubmitted, the City shall have an additional 20 days to make a determination of completeness. 
(C)  Once a determination has been made that an application is complete, applications for accessory telecommunications antenna shall be processed within 45 business days, and applications for telecommunications towers as a primary use shall be processed within 90 business days, unless the application is scheduled for City Commission action at the regularly scheduled meeting following the 90-day period. 
(D)  The applicant and the City may mutually agree upon a waiver of these timeframes. 
(E)  All applications for the co-location of new transmission equipment, removal of transmission equipment, or replacement of transmission equipment shall be approved following the application and review process, unless the co-location, removal, or replacement of the transmission equipment results in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the tower or base station supporting the transmission equipment. A review of an application for the co-location, removal, or replacement of transmission equipment shall be processed within ninety (90) business days unless the application is scheduled for City Commission action at the regularly scheduled meeting following the 90-day period. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 3, 6-6-2016) 
64.00 - Public education facilities. 
(A)  The location of new public education facilities or the expansion of an existing public education facility beyond its current boundaries shall be processed in accordance with the school siting procedures contained in the Interlocal Agreement for Public Educational Facility Siting for Pinellas County. 
(B)  Public education facility siting shall be reviewed in accordance with the review criteria contained in the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Plan. 
(C)  Site development plans for both new facilities and the expansion of existing facilities shall be submitted to the City for administrative review. 
65.00   Distribution electric substations.
(A)  Distribution Electric Substations shall mean an electric substation which takes electricity from the transmission grid and converts it to a lower voltage so it can be distributed to customers in the local area on the local distribution grid through one or more distribution lines less than 69 kilovolts in size. 
(B)  In all residential zoning districts, a setback of 100 feet between the Distribution Electric Substation property boundary and any permanent equipment structures shall be required in the form of open green space formed by the installation of trees and shrub material consistent with the City's land development regulations. In this regard, the site shall be screened for the length of the property line by a vegetative screen maintained at a height of between 6 and 10 feet that meets the requirements of Section 154.05(B) of the Land Development Code. Substation equipment shall be protected by a security fence consistent with the requirements of Section 36.02 of the Land Development Code. 
(C)  In all nonresidential zoning districts, a setback of 25 feet between the Distribution Electric Substation property boundary and any permanent equipment structures shall be required. Screening in accordance with the requirements set forth in Subsection (B) above shall be required. 
(D)  For requests to place a new Distribution Electric Substation within a residential zoning district, the provider shall consult with the City regarding the selection of a site prior to making application. The provider shall provide the City with information regarding the provider's preferred site, and as many as three (3) alternative sites, including sites in nonresidential zoning districts, which are reasonable for the load to be served. The final determination on the site location shall be made by the City within 90 days after provision by the provider of the necessary technical and other information on the preferred and alternate sites. In the event that the City and the provider cannot reach an agreement on a site, then the request shall be submitted to mediation pursuant to Sections 44.401-44.406, Florida Statutes, unless otherwise agreed to by the City and the provider in writing. The mediation shall be conducted within 30 days unless the City and provider agree to a longer period in writing. The 90-day period for the City to make its final determination shall be tolled from the date of notice of intent to mediate is served by the provider on the City until the mediation is concluded, terminated or impassed. The City and provider may agree to waive or extend the 90-day period. 
(E)  Information on a provider's business decisions about its service, customer demand, or quality of service, cannot be required unless the provider voluntarily offers this information to the City. 
(F)  Properly completed applications for a Distribution Electric Substation shall be decided within 90 days. The applicant shall be notified by the City within 30 days of submittal whether the application is properly completed. If incomplete, further completeness determinations shall be made within 15 days after the receipt of additional information. A waiver of the time frames may be voluntarily agreed to by the provider and the City in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7, 3-16-2015) 
66.00 - Reserved. 
Editor's Note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 2016-06, adopted June 6, 2016, repealed § 66.00 which pertained to proportionate fair share mitigation of development impacts on transportation corridors, and which derived from the original codification. 
67.00 - Patrons' dogs in public food service establishments. 
67.01   Purpose.
(A)  The Dixie Cup Clary Local Control Act, Florida Statute 509.233, grants the City the authority to provide exemptions from Section 6-501.115, 2001 FDA Food Code, as adopted and incorporated by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants ("Division") in Chapter 61C-4.010(6), Florida Administrative Code, (2006). The purpose of this section is to allow dogs in public food service establishments in a manner consistent with the 3-year pilot program approved by state statute. The procedure adopted pursuant to this section provides an exemption for those public food service establishments which have applied for and received a permit to those sections of the Food and Drug Administration Food Code that prohibit live animals in public food service establishments. 
(B)  No dog shall be in a public food service establishment unless allowed by state law and the public food service establishment has received and maintains an unexpired and valid permit pursuant to this section allowing dogs in designated outdoor areas of the establishment. 
(C)  As used in this section "public food service establishments" shall mean eating and retail food establishments as defined by the Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code of the City of Safety Harbor. "Employee" or "employees" shall include, but is not limited to, the owner or owners of the public food service establishment. 
67.02   Application requirements.
(A)  Public food service establishments must apply for and receive a permit from the City before patrons' dogs are allowed on the premises. The City shall establish a reasonable fee to cover the cost of processing the initial application and renewals. The application for a permit shall require such information from the applicant as is deemed reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, but shall require, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name, location, mailing address, and division issued license number of the public food service establishment. 
(2)  Name, mailing address and telephone contact information of the permit applicant. 
(3)  A diagram and description of the outdoor area which is requested to be designated as available to patrons' dogs, including dimensions of the designated area; a depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; the entryways and exits to the designated outdoor area; the boundaries of the designated area; and of the other outdoor dining areas not available for patrons' dogs; any fences or other barriers; surrounding property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways; and such other information as is deemed necessary by the City. 
(4)  The diagram shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional. A copy of the approved diagram shall be attached to the permit. 
(5)  A description of the days of the week and hours of operation that patron's dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area. 
67.03   Indemnification requirement.
(A)  The public food service establishment, its officials, boards, members, agents and employees, shall indemnify, defend with counsel reasonably acceptable to the city, and hold the city, its officials, boards, members, agents and employees harmless of and from any and all claims for personal injury, death, or property damage, any other losses, damages, charges or costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, witness fees, court costs, and the reasonable value of any services rendered by any officer or employee of the city, and any orders, judgments, or decrees which may be entered, including, but not limited to, any causes of action in equity, arising out of any permit granted the public food service establishment or the regulation and enforcement of the provisions of this section hereunder, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this section, except to the extent any losses arise from the negligence or willful omissions of the city, its officials, boards, members, agents and employees. 
(B)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, this indemnification provision shall not be construed as a waiver of any immunity from or limitation of liability to which the city is entitled to pursuant to Florida Statutes 768.28. Furthermore, this provision is not intended to nor shall be interpreted as limiting or in any way affecting any defense the city may have under Florida Statutes 768.28 and is not intended to and shall not be interpreted to alter the extent of the city's waiver of sovereign immunity under Florida Statutes 768.28. Nothing herein is intended to serve as a waiver of sovereign immunity by either party, and nothing herein shall be construed as consent by either party to be sued by third parties in any manner arising out of this Ordinance. This indemnification provision shall survive the expiration or termination of Florida Statutes 509.233, however or whenever expired or terminated. 
67.04   Regulations.
(A)  Public food service establishments that receive a permit for a designated outdoor area pursuant to this section shall require that: 
(1)  Employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching, petting or otherwise handling any dog(s) and shall wash their hands before entering other parts of the public food service establishment from the designated outdoor area. 
(2)  Employees are prohibited from touching, petting or otherwise handling any dog while serving or carrying food or beverages or while handling or carrying tableware. 
(3)  Patrons in a designated outdoor area shall be advised by appropriate signage at conspicuous locations, that they should wash their hands before eating. Waterless hand sanitizer shall be provided at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
(4)  Patrons shall keep their dogs on a leash at all times and shall keep their dogs under direct control. 
(5)  Employees and patrons shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products or any other items involved with food service operations. 
(6)  Employees and patrons shall not allow any part of a dog to be on chairs, tables, or other furnishings. Dogs must remain on the floor/ground level and shall not be permitted in the lap of the patron. 
(7)  Employees shall clean and sanitize all table and chair surfaces with an approved product between seating of patrons. 
(8)  Employees shall remove all dropped food and spilled drink from the floor or ground as soon as possible but in no event less frequently than between seating of patrons at the nearest table. 
(9)  Employees and patrons shall remove all dog waste immediately and the floor or ground shall be immediately cleaned and sanitized with an approved product. Employees shall keep a kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose near the designated outdoor area. 
(10)  Employees and patrons shall not permit dogs to be in, or to travel through, indoor or nondesignated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment. 
(11)  A sign or signs notifying the public that the designated outdoor area is available for the use of patrons and patrons' dogs shall be posted in a conspicuous manner that places the public on notice. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half inches in width and eleven inches in height (81/2 inches by 11 inches) and printed in easily legible type face of not less than twenty (20) point font size. 
(12)  A sign or signs informing patrons of these laws shall be posted on premises in a conspicuous manner and place as determined by the City. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half inches in width and eleven inches in height (81/2 inches by 11 inches) and printed in easily legible type face of not less than twenty (20) point font size. 
(13)  A sign or signs informing employees of these laws shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous manner and place as determined by the City. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half inches in width and eleven inches in height (81/2 inches by 11 inches) and printed in easily legible type face of not less than twenty (20) point font size. 
(14)  Ingress and egress to the designated outdoor area shall not require entrance into or passage through any indoor area or nondesignated outdoor portions of the public food service establishment. 
(15)  The public food service establishment and designated outdoor area shall comply with all permit conditions and the approved diagram. 
(16)  Employees and patrons shall not allow any dog to be in the designated outdoor areas of the public food service establishment if the public food service establishment is in violation of any of the requirements of this section or if they do not possess a valid permit. 
(17)  Permits shall be conspicuously displayed in the designated outdoor area. 
(18)  It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Each instance of a dog on the premises of a public food service establishment without a permit is a separate violation. Each violation of any of the requirements of this section is considered a separate violation. 
(19)  All dogs shall wear a current license tag or rabies tag and the patron shall have a current license certificate or rabies certificate immediately available upon request. 
(20)  Employees and patrons shall not permit patrons' dogs to be in food preparation areas. 
67.05   Expiration and revocation.
(A)  A permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire automatically upon the sale of the public food service establishment and cannot be transferred to a subsequent owner. The subsequent owner may apply for a permit pursuant to this section if the subsequent owner wishes to continue to allow patrons' dogs in a designated outdoor area of the public food service establishment. 
(B)  Permits shall expire on July 1, 2009 and must be renewed if Florida Statute 509.233 is reenacted by the Legislature. However, if Florida Statute 509.233 is repealed at any time, all permits shall expire on the effective date of the repeal. 
(C)  A permit may be revoked by the City if, after notice and reasonable time in which the grounds for revocation may be corrected, the public food service establishment fails to comply with any condition of approval, fails to comply with the approved diagram, fails to maintain any required state or local license, or is found to be in violation of any provision of this section. If the ground for revocation is a failure to maintain any required state or local license, the revocation may take effect immediately upon giving notice of revocation to the permit holder. 
(D)  If a public food service establishment's permit is revoked, no new permit may be approved for the establishment until the expiration of 90 days following the date of revocation, providing that all issues continued within the revocation have been satisfied. This includes any outstanding fines associated with enforcement of this ordinance. 
67.06   Complaints and reporting.
(A)  Complaints may be made in writing to the Community Development Department which shall accept, document, and respond to all complaints and shall timely report to the Division all complaints and the response to such complaints. 
(B)  The City shall provide the Division with a copy of all approved applications and permits issued. 
(C)  All applications, permits, and other related materials shall contain the Division issued license number for the public food service establishment. 
(D)  The patron or the designated person in charge of the public food service establishment, or both, may be issued civil citations for each violation of this ordinance. 
(E)  This section shall sunset on July 1, 2009, and be of no further force or effect unless the City Commission readopts this section by ordinance. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire on July 1, 2009, unless the permit has sooner expired or been revoked. 
68.00 - Day pet boarding establishment. 
(A)  An establishment in which domesticated animals are housed or boarded for less than 24 hours per day with no overnight stays, subject to the following performance standards: 
(1)  Such use shall only be permitted within shopping centers in the C-1A (Restricted Commercial) District. 
(2)  The minimum setback of the use from residentially zoned or used properties shall be 100 feet. 
(3)  Local business tax receipt approval may be revoked after notice and reasonable time in which the grounds for revocation may be corrected if the day pet boarding establishment is found to be in violation of Section 15.03 of the City Code prohibiting excessive or unnecessary noise. 
(4)  The facility shall be completely enclosed with any dog runs interior to the building. 
(5)  Any external animal waste associated with this use shall be immediately removed. 
(6)  The shopping center owner shall authorize in writing an application for local business tax receipt approval for a day pet boarding establishment. 
(7)  A ratio of one (1) staff member per each ten (10) domesticated animals is required. 
69.00 - Brewpubs, microbreweries, and micro-distilleries. 
69.01   Brewpubs.
(A)  Revenue from food sales shall constitute more than 50 percent of the total business revenues. 
(B)  No more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area of the establishment shall be used for the brewery function, including, but not limited to, the brewhouse, boiling and water treatment areas, bottling and kegging lines, malt milling and storage, fermentation tanks, conditioning tanks and serving tanks. 
(C)  No outdoor storage shall be allowed. 
69.02   Microbrewery/micro-distillery.
(A)  A taproom, for a microbrewery, or a tasteroom for a micro-distillery, each respectively occupying a gross floor area of no less than 500 sq. ft., shall be incorporated and operated as part of said facility when located in one of the following zoning districts: 
a.  C-1A, Restricted Commercial 
b.  CRD, Community Redevelopment District/MSM, Main Street Marketplace 
c.  CRD, Community Redevelopment District/SC-1, Service Corridor-1 
69.03   Requirements of law.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to abrogate any duty for a Brewpub, Microbrewery, or Micro-distillery to otherwise comply with all laws, rules, and regulations prescribed by the State of Florida or other regulatory authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 4, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 4, 6-19-2017) 
70.00 - Hotels. 
(A)  Each hotel establishment shall: 
a.  Be entirely located within 300 feet of a signalized arterial roadway as classified by the Pinellas County Metropolitan Planning Organization to be measured from the nearest right-of-way line on properties inside the C1-A, Restricted Commercial District; 
b.  Contain a lobby and front desk, internally oriented and easily accessible to members of the public that is staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week; 
c.  Provide for and maintain a central reservation system or agency for rental of all units; and make such system or agency available for public access at all times; and 
(B)  Each hotel room shall: 
a.  Contain no less than 300 square feet of gross floor area; 
b.  Open to the interior of the building with no exterior entrance; 
c.  Not have any exterior balcony facing a residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 3, 5-5-2014) 
71.00 - Reserved. 
72.00 - Entertainment. 
(A)  Entertainment is permissible as an accessory use for retail uses, brewpubs, microbreweries, micro-distillery, taverns and eating establishments, sit down. 
(B)  Entertainment shall not be permissible as an accessory to any other non-residential uses unless approved as a temporary use pursuant to Section 54.00 of this Code or as part of a special event application pursuant to Article IV of the Safety Harbor City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 3-6-2017) 
73.00 - Medical marijuana treatment centers. 
(A)  Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities are prohibited and shall not be located within the boundaries of the City. 
(B)  A medical marijuana treatment center cultivating or processing facility may not be located within 500 feet of any public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 12-18-2017) 
74.00, 75.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 

76.00 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this Article to establish standards to allow the use of Planned Development Districts consistent with the following objectives: 
(A)  Provide an alternate method of land development not available within the framework of other zoning districts; 
(B)  To allow the development of sites that would normally be difficult to develop due to topography, soils or other site-specific features; 
(C)  To allow the most beneficial use of the site in terms of maintaining compatibility with the adjoining neighborhood; 
(D)  To provide for flexibility in design with the ability to preserve significant environmental, topographical or natural features; 
(E)  To allow a variety and mix of housing types and compatible uses that provide for an architecture and character reminiscent of a small town or village typical of Florida's history; 
(F)  To allow low profile office uses on suitable sites, including those adjacent to a residential use district, where any negative impacts can be mitigated through setbacks, context sensitive building design, and landscape architecture techniques; 
(G)  To relate buildings to the street and locate them so that they reinforce street frontages; 
(H)  To encourage the orderly concentration of development on parcels of land within the existing developed areas; 
(I)  To prevent urban sprawl, through the use of infill development and maximize the use of the existing urban fabric and public facilities that are currently in place; and 
(J)  To provide for design flexibility and to encourage the use of traditional neighborhood design (TND) concepts. 
77.00 - Definitions. 
(A)  Artist studio: Place designed to be used, or used as, both a dwelling place and a place of work by an artist, artisan or craftsman, including persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine arts such as, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or instrument music, painting, sculpture and writing. 
(B)  Conventional suburban development: A development that exhibits several of the following characteristics: separation of uses, large building setbacks with marginal open space, auto-oriented, fragmented street network and homogenous architecture. 
(C)  Garden apartments: Small apartment houses that are not concentrated in any one location, but rather, are distributed throughout a neighborhood. These structures do not contain more than 8 units and are located near areas of higher activity, parks, schools and downtown areas. Private open space takes the form of individual porches and balconies, shared rear gardens, and front or rear courtyards. 
(D)  Live/work dwelling: A dwelling unit in combination with a business or professional office or artist studio within the same unit or in an accessory structure to the principal dwelling, where the resident occupant both lives and works. 
(E)  Work/live building: Buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly for business or professional office purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary to the primary use as a place to work and where the resident occupant may or may not work on the premises. 
(F)  Single-family attached: A one-family dwelling on a single lot attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls; 
(G)  Single-family detached: A dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
(H)  Single-family semi-detached: A one-family dwelling attached to one other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, and each dwelling located on a separate lot. 
(I)  Traditional neighborhood development (TND): A development that exhibits several of the following characteristics: alleys, streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented to the street, front porches on houses, pedestrian-orientation, compatible and mixed land uses, village squares and greens. 
78.00 - Establishment of districts. 
(A)  The following planned development zoning district is hereby established: 
PDD Planned Development District 
(B)  In approving any Planned Development the City Commission may prescribe conditions and safeguards in conformance with the Land Development Code as the City Commission deems necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this Code and its standards, and the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
78.01   Planned Development District (PDD).
(A)  Permitted uses in the PDD, subject to approval by the City Commission, are those authorized by the underlying future land use category and limited to the following: 
(1)  Single-family detached; 
(2)  Single-family semi-detached; 
(3)  Single-family attached; 
(4)  Garden Apartments; 
(5)  Live-Work Dwelling (including Artist Studios); 
(6)  Work-Live Building; 
(7)  Business and Professional Offices. 
(B)  Accessory Uses (exempt from accessory structure height limitations of Article III): 
(1)  Garage Apartments; 
(2)  Guest Cottages; 
(3)  Mother-in-law Suites with separate entrances. 
(C)  Planned Development Standards: 
(1)  The maximum residential density and nonresidential floor area allowance is determined by the underlying land use designation of the City or countywide comprehensive plan, whichever is more restrictive. The floor area ratio for a business or professional office shall be limited to 0.20. The percentage of floor area devoted to office or workspace use shall not exceed 30 percent for live-work dwellings or 50 percent for work-live units. Submerged land, jurisdictional wetlands and public road rights-of-way shall be excluded in determining the total site area of the subject property. 
(2)  The maximum impervious surface ratio for any Planned Development project is 0.60. 
(3)  Live-Work Dwellings and Work-Live Buildings shall be confined to the City of Safety Harbor Community Redevelopment Area. 
(4)  Freestanding office buildings must be on sites with at least 150 lineal feet of frontage on a collector street or arterial roadway. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall be provided in appropriate locations. The emphasis shall be on a circulation system that provides movement between major destinations internal and external to the project. 
(6)  Buildings should be aligned with, and close to, streets, squares and green spaces where appropriate. Ensure that building entries are prominent and visible. 
(7)  Buildings shall create their own visual identity, utilize a variety of building forms and roof shapes, and select building materials that are complimentary to the surrounding area. 
(8)  Residential buildings should have front porches, balconies and/or stoops. Front porches, balconies and/or stoops should be elevated between 18 and 30 inches above the sidewalk. To be usable, front porches shall have a minimum depth of 8 feet. 
(9)  Views should be directed towards streets and back yards. Fences, hedges or garden walls should physically define property lines. 
(10)  Street lighting is required, and decorative lights and poles are preferred. 
(11)  Garages shall be detached or in the rear yard. Attached garages and carports shall be at least 15 feet behind the front face of the building. 
(12)  Parking shall be provided in accordance with applicable requirements under Section 147.00. The Planning and Zoning Board may recommend and the City Commission may allow some of the required parking to be deferred. This shall be done by noting such parking spaces on the Final Development Plan as "future parking if needed". Vehicular use areas should be designed to maximize interconnectivity, pedestrian-oriented interaction and shade. 
(13)  Street trees are required. Street trees should consist of one type of tree, planted in straight rows or lines close to the curb or behind the sidewalk to provide maximum shade. The maximum spacing shall be 30 feet. 
(14)  Existing topography, significant tree cover, water courses and water bodies shall be largely preserved and incorporated into the project design, where appropriate, and consistent with this Article. 
(15)  Buildings should protect and form open space consisting of yards, gardens and courtyards. 
(16)  Garden apartments should be compatible, and interspersed, with other types of residential uses. Apartments shall consist of no more than eight (8) units, and should be oriented around an interior courtyard. Private open space can also take the form of individual or shared entry porches/balconies/terraces and rear yards. 
(17)  Signage shall conform to Article XII, Sign Regulations, and shall be limited to the following types, as permitted: ground-mounted sign, wall sign, and projecting sign. Signage shall be architecturally integrated with their surroundings so that they are complementary to the overall design of the development. 
(D)  Dimensional regulations: 
(1)  The designation of all minimum yards shall be noted on the conceptual and final development plan. 
(2)  Maximum building height = 35 feet; 
(3)  Minimum site area: 
(a)  Residential uses or Live-Work Dwelling = 15,000 square feet; 
(b)  Work-live unit = 20,000 square feet; 
(c)  Office use = 43,560 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum net floor area: 
(a)  All dwellings = 700 square feet; 
(5)  Maximum building footprint: 
(a)  Live-Work Dwelling or Work-Live Building = 5,000 square feet; 
(b)  Office buildings = 10,000 square feet; 
(6)  Minimum Yards: 
(a)  Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND). In a TND, the fronts of buildings face on the public realm of the community while private yards and off-street parking are located to the rear. Therefore, buildings should maintain a close relationship with the street with front yard setbacks scaled to account for roadway conditions and existing setbacks of nearby buildings on the same block face. The TND design format is most appropriate for infill projects in the City of Safety Harbor Community Redevelopment Area. 
For residential dwellings or work-live units, the front yard setback should typically range between 5 to 20 feet with a side yard setback ranging between 0 and 10 feet depending upon unit type, site characteristics, and neighborhood character. Rear yard setbacks for principal buildings typically range between 15 and 20 feet. 
(b)  Conventional Suburban Development (CSD). In a CSD, the fronts of buildings are setback from the roadway to accommodate landscape buffers for parking areas and on-site drainage ponds. They are typically accessed by automobile. The deeper setbacks associated with CSD may be appropriate in suburban settings outside of the City of Safety Harbor Community Redevelopment Area in cases where conservation design is used or as a method for mitigating any negative impacts on nearby residential and non-residential uses. 
For freestanding office uses, the front yard setback typically ranges from 20 to 35 feet and no less than 50 feet when adjacent to a major arterial roadway. Side and rear yard setbacks should be no less than 35 feet when abutting a residential use or zoning district. 
(7)  The following shall apply to single-family attached dwelling, Live-Work Dwelling and Work-Live Building: 
(a)  No more than five (5) units shall be attached in a single row; 
(b)  To create a staggered effect, no contiguous units shall be built with a common front building line, and the minimum difference in building setback line shall be two (2) feet. To create diversity, varied facades are also encouraged. 
79.00 - Review criteria for planned developments. 
Planned Development Districts may hereafter be established by amendment to the Official Zoning Atlas provided they are found to satisfy the following criteria: 
(A)  Consistent with the comprehensive plan: The Planned Development shall be consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive and redevelopment program; 
(B)  Physical character of the neighborhood: Planned Development District sites shall be complimentary to the location, area, and character of the existing street pattern and neighborhood. 
(C)  Adequacy of public facilities: Planned Development Districts shall be so located to take advantage of existing public facilities; 
(D)  Environmental design: The Planned Development shall be designed to take advantage of the natural features and topography of the site, preserve natural features, and protect archeological or historic sites. 
(E)  Infill development: The Planned Development District shall be used to promote infill development and a variety of housing types and compatible uses in areas close to schools, parks, shopping, downtown and other amenities. 
80.00 - Conceptual development plan review. 
(A)  The applicant is required to submit to the Planning and Zoning Department a Conceptual Development Plan for review by the City Commission in conjunction with the zoning application. The Planning Director may allow a combined Conceptual and Final Development Plan. A Conceptual Development Plan shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth: 
(1)  The relationship of the proposed project to the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Plan and Community Redevelopment Plan (if applicable); 
(2)  The general character of and the uses to be included in the proposed project; 
(3)  Aspects of the project that provide a community benefit; and 
(4)  Other studies or impact analyses as deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Director. 
(B)  Conceptual Development Plans shall consist of the following minimum information: 
(1)  Accurate survey of boundary and existing conditions including, but not limited to, easements, streets, buildings, land uses, historic sites, zonings, wetlands, watercourses, trees in accordance with the requirements of Section 153.00 et seq., utilities, general topographic contours, rights-of-way, and existing zoning and land uses for all contiguous properties; 
(2)  Title of the project; 
(3)  Total site acreage; 
(a)  Upland acreage; 
(b)  Submerged acreage; 
(c)  Jurisdictional Wetlands; 
(4)  Date, scale (1" = 60' or larger), north arrow, legend, location map; 
(5)  Master plan showing the locations and acreages of general land uses including dwelling unit types, building footprints, proposed setbacks, open spaces, street trees and other proposed design features; 
(6)  Circulation plan showing locations and types of all access points and streets; 
(7)  Street lighting location and design; 
(8)  Gross residential density of each unit type and overall gross residential density; 
(9)  Architectural elevations and floor plans; 
(10)  Proposed development phasing for all projects with more than one phase; 
(11)  A Master Signage Plan that provides specifications and illustrations for all proposed signage, including type, size and locations. Calculations for total sign area must be included. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 8, 3-16-2015) 
81.00 - Final development plan review. 
(A)  Within one (1) year of Conceptual Development Plan approval, the developer shall submit the Final Development Plan for review and approval by the City Commission; 
(B)  Final Development Plans shall consist of the following minimum information: 
(1)  Accurate survey of boundary, existing conditions, and proposed rights-of-way; 
(2)  Title of the project; 
(3)  Date, scale (1" = 40' or larger), north arrow, legend, location map; 
(4)  Sheet size 24 x 36 inches maximum; 
(5)  Multiple sheets if necessary with match lines clearly shown; 
(6)  Total site acreage: 
(a)  Upland acreage; 
(b)  Submerged acreage; 
(c)  Jurisdictional Wetlands; 
(7)  Existing contours at one-foot intervals; 
(8)  Proposed contours at one-foot intervals; 
(9)  All required drainage and utility construction drawings; 
(10)  Tree survey and other data in accordance with the requirements under Section 153.00 et seq.; 
(11)  Open spaces, common element design features, landscaping, and any proposed street trees in accordance with the requirements under Section 154.00 et seq.; 
(12)  Building Envelopes and the number, size, type and gross density of all dwelling units. First floor elevations of all structures and proposed floor plans; 
(13)  Streets, travelways, sidewalks, and alleyways, including their type, name, width, street center lines, construction, and whether they are to be public or private, showing the boundaries of all rights-of-way or easements; 
(14)  Proposed parking and the location, type, and dimension of all driveways; 
(15)  Yards, limited to the location and dimensions of all yards and/or buffers provided to satisfy any yard requirements, and the distance between buildings where such minimums are required; 
(16)  A Landscape Plan, signed and sealed by a State of Florida Registered Landscape Architect, including dimensions and the location, spacing, type, size, method of irrigation, and maintenance, and a description of all proposed plant materials; 
(17)  Plans for signs, if any, including the location, type, height, area, and proposed lighting; 
(18)  Proposed street lighting, the location and type of all street lights; 
(19)  Pedestrian facilities; 
(20)  Documents for the maintenance of all common improvements and open space; 
(21)  Final Subdivision Plat indicating: 
(a)  The dimensions of all lot lines; 
(b)  Designation of all required minimum yards; 
(c)  The designation of all building envelopes; 
(d)  The designation of all distances between structures where applicable; 
(22)  Architectural plans, floor plans, elevations, and perspective drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of proposed structures; 
(23)  A Master Signage Plan that provides specifications and illustrations for all proposed signage, including type, size and locations. Calculations for total sign area must be included. 
(24)  Compliance with the design standards of this Article and all other requirements of this Code. 
(C)  Approval of final development plans and phasing plans shall expire if: (1) one year after the date of final development plan approval, a building permit has not peen granted; or (2) one year after the date of final development plan approval a building permit has been granted but construction has not commenced; or (3) if construction begins but more than one year has elapsed without construction activity, unless an alternate phasing plan with alternate commencement and completion dates has been approved by the City Commission or an extension of time pursuant to Section 82.00(b) has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 9, 3-16-2015) 
82.00 - Expirations and extensions. 
(A)  Once a Final Development Plan has expired, subsequent proposals shall be processed in the same manner as new submissions; 
(B)  The approval period of a Final Development Plan may be extended once for a one-year period by the City Commission, for good cause. The review of extension requests shall include an evaluation of the effect of new or current regulations on the project. Requests for a time extension shall be submitted a minimum of forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration date in writing. 
83.00 - Amendments, modifications, deviations. 
(A)  Once a Final Development Plan has been approved, any amendment shall be processed in accordance with the procedures required for a new submission, with the exception that the Planning Director and/or TRC have the authority to approve any minor modification to an approved Final Development Plan; 
(B)  Major modifications shall be reviewed and approved by the City Commission, and shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of Final Development Plan approval. The following criteria shall be used to identify a major modification: 
(1)  Any increase in density or intensity; 
(2)  Any change in housing type; 
(3)  Any change in project phasing; 
(4)  Any change which would require an amendment to approval conditions; 
(5)  Design alterations significantly affecting the basic size, form, layout and style of the building(s); 
(6)  Any substantial change in the location or characteristics of open space or common elements; 
(7)  Any significant change in the location or design of driveways, streets and alleyways; and 
(8)  Any increase in protected tree removals. 
(C)  Deviations from the approved plans or failure to comply with any requirements, condition or safeguard imposed by the City Commission shall constitute a zoning violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 3-16-2015) 
84.00 - Planned developments established prior to the effective date of this Code. 
Any planned development that was lawfully approved and constructed or is actively under construction prior to the effective date of this Code must meet the requirements of the regulations (including dimensional regulations) in effect at the time the development order was issued. If the development order expires for any reason or if an amendment to the development order is requested, any further development activity shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
85.00-95.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

96.00 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Article to: 
A.  Implement the City of Safety Harbor Downtown Master Plan. 
B.  Promote the health, safety, general welfare and quality of life in the City by establishing reasonable standards for the orderly development and redevelopment of areas within the Community Redevelopment District of the City as identified in the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Enhance the character, quality, and vitality of development within the Community Redevelopment District by: 
(1)  Providing for adequate light, air and privacy; securing safety from fire, flood and other damage; preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
(2)  Preserving and enhancing natural resources and aesthetic character; 
(3)  Protecting and conserving the value of land and buildings and improvements upon the land, and minimizing the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; 
(4)  Providing the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic, with particular regard for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian traffic movement; 
(5)  Providing for value-added open spaces through efficient project design and layout that addresses appropriate relationships between buildings on the project site and adjoining properties, including public rights-of-way and other public places; 
(6)  Protecting and improving the quality of water resources and wetlands and preserving floodplains, drainageways, and other natural areas having beneficial hydrological characteristics and functions; 
(7)  Establishing districts of a size, type, location and with standards that reflect the existing and desirable characteristics of each particular area within the City; 
(8)  Establishing permitted uses corresponding with the purpose and character of the respective districts and limiting uses within each district to those uses specifically authorized; 
(9)  Establishing use limitations for specified uses which are consistent with the district in which they are allowed and the particular characteristics of such specified uses; and 
(10)  Enumerating density, area, height, setback, coverage and like requirements for each district, and making appropriate distinctions between categories of uses within districts, based on the general purposes of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan, the Downtown Master Plan and existing and desired community characteristics. 
D.  Create value for the citizens of the City of Safety Harbor by: 
(1)  Promoting the downtown as a focal point for the City and encouraging its aesthetic improvement; 
(2)  Allowing property owners to enhance the value of their property through innovative and creative development and redevelopment; 
(3)  Ensuring that development and redevelopment will not have a negative impact on the value of surrounding properties, and wherever practicable promoting development and redevelopment which will enhance the value of surrounding properties; 
(4)  Promoting economic development and neighborhood revitalization; 
(5)  Strengthening the City's economy and increasing its tax base as a whole; and 
(6)  Enhancing the timeliness and certainty of development approvals. 
E.  Provide for the protection of constitutional and statutory private property rights. 
F.  Make beautification of the Community Redevelopment District a matter of high priority, and to ensure that existing and future uses and structures in the City are attractive and well-maintained. 
97.00 - Relationship to community redevelopment plan. 
In approving any development in the Community Redevelopment District (CRD) the City Commission may prescribe conditions and safeguards necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this Code, the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Plan and the City of Safety Harbor Downtown Master Plan, as they may be amended from time to time. 
98.00 - Community Redevelopment District. 
Development in the Community Redevelopment District shall correspond to the Character District categories specified in the Master Development Plan Framework as delineated in Figure 2 of the adopted City of Safety Harbor Downtown Master Plan, which is incorporated and made a part of this Article and which is maintained by the Planning and Zoning Division of the Community Development Department as the Official Community Redevelopment District Map. The Character District categories are classified as follows: 
Abbreviation Character District Category MSM Main Street Marketplace CTC Community Town Center DR Destination Resort SC-1 Service Corridor - 1 SC-2 Service Corridor - 2 LHL Local Historic Landmark WV Waterfront Village CC Creekside Conservation TND-1 Traditional Neighborhood Development - 1 TND-2 Traditional Neighborhood Development - 2 P Public  
  
98.01   Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Community Redevelopment District Map, the following rules of interpretation apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of alleys, streets, highways, streams, or railroads shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines or city limits shall be construed as following such lot lines or city limits. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of changes in the shoreline shall be construed as following such changes. 
D.  Boundaries which are shown as dividing a lot or which are shown with distances which are not specifically indicated on the Master Development Plan Framework shall be determined by measurement according to the scale of the Official Downtown District Map. 
E.  Public rights-of-way which are vacated or abandoned shall be subsumed into the districts which are applicable to the parcels to which the vacated or abandoned rights-of-way are added. 
98.02   Permitted and conditional land uses.
Land uses are allowed in the Community Redevelopment District in accordance with Table VI-1. Article XVI, Definitions, shall be referred to for clarifying land use classifications. Permitted uses are permitted by right in the Character District, subject to compliance with all other applicable requirements of this Code. Conditional uses may be allowed subject to review and approval by the City Commission in accordance with Section 228.00, and with all other applicable requirements of this Code. 
Table VI-1 
Permitted and Conditional Uses MSM (1) CTC (1) DR SC-1 (1) SC-2 CC (2) LHL WV (3) TND-1 TND-2 (4) P RESIDENTIAL Single-family detached dwellings P P P P P P P P P Single-family semidetached dwellings P P P P P P P Two-family dwellings P P P P P P P Single-family attached dwellings P P P P P P P Residential uses above ground level P P P P P C Multifamily dwellings P P P P C C P Community residential homes/congregate care facilities P P P P P P P P NONRESIDENTIAL Retail sales establishments P P P P C C Retail food establishments P P P P C C Financial institutions P P Personal/business service establishments P P P P P/C (2) P C Business and professional offices P P P P/C (2) P P C Eating establishments, sit down, and taverns P P P P C C Hotels, motels and resorts P P C Bed and breakfast C C C C C Tennis or racquet clubs P P Commercial recreation facilities, indoor P C C Transient accommodations P P P P C Theaters, indoor P P Private clubs P P P P Performing arts centers P Assembly halls and convention centers P P Brewpub P P C Microbrewery/micro-distillery C C P Regional brewery C Schools of special education P Day care centers P C C C C C Churches C C Social service/public agency P P C C Funeral homes and mortuaries P Veterinary clinics and hospitals P P Repair service establishments P P P Light printing establishments P P Heavy printing establishments P Rental service establishments P P Transportation terminals C C Service stations P Vehicle repair, minor and major P P Wholesale trade P P Warehouses P Light manufacturing P Outdoor storage (5) P Mini-warehouses P Light utility service P P Heavy utility service P Construction service establishments P P Industrial workshop and services P P Public park and recreation facilities P Public marinas P Museums, galleries, cultural centers, studios and similar uses P P C C C C P Government offices and related facilities P P Emergency service facilities P Commercial off-street parking P C P Wholesale vegetable garden P Community gardens P P P P P P P P P P P Preservation areas and open space P P P P P P P P P P P  
P= Permitted Use   C= Conditional Use 
Notes: 
(1) Ground floor residential uses fronting Main Street are prohibited. Freestanding residential that is not part of a mixed-use project shall comply with the area and dimensional standards of the TND-1 district. 
(2) Conditional use approval is required in cases where more than 50 percent of the gross floor area of the subject property is devoted to business and professional office and/or personal/business service use(s). 
(3) Development applications involving a site area of 20,000 sq. ft. or greater shall follow the review and approval procedures of a Planned Development Project under Article V of the Code with required application material to be determined by the Planning and Zoning Director. 
(4) Multifamily and all attached housing types are permitted on property located at the southwest corner of Main Street and 11th Avenue South designated for "transient accommodation" use (parcel identification number 04291663480030170) and the mobile home park property adjacent to Main Street between 12th Avenue N and 13th Avenue N. (parcel identification number 042916663480050010) subject to the area and dimensional standards of TND-1 specified in Table VI-3 under Section 98.05(A). 
(5) Subject to Screening and Site Plan Approval as required by Section 55.00 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 5, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 5, 6-19-2017) 
98.03   Maximum building height.
All development within the Community Redevelopment District shall comply with the building height limitations shown in Figure 3, Maximum Building Height of the adopted City of Safety Harbor Downtown Master Plan which is incorporated [by reference] and made a part of this Article. Article XVI, Definitions, shall be referred to for the method of measuring building height. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2, 5-7-2012) 
98.04 - Maximum density and intensity of use. 
Density and/or intensity of use standards are set forth by location in Figure 4 of the City of Safety Harbor Downtown Master Plan which is incorporated [by reference] and made a part of this Article and further delineated by classification of use in Table VI-2. Density and intensity of use standards may be combined in mixed-use districts. 
Article XVI, Definitions, of this Code shall be referred to for the method of calculating site density and intensity (see floor area ratio) allowances. Factors such as off-street parking, height limits, dwelling unit sizes, lot configuration, minimum landscaping and drainage requirements may limit the amount of density and intensity that can be achieved on a parcel proposed for development. 
TABLE VI-2 Abbreviation District Category Maximum Density (DU/A) Maximum Intensity (FAR) MSM Main Street Marketplace * 1.00 CTC Community Town Center ** 1.00-1.25 DR Destination Resort 15.0*** 1.00 SC-1 Service Corridor-1 * 1.00 SC-2 Service Corridor-2 NP 0.55 LHL Local Historic Landmark 10.0 0.35 WV Waterfront Village 10.0 0.35 CC Creekside Conservation 10.0 0.35 TND-1 Traditional Neighborhood Development-1 15.0 N/A TND-2 Traditional Neighborhood Development-2 7.5**** N/A P Public NP 0.55  
NOTES: 
* The maximum residential build-out of the MSM and SC-1 districts shall be 100 dwelling units, which is not calculated towards the floor area ratio. 
** The maximum residential build-out of the CTC district shall be 150 dwelling units, which is not calculated towards the floor area ratio. 
*** Residential development in the Coastal High Hazard Area shall not exceed 15 dwelling units per acre. 
**** Up to 15 dwelling units per acre may be allowed on the mobile home park property adjacent to Main Street between 12th Avenue N and 13th Avenue N (parcel identification # 042916663480050010) 
NP = Residential uses are not permitted in this district. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 3, 5-7-2012) 
98.05 - Dimensional regulations. 
(A)  Traditional Neighborhoods. All development in TND-1 and TND-2 Districts must comply with the area and dimensional requirements in Table VI-3 except as may be permitted under Section 24.00, Nonconformities. 
TABLE VI-3 Area and Dimensional Standards TND-1 TND-2 Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft./unit)  Detached single-family, interior 5,000 5,000  Detached single-family, corner 6,000 6,000  Two-family 9,000 N/A  Semi-detached single-family 3,500 N/A  Attached single-family 2,500 N/A  Multiple family 10,000 N/A Minimum Lot Width (feet)  Detached single-family, interior 50 50  Detached single-family, corner 50 50  Two-family 60 N/A  Semi-detached single-family 35 N/A  Attached single-family (per unit) 25 N/A  Multiple family 100 N/A Maximum Building Width (feet) 150 N/A Required Yards (feet) Detached Single-Family and Two-Family  Minimum front for building height at or below 18 feet 15 15  Minimum front for building height above 18 feet 20 20  Minimum side   Minimum one side 5 5   Total side yard requirement 14 14  Minimum rear 20 20 Semi-Detached Single-Family, Attached Single-Family  Minimum front (primary front yard) 15 N/A  Minimum front (secondary front yard, corner lots only) 10 N/A  Minimum side   Common interior building walls(s) 0 N/A   Outside building wall(s) 10 N/A  Minimum rear 20 N/A Multiple Family  Minimum front 15 N/A  Minimum side 10 N/A  Minimum rear 20 N/A Minimum building separation, multiple family (feet) 20 N/A Maximum lot coverage of single-family detached dwelling unit  One-story structure 65% 65%  Multistory structure (1) 35% 35% Maximum impervious surface ratio Refer to Article III, Section 40.00 of this Code  
(1) Applied only to cases where the upper story of the principal structure exceeds 50 percent of the gross floor area of the first story. 
(B)  Mixed use areas. All development in MSM, CTC, WV, and CC must comply with the area and dimensional requirements in Table VI-4 except as may be permitted under Section 24.00, Nonconformities, of this Code. 
TABLE VI-4 Area and Dimensional Standards MSM CTC WV CC Minimum lot area None None None None Minimum lot width None None None None Required yards (in feet)  Minimum front   Collector or minor arterial 5 (1) 5 (1) 50 20   Local street 10 10 10 5  Maximum front 15 15 N/A N/A  Minimum side (2) 0 0 0 0  Minimum rear 10 10 10 10 (3)  
(1) The minimum front yard setback may be reduced to zero feet when building fronts a public sidewalk or courtyard space no less than 15 feet in width. 
(2) A minimum 10-foot side yard setback is required for new construction when a nonresidential use is proposed adjacent to an existing residential use in the WV and CC districts. 
(3) Required wetland setback (upland buffer) per Section 53.01. 
(C)  Local Historic Landmark. All development in the LHL shall comply with the requirements of Article VIII, of this Code, Historic Preservation. Building setbacks and other dimensional requirements shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Board, acting in their capacity as the Historic Incentives Board, according to the review criteria provided in Section 129.01(B). 
The dimensional standards of the CC district stated in Table VI-4 shall apply if: 
(1)  The City Commission grants a Certificate of Approval to relocate the Tucker Mansion building to another site; or 
(2)  The City Commission authorizes the removal of the historic designation pursuant to Section 128.02, Criteria for Removal of Designation. 
(D)  Service Corridor. All development in SC-1 and SC-2 must comply with the dimensional requirements in Table VI-5 except as may be permitted under Section 24.00, Nonconformities. 
TABLE VI-5 Area and Dimensional Standards SC-1 SC-2 Minimum lot area None None Required yards (in feet)  Minimum front 5 1 25  Minimum side 0 1 10  Minimum rear 10 10  
1 10 feet of side yard setback is required when abutting a property principally zoned for residential use. 
(E)  Public Use Areas. All development in P must comply with the dimensional requirements in Table VI-6: 
TABLE VI-6 Area and Dimensional Standards P Minimum lot area None Required yards (in feet)  Minimum front 5  Minimum side 0 1  Minimum rear 10  
1 10 feet of side yard setback is required when abutting a property principally zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 4, 5-7-2012; Ord. No. 2013-22, § 1, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 10, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-25, § 3, 1-17-2017) 
98.06   Design standards. Compliance with the design standards in this Section is required for any development project that requires site plan approval from the City Commission.
(A)  Traditional Neighborhoods. 
(1)  Building Form. Single-family dwelling units shall be constructed with a raised foundation or shall be designed to give the front facade the appearance of an elevated floor at least 16 inches above grade level. Where slab on grade construction is proposed, this requirement can be satisfied by using a raised front entry porch, elevated windows, doors and wall heights. 
(2)  Windows. Windows shall not be flush mounted. Windows recessed less than three inches shall feature architectural trim including a header, sill and side trim or decorative shutters. Windows recessed three inches or more shall feature a window sill. 
(3)  Main Entrance. The main entrance shall include a porch, portico, or stoop, with a minimum usable depth of six feet and 48 square feet of total floor area. The main entrance shall be connected to the public sidewalk with a sidewalk. 
(4)  Driveway Access. New garages shall be accessed from an alleyway or side-street, where feasible as determined by the Planning and Zoning Director. Multifamily and attached housing types shall be designed with shared driveway access with no more than one access point for every 100 linear feet of street frontage. 
(5)  Garage Doors. When facing the primary street, front loaded garage doors shall be set back at least 20 feet from the front lot line and be recessed at least five feet behind the front façade line of the dwelling unit. 
(B)  Community Town Center and Main Street Marketplace. 
(1)  Materials. Durable building materials, simple configurations, and solid craftsmanship are required. Fifty (50) percent of walls fronting Main Street, exclusive of windows shall be constructed of: stucco, brick, split-faced block, stone, or fiber cement siding. 
(2)  Windows. At least 60 percent of the street level of any façade facing Main Street shall be windows. Windows shall be of a type which are recessed or "punched" to a depth of not less than two inches from the façade wall in which the window is installed. Windows shall be vertical in shape (height is greater than width). 
(3)  Expression Line. A horizontal line on the façade known as the Expression Line (EL) shall distinguish the base of the building from the remainder to enhance the pedestrian environment. The EL shall be created by a change in material, a change in design, or by a continuous setback, recess, or projection above or below the Expression Line. Such elements such as cornices, belt courses, corbelling, molding, stringcourses, ornamentation, and changes in material or color or other sculpturing of the base, are appropriate design elements for the ELs. 
(4)  Uninterrupted Façade. The maximum linear length of an uninterrupted building façade facing public streets shall be 20 feet. Façade articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance. Building wall offsets (projections and recesses), cornices, varying building materials or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building. 
(5)  Building Orientation and Entrances. The primary building entrance shall be located in the front façade parallel to the street. Main building entrances and exits shall be located on the primary street. A clearly identifiable and usable building entrance is required for every 50 feet of a building's frontage on a primary street. Main building entrances shall be defined by at least one of the following: 
(a)  A projecting or recessed entrance. A recessed entrance is required if the entrance is within five feet of a property line. 
(b)  Transom and/or side light window panels framing the door opening. 
(c)  Architectural trim framing the door opening. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 5, 5-7-2012) 
99.00 - Special regulations. 
99.01   Fee in-lieu of required on-site parking.
(A)  The amount of any on-site parking required by Sections 147.00 through 147.05 of this Code for development in the Community Redevelopment District may be reduced by the payment of the fee provided below to the City. 
(B)  The fee to be paid by the applicant for a development order shall equal the market value of the land (300 square feet per parking space) which would have been required for parking under Sections 147.00 through 147.05 of this Code plus the construction value of the parking which would have been required. The market value of the property shall be determined by an MIA appraisal, reflecting the market value of the property at the time of development order approval. The construction value shall be determined by a certified cost estimate submitted by the Engineer of Record. The appraisal and construction cost estimate, obtained at the cost of the applicant, shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Director for review to determine if the appraisal and construction cost estimate comply with the requirements of this Section. 
(C)  Any money collected by the City under this Section may be used only for the purchase of land for, or the construction, maintenance, or operation of on- or off-street municipal parking facilities, and any other costs associated with the provision of municipal parking in the Community Redevelopment District. 
100.00 - Waivers. 
(A)  In connection with the approval of a development order in the Community Redevelopment District, the City Commission may waive or modify any requirement of this Code with the exception of the use restrictions. 
(B)  No waiver or modification may be granted unless one or more of the following circumstances exists: 
(1)  Superior Alternatives. Where the development will provide an alternative which will achieve the purposes of the requirement through clearly superior design, efficiency, or performance. 
(2)  Protection of Significant Features. Where the waiver or modification is necessary to preserve or enhance significant existing environmental or cultural features, such as trees, scenic areas, historic sites or public facilities, related to the development site. 
(3)  Deprivation of Reasonable Use. Where the strict application of the requirement would effectively deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the land, due to its unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions or location; provided: 
(a)  Such effect upon the owner is not outweighed by a valid public purpose in imposing the requirement in this case, and 
(b)  The unusual conditions involved are not personal to, nor the result of actions of the developer or property owner, their predecessors or agents. 
(4)  Technical Impracticality. Where strict application of the requirement would be technically impractical in terms of engineering, design, or construction practices, due to the unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions or location of the land or due to improved efficiency, performance, safety, or construction practices which will be realized; provided: 
(a)  The development will provide an alternative adequate to achieve the purposes of the requirement; and 
(b)  Any unusual conditions creating the impracticality are not personal to, nor the result of the actions of the developer or property owner, their predecessors or agents. 
(5)  No Relationship to the Development or its Impacts. Where all or any part of the requirement has no relationship to the development, or to the impact of the development on the public facilities, land use, traffic, or environment of the neighborhood and the general community, due to the location, scale, or type of development involved. 
101.00-115.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 

116.00 - Authority and requirements. 
(A)  The City Commission of the City of Safety Harbor shall have the authority to enter into Development Agreements with the legal and equitable owners of real property within, or to be annexed within, the City limits of Safety Harbor as provided for in Chapter 163, Florida Statutes and as further set forth under the terms of this Article. 
(B)  The entry into a development agreement by the City shall not limit or modify any legislative power by the City to adopt ordinances, resolutions, regulations or to make administrative or legislative decisions of any kind which it had the power to make prior to the entry into such development agreement, except to the degree that the development agreement, by its express terms and not by implication, gives vested rights as to certain development permissions, required improvements and similar matters. 
(C)  A development agreement and authorized development shall be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Code. No development agreement shall be effective or implemented unless all plan amendments required by said agreement are found in compliance by the state land planning agency in accordance with Chapter 163, Florida Statutes. 
(D)  The duration of a development agreement shall not exceed ten (10) years. It may be extended by mutual consent of the City Commission and the developer, subject to a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of this article and a review for compliance with current City ordinances and regulations. 
(E)  A development agreement may be amended or canceled by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or by their successors in interest subject to a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(F)  The City's ordinances and regulations governing the development of the land at the time of the execution of the development agreement, with the exception of any fee structure, including impact fees, shall govern the development of the land for the duration of the development agreement. The City may apply subsequently adopted local ordinances and regulations to a development that is subject to a development agreement only if the City Commission determines the following after undertaking a public hearing and considering all evidence presented at the public hearing: 
(1)  The subsequently adopted ordinances and regulations are not in conflict with the development agreement and do not prevent development of the land uses, intensities or densities in the development agreement; 
(2)  The subsequently adopted ordinances and regulations are essential to the public health, safety, or welfare, and expressly state that they shall apply to a development that is subject to a development agreement; 
(3)  The subsequently adopted ordinances and regulations are specifically anticipated and provided for in the development agreement; 
(4)  The City demonstrates that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of approval of the development agreement; or 
(5)  The development agreement is based upon substantially inaccurate information supplied by the applicant for development agreement. 
(G)  If state or federal laws are enacted after the execution of a development agreement which are applicable to and preclude the parties' compliance with the terms of the development agreement, such agreement shall be modified or revoked as necessary to comply with the relevant state or federal laws. 
117.00 - Development agreement procedures. 
(A)  A property owner desiring to enter into a development agreement shall make application through the Planning Department and pay the required fee. 
(B)  Upon receipt of an application for development agreement, the City Manager shall request authorization from the City Commission to negotiate with the applicant. 
(C)  Upon authorization from the City Commission to negotiate, the applicant shall submit a development proposal consisting of the following minimum information: 
(1)  Required additional review fee; 
(2)  Legal description, including the identification of outparcels to be exempt from the agreement; 
(3)  The persons, firms or corporations having a legal or equitable interest in the land; 
(4)  The desired duration of the development agreement not to exceed ten (10) years; 
(5)  The development uses desired, including residential density, building intensity, and building height; 
(6)  An analysis of the impact upon existing and proposed public facilities and services; including who shall provide such facilities, the date any new facilities, if needed, will be constructed; and a schedule to assure public facilities and services are available concurrent with the impacts of the development; 
(7)  A description of any reservation or dedication of land for public purposes; 
(8)  A description of all City development approvals necessary, including any zoning or land use modifications required; 
(9)  Accurate survey of boundary and existing conditions including, but not limited to, easements, streets, buildings, land uses, historic sites, zoning, wetlands, watercourses, utilities, general topographic contours, and existing zoning and land uses for all contiguous properties; 
(10)  A preliminary master drainage and grading plan; 
(11)  The location of proposed buffers or screening; 
(12)  An existing tree survey in accordance with the requirements of Section 229.00 of this Code; 
(13)  A conceptual master plan showing the locations and acreage of general land uses including dwelling unit types, general types of nonresidential uses; open spaces, recreational facilities and other proposed uses; 
(14)  Circulation plan showing locations and types of all access points and internal streets; 
(15)  Proposed development phasing; 
(16)  A list of all federal, state and local permit requirements; 
(17)  Any further information deemed necessary to conduct a complete review of the proposal. 
(D)  A review of the development proposal shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days and conducted by the Technical Review Committee (TRC) to determine compliance with City ordinances, regulations and that the development is consistent with the local comprehensive plan. The development proposal shall be amended as necessary to comply with the requirements of the Technical Review Committee (TRC). 
(E)  Once compliance with City ordinances and regulations has been determined by the Technical Review Committee the development proposal shall be transmitted to the City Manager for negotiation. The City Manager and his (her) staff shall review the development of the property and the terms and conditions which are necessary to protect the public interest. 
(F)  The City Manager shall report the status of negotiations to the City Commission within ninety (90) days of TRC compliance. 
(1)  In the event that the City Manager and the property owner have negotiated the terms of a mutually acceptable development agreement, the essential terms of that development agreement shall be presented in an outline form to the City Commission. The Commission shall review the same and shall, if it determines to proceed further with completion of the development agreement by an affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members, direct the City Attorney to reduce the said development terms to contractual form for further consideration by the Commission. This direction shall in no manner whatsoever obligate the Commission to ultimately approve a development agreement or to approve any of the matters outlined to it by the City Manager as to any specific term or condition. 
(2)  In the event that the City Manager and the property owner have not negotiated a mutually satisfactory development agreement, the City Manager shall so notify the City Commission and the development agreement process as to the particular land shall be concluded unless by an affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Commission shall direct that negotiations shall continue. A further development agreement application on the same property may be submitted no sooner than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the date the Commission has concluded consideration of the development agreement. 
(G)  At such time as the City Attorney has reduced the terms of the proposed development agreement to written contractual form, the City Manager shall provide the Planning Department with a written recommendation regarding adoption of the development agreement. 
(H)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall conduct the first public hearing on the proposed development agreement, and forward a recommendation to the City Commission. 
(I)  The City Commission shall conduct the second public hearing to determine final action on the proposed development agreement. The Commission may, by an affirmative vote of not less than three (3) members, approve the form and execution of the development agreement by resolution. 
(J)  Within fourteen (14) days after the City enters into a development agreement, the City shall record the agreement with the Clerk of the Circuit Court in Pinellas County. A copy of the recorded development agreement shall be submitted to the state land planning agency within fourteen (14) days after the agreement is recorded. The development agreement shall not be binding until proper recording, and until thirty (30) days after having been reviewed by the state land planning agency. A development agreement shall be binding upon all successors in interest to the parties of the agreement. 
(K)  The City shall review land subject to a development agreement once every twelve (12) months to determine if there has been good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the City makes a finding that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the development agreement, the agreement may be revoked or modified by the City after a public hearing held in accordance with the requirements of this Article. 
(L)  For each annual review conducted during years six (6) through ten (10) of a development agreement, a written report shall be submitted to the parties to the agreement and the state land planning agency in accordance with rules adopted by that Agency. 
(M)  Such persons as are defined by Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, shall have standing to enforce a development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 11, 3-16-2015) 
118.00 - Public hearings requirements. 
(A)  Before entering into, amending, or revoking a development agreement, the City shall conduct a minimum of two (2) public hearings. 
(B)  Notice of intent to consider a development agreement shall be advertised approximately seven (7) days before each public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation and readership in Pinellas County. Notice of intent to consider a development agreement shall also be mailed to all property owners within 300 feet of the entire contiguous property which is the subject of the agreement and the applicant before the first public hearing. The day, time, and place at which the second public hearing will be held shall be announced at the first public hearing. 
(C)  The notice shall specify the location of the land subject to the development agreement, the development uses proposed on the property, the proposed population densities, and the proposed building intensities and height and shall specify a place where a copy of the proposed agreement can be obtained. 
119.00 - Development agreement content. 
(A)  Any development agreement approved under the provisions of this Code shall include the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A legal description of the land subject to the agreement and the names of its legal and equitable owners; 
(2)  The duration of the agreement; 
(3)  The development uses permitted on the land, including population densities, and building intensities and height; 
(4)  A description of public facilities that will service the development, including who shall provide such facilities, the date any new facilities, if needed, will be constructed; and a schedule to assure public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of the development; 
(5)  A description of any reservation or dedication of land for public purposes; 
(6)  A description of all development permits approved or needed to be approved for the development of the land, including, but not limited to, the following; 
(a)  Any required Comprehensive Plan amendments; 
(b)  Any required zoning amendments; 
(c)  Site plan approval; 
(d)  Any required approvals, permits or authorizations from Pinellas County, Florida Department of Transportation, Southwest Florida Water Management District, Florida Department of Environmental Regulation, Florida Department of Natural Resources, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, Tampa Bay Regional Planning Council, Pinellas Planning Council, Department of Community Affairs, or any other agency with competent jurisdiction; 
(e)  A statement that said development permits will be obtained at the sole cost of the applicant, and in the event that any development permissions are not received, that no further development of the property shall be allowed until such time as the City has reviewed the matter and determined whether to modify or terminate the agreement. Under these conditions, actions in reliance to the development agreement shall not vest any development rights in the property. 
(7)  A finding that the development permitted or proposed is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and land development regulations, and that if amendments are necessary to the zoning or land use designations, that such development agreement is contingent upon those amendments being made and approved by the appropriate governmental agencies; 
(8)  A description of any conditions, terms, restrictions, or other requirements determined to be necessary by the local government for the public health, safety or welfare of its citizens; and 
(9)  A statement indicating that the failure of the agreement to address a particular permit, condition, term, or restriction shall not relieve the developer of the necessity of complying with the law governing said permitting requirements, conditions, term or restriction; 
(10)  Phasing and phase timing. 
(B)  Development agreements shall be executed by all persons having legal or equitable title in the subject property, including the fee simple owner, any contract purchasers and mortgagees; or include joinders or subordination. 
(C)  A development agreement shall be a legislative act in the furtherance of the City's powers to zone and regulate development within its jurisdiction. 
120.00-125.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

126.00 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this Article to establish standards for the protection, enhancement, and preservation of historic resources consistent with the following objectives: 
(A)  To effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of buildings, structures, improvements, landscape features and archaeological resources that represent distinctive elements of the City's historical, cultural, archaeological, aesthetic and architectural heritage; 
(B)  To safeguard the City's historical, cultural, archaeological and architectural heritage, while allowing the reasonable and productive use of such resources; 
(C)  To foster civic pride through neighborhood conservation; 
(D)  To protect and enhance the City's attraction to visitors and residents alike, thereby stimulating the economic base of the community; 
(E)  To stabilize neighborhoods and improve property values; 
(F)  To promote the use of individual sites and districts for the education, pleasure, and economic welfare of the citizens of Safety Harbor. 
127.00 - Definitions. 
(A)  Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this Article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this Article its most reasonable application: 
(1)  Archaeological site: A location that has yielded or may yield information on history or prehistory. An archaeological site contains physical remains of the past. An archaeological site may be found within archaeological zones, historic sites or historic districts. 
(2)  Board: The Architectural Review Board created by this Code as described in Section 249.00 and referred to in this Article as the "Board." 
(3)  Building: A structure created to shelter any form of human activity. This may refer to a house, barn, garage, church, hotel, or similar structure. Buildings may refer to a historically or architecturally related complex, such as a house or jail, or a barn. 
(4)  Certificate of approval: A certificate issued by the City indicating its approval of plans for the alteration, construction, removal, or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within a historic district. 
(5)  City Commission: The governing body of the City of Safety Harbor. 
(6)  Contributing structure: A structure in a historic district that contributes to the district's historical significance through location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and other considerations, and which shall be afforded the same consideration as landmarks. 
(7)  Demolition: The complete or constructive removal of a building or any substantial part thereof when same will not be relocated to a new site. 
(8)  District: A geographically definable area, urban or rural, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, objects or areas which are united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
(9)  Economic hardship: A condition resulting from failure to issue a Certificate of Approval, inflicting excessive financial burden upon the owner and amounting to the taking of the owner's property without just compensation. 
(10)  Historic property or historic resource: Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, object, or other real or personal property of historical, architectural or archaeological value subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Safety Harbor. 
(11)  Historic site: A single lot or portion of a lot containing an improvement, landscape feature, or archaeological site, or a historically related complex of improvements, landscape features or archaeological sites that may yield information on history or prehistory. 
(12)  Landmark: A building, object, site or structure of the highest historical, cultural, architectural or archaeological importance and whose demolition or destruction would constitute an irreplaceable loss of the quality and character of the City of Safety Harbor. The property on which these are located shall be considered historic sites as defined by this Article. 
(13)  Non-contributing structure: A building, object, site or structure that neither adds to nor detracts from a district's sense of time and place and historical development. 
(14)  Object: A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be by nature or design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
(15)  Ordinary repairs or maintenance: Work done to prevent deterioration of a building or structure or decay of or damage to a building or structure or any part thereof by maintaining the building or structure as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay, or damage. 
(16)  Owner of record: The individual listed on the current Pinellas County tax rolls or the current title holder of a specific property. 
(17)  Petition for designation: A petition or application submitted to the Board requesting designation by City ordinance of a building, structure, site, district, or archaeological resource as historically or archaeologically significant. 
(18)  Preservation: The identification, evaluation, recordation, documentation, analysis, recovery, interpretation, acquisition, protection, management, rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, maintenance or reconstruction of historic properties. 
(19)  Reconstruction: The authentic reproduction of a building or site that once existed, but disappeared or was demolished. 
(20)  Rehabilitation: The act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property that are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values. 
(21)  Relocation: The moving of a structure from its existing location to a new location. 
(22)  Resource: Sites, buildings, structures, districts, objects, and areas, public or private, singly or in combination. 
(23)  Restoration: The creation of an authentic reproduction utilizing the existing parts of an original object or building. 
(24)  Site: The location of a significant event, activity, building, structure or archaeological resource. 
(25)  Structure: A work constructed by man made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. It may be an engineering project large in scale, such as a bridge, wall, gate, or building, or small in scale, such as monuments or fountains. 
128.00 - Designation of historic districts, landmarks, and sites. 
(A)  The Board shall have the authority to recommend to the City Commission the designation of areas, places, buildings, structures, landscape features, landmarks, archaeological sites, and other improvements or physical features as individual sites or districts, in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Sites or districts which are significant to the City of Safety Harbor's history, architecture, archaeology, or culture and possess an integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship or association; 
(2)  Sites or districts which are associated with distinctive elements of the social, political, economic, scientific, religious, prehistoric, and architectural history of the City of Safety Harbor, the state, or the nation; 
(3)  Sites or districts which are associated with the lives of persons significant in the city's, state's or nation's past; 
(4)  Sites or districts which embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, style, or method of construction or work of a master; or that possess high artistic value; or that represent a distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; 
(5)  Sites or districts which have yielded or are likely to yield information about the prehistory or history of the City of Safety Harbor; or 
(6)  Sites or districts which are listed in the National Register of Historic Places. 
(B)  The following procedure shall apply for the petitioning for designation of structures, landmarks, districts or sites pursuant to this Article: 
(1)  A petition for designation shall be made to the City of Safety Harbor on a form prepared by the City Planning and Zoning Department. 
(2)  A petition may be submitted by a member of the Board, the owner of record of the nominated property or structure, the City Commission or the City Manager. 
(3)  The Board shall hold a public hearing on the petition and shall notify the property owner by first class mail at least seven (7) days in advance of the hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) days in advance of the hearing. 
(C)  The petition for designation shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  A written description of the historical, cultural, architectural, and archaeological significance of the property or properties recommended for designation, including the dates of construction and names of former owners if available; 
(2)  An identification of all structures within a proposed district, classifying them as contributing or non-contributing, with an explanation of the criteria used in developing the classification; 
(3)  A legal description of the boundaries of the site, structure or district recommended for designation; an explanation of the reasons for those boundaries; and a map illustrating the boundaries; 
(4)  Photographic documentation of individual sites and structures recommended for designation; 
(5)  The names and addresses of all property owners of record affected by the application. 
(D)  The Board shall hold a public hearing upon every Petition for Designation submitted to the City. At such public hearing, any person may present testimony or documentary evidence concerning the significance of the property under consideration. At the close of the public hearing the Board shall vote on the proposed designation for recommendation to the City Commission. 
(E)  The Board action shall be reported to the City Commission. Such report shall not require a public hearing before the City Commission. 
(F)  After hearing a report from the Board, the City Commission may direct the preparation of an ordinance providing for the recommended designation. Alternatively, the City Commission may act to deny the proposed designation without further hearing. 
(G)  The City Commission shall follow normal procedures of public hearing in the adoption of an ordinance providing for such historic designation. In addition, the owner or owners of property proposed for designation shall also be given written notification by first class mail a minimum of seven (7) days before the scheduled public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven (7) days in advance of the meeting. 
(H)  After the final adoption of a designation ordinance by the City Commission, structures, sites and districts shall remain designated as historically or archaeologically significant unless such designation is removed by subsequent ordinance of the City. A positive finding by the City Commission in accordance with the criteria of Section 128.02 of this Article is required to remove a historic designation. The public notice requirements of Subsection (G) above shall also be followed in the removal of such designation. 
128.01   Recording of designated property.
(A)  The Planning and Zoning Department shall maintain a historic sites map as part of the Official Zoning Atlas. The historic sites map shall show the location of all sites and structures designated as landmarks, and shall show the boundaries of all designated historic districts. 
(B)  Within districts, a map shall identify contributing and non-contributing structures. 
(C)  Rules of interpretation shall be in accordance with Section 22.00 of this Code. 
128.02   Criteria for removal of designation.
(A)  The City Commission may remove the historic or archaeological designation from a structure, site or district by ordinance if one or more of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The subject property no longer meets the applicable criteria for designation found in Section 128.00 of this Article; 
(2)  Additional information indicates that the subject property does not meet the applicable criteria for designation found in Section 128.00 of this Article; 
(3)  An error in professional judgment was made in the petition for designation of the subject property; 
(4)  A procedural error occurred in the designation process; 
(5)  It is determined by the City Commission during the removal procedure that the property owner has violated a term or condition of a Certificate of Approval pertaining to the designated property. 
129.00 - Certificate of approval. 
(A)  A Certificate of Approval from the City shall be required before the following actions affecting a designated site or any property in a designated historic district may be undertaken: 
(1)  Any construction, reconstruction, development, redevelopment, alteration, restoration or rehabilitation which requires a Building Permit from the City and affects the exterior appearance of the structure involved. 
(2)  The construction of any new structures in a designated historic district. 
(3)  The relocation of any historic structures or any contributing structure located in any designated historic district. 
(4)  The demolition of any historic site, landmark or any contributing structure located in a designated historic district or the removal of any significant historical feature. 
(5)  Any construction which may potentially affect the integrity of a designated archeological site. 
(B)  Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed as negating the requirement to obtain site plan approval in accordance with the requirements of Sections 229.00 through 229.05 of this Code, and any other requirement of this Code. 
(C)  Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or interior remodeling of any historic structure that does not involve a significant change in material, design or exterior appearance. 
(D)  Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed as to restrict exterior painting, signage or the erection of awnings. 
(E)  Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed as to prevent the demolition of a noncontributing structure in a historic district. 
(F)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the alteration, construction, reconstruction, repair, or demolition of a designated structure on an emergency basis when the Building Official certifies in writing that such work is necessary for the purpose of correcting conditions determined to be dangerous to life, health or property. 
(G)  The Certificate of Approval shall be in addition to any other permits and procedure required by this Code or by law. 
(H)  The application shall be made on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Department and shall be accompanied by such plans, drawings, materials, or photographs as deemed necessary to describe the proposed alteration and enable the Board to visualize the effect of the proposed alteration on the property and adjacent buildings and streetscapes. If such application involves a designated archaeological site the applicant shall provide full plans and specifications to work that may affect the surface and subsurface of the archaeological site. 
(I)  Notice for public hearing shall constitute written legal notice, and legal notice publication in accordance with the requirements of Article XIII of this Code. 
129.01   Standards for review.
(A)  It shall be the intent of this Article to promote maintenance, restoration, adaptive reuses appropriate to the property, and compatible contemporary designs that are harmonious with the exterior and landscape features of neighboring buildings, sites and streetscapes. 
(B)  In reviewing an application for a Certificate of Approval, the City shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The height of any proposed alterations or new construction shall be visually compatible with adjacent properties. 
(2)  The width and height of windows, doors, and entries shall be visually compatible with the character of the building's original architectural style and those found in surrounding structures. 
(3)  The relationship of a structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining structures shall be visually compatible to the neighborhood or district. 
(4)  The shape of the roof shall be compatible with the shape and type of roof of the building's original architectural style and those found on neighboring structures in a historic district. 
(5)  The size and mass (or shape) of the building after alteration or construction shall be compatible with the building's original architectural style and the character of surrounding buildings and structures. 
(6)  Landscaping shall be compatible with the architectural character and appearance of the structure or historic district. 
(7)  Architectural details, including color, materials and texture, shall be treated so as to make the building or structure compatible with its original architectural style and character and to preserve or enhance the architectural style and character of the historic district in which it is located. 
(8)  The renovation of contributing structures in a historic district or designated sites/landmarks shall meet the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
(9)  The proposed project shall conform with the other requirements of this Code and compliance with the goals, objectives, and policies of all elements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(10)  The proposed project shall comply with the City's concurrency management system. 
(11)  The impact upon archaeological sites shall preserve the integrity of the site. 
129.02   Determination by the board.
(A)  Based on the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, the designation report, a complete application for Certificate of Approval, additional plans, drawings or photographs that describe the proposed alteration, and other guidelines the Board may deem necessary, the Board shall make a written recommendation to the City Commission. The written recommendation shall approve; approve with conditions; or deny the application. 
(B)  A denial of a Certificate of Approval shall be accompanied by a statement of the reason(s) for such denial. The Board shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the Board to reconsider its denial and shall attempt to resolve the differences between the owner and the Board. The applicant may amend an application in order to provide for the recommendations of the Board. 
(C)  The City Commission shall review the application and recommendation of the Board. The City Commission shall approve; approve with stipulations; or deny the application. 
(D)  In granting a Certificate of Approval the City Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the intent of this Article to insure compliance with the standards for review or to minimize any potential adverse impacts to adjoining property or to the district. 
(E)  A Certificate of Approval shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval by the City Commission. 
129.03   Permit for demolition.
(A)  A request to demolish a designated historic site/landmark or any contributing structure within a designated historic district shall require the issuance of a Certificate of Approval. 
(B)  When authorizing a Certificate of Approval for the issuance of a demolition permit, the City shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The historic or architectural significance of the building or structure. 
(2)  The importance of the building or structure to the ambiance of a district. 
(3)  The difficulty or impossibility of reproducing such a building or structure because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location. 
(4)  Whether the building or structure is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or in the city. 
(5)  The future utilization of the site. 
(6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building or structure. 
(7)  Whether the building or structure is capable of earning a reasonable economic return on its value and whether the perpetuation of the building or structure, considering it physical condition, its location and the anticipated expense of rehabilitation would be economically feasible. 
130.00 - Economic hardship exception. 
(A)  Upon final notification that a Certificate of Approval has been denied, the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to apply for an Economic Hardship Exception on the basis that the denial will result in the loss of all beneficial or economic use of the property. 
(B)  Application for a Economic Hardship Exception shall be made on a form provided by the Planning and Zoning Department. The City shall schedule a public hearing concerning the application and provide written legal notice and legal notice publication in the same manner as required by Article XIII of this Code. 
(C)  The City may solicit expert testimony or require that the applicant for an Economic Hardship Exception make submissions concerning any or all of the following information: 
(1)  Estimate the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition, or removal and an estimate of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the Board for the changes necessary to obtain a Certificate of Approval; 
(2)  A report from a licensed engineer, architect or contractor with experience in rehabilitation as to the soundness of any structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation; 
(3)  Estimated market value of the property in its current condition; after completion of the proposed construction alteration, demolition, or removal; after any requirements to obtain a Certificate of Approval; and, in the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property for continued use; 
(4)  In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property; 
(5)  Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer; 
(6)  If the property is income-producing, the annual income for the previous two years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period. 
(7)  Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any for the previous two years; 
(8)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
(9)  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two years; 
(10)  Assessed value of the property according to the two most recent assessments; 
(11)  Real estate taxes for the previous two years; 
(12)  Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture, or other; 
(13)  Any other information, including the income tax bracket of the owner, applicant, or principal investors in the property considered necessary by the Board to a determination as to whether the property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners. 
(D)  The Board shall review all the evidence and information required of an applicant for an Economic Hardship Exception and make a recommendation to the City Commission whether the denial of a Certificate of Approval has deprived, or will deprive, the owner of the property a reasonable use of, or economic return on the property. 
(E)  The City Commission shall review the application and recommendation of the Board, and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny each application for Economic Hardship Exception. Written notice of the decision shall be provided. 
131.00 - Appeals. 
(A)  Any person or persons, firm or corporation, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of a governing body aggrieved by any decision of the City Commission, may seek judicial review by a petition for certiorari as provided by law. 
132.00 - Maintenance and Repair of Landmarks, Historic Sites and Property in Historic Districts. 
(A)  The owner of a landmark, a historic site or a property in a historic district shall keep in good repair the following: 
(1)  All of the exterior portions of such buildings or structures. 
(2)  All interior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause such buildings or structures to deteriorate or to become damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair. 
(3)  The archaeological integrity of the site, if the property is designated as a historic site by virtue of its archaeological significance. 
(B)  Violations of this section will be referred to the Building Official for enforcement proceedings in accordance with the terms established for the Code Enforcement Board by the Code of Ordinances for the City of Safety Harbor. 
(C)  The provisions of this Section shall be in addition to the provisions of the Building Code requiring such buildings and structures to be kept in good repair. 
133.00 - Emergency actions. 
(A)  The City Commission may call a meeting to review a threat to a property which has not yet been designated by the City but which may be eligible for designation. 
(B)  The City Commission may initiate the adoption of an ordinance to stop all work being done to the property for a maximum period of six (6) months in order to provide time for the City to negotiate with the property owner to remove the threat to the property. Such ordinance shall be based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The historical, architectural, cultural, or archaeological significance of the site. 
(2)  The importance of the site to neighborhood conservation and stabilization. 
(3)  The importance of the site relative to the education, pleasure, and economic welfare of the citizens of Safety Harbor. 
(4)  Whether the site is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or in the city. 
(5)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to preserve the significant features of the site. 
(6)  Whether preservation of the significant features of the site allow reasonable and productive use of the property. 
(7)  Whether the site is associated with a significant event, period, or person in the City's history. 
(C)  During the six-month period the City Commission may direct the Planning and Zoning Department to initiate steps to designate the property in accordance with the terms of this Article. 
134.00 - Fees and violations. 
(A)  This Code shall establish an appropriate system of processing fees for the review of applications for designation, Certificates of Approval, and request for an Economic Hardship Exception. 
(B)  Violations of the terms of this Article shall be processed in accordance with the requirements established by this Code, the Code of Ordinances for the City of Safety Harbor, or any other applicable legal means. 
(C)  The violation of any conditions attached to any approval granted by the Board or any violation of any type of approval under this Article shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
135.00 - Incentives for preservation. 
(A)  Structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places, historical sites/landmarks or contributing structures located in a historic district designated as such under the provisions of this Article, and structures listed on the Florida Master Site File Inventory shall be entitled to the following incentives for preservation: 
(1)  Such structures shall be exempt from the nonconforming provisions as provided by this Code; 
(2)  Such structures shall be entitled to parking credits as provided by this Code; 
(3)  Such structures shall be entitled to qualify for the exemption accorded special historic buildings under the appropriate sections of the City's Building Code as administered by the Building Official. 
136.00-139.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX - PLAN CONSISTENCY AND CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT 

140.00 - Plan consistency. 
(A)  All development orders reviewed after the effective date of the Comprehensive Plan shall be issued only if they are consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies contained within the Plan. Requests for development order approval shall be reviewed in accordance with, and shall be consistent with all elements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  Consistency shall mean to further the intent of the Comprehensive Plan. Inconsistency exists when a development order is in conflict with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(C)  The provisions of this Code are intended to implement the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, and it shall be presumed that a development order which is found to meet all the requirements of this Code is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
141.00 - Concurrency management. 
(A)  No development order may be issued where the required levels of service provided below are not available concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
(B)  All requests for site plan, subdivision, zoning/land use, or conditional use approval shall be required to demonstrate that the required facilities provided below are available at the prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
(C)  The burden of demonstrating compliance with the level of service requirements shall be upon the applicant for development approval. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 8-1-2016) 
141.01   Exceptions.
(A)  The provisions of this Article shall not affect the validity of any of the following lawfully issued and effective development orders: 
(1)  The development activity is authorized by an effective building permit where construction has commenced prior to the effective date of this Code or application for a building permit has been made prior to the effective date of this Code, said permit is granted and does not expire, and the development activity continues without interruption until the development is complete. Extensions to said permit shall not be granted if there is a conflict with any of the provisions of this Article or any other provisions of this Code; or 
(2)  The development activity is authorized by an effective site plan approval which has been granted prior to the effective date of this Code and the development activity commences prior to the expiration date of the original site plan approval and continues without interruption until the development is complete. In the event that a site plan approval involves a phased project, the succeeding phases of that site plan shall retain vested status provided that the approval of the original phase does not expire and each subsequent phase continues without interruption until the development is complete. 
Unless an alternate phasing plan was approved by the City prior to the effective date of this Code, the vested status of each subsequent phase shall expire one year per phase after the initial approval date; or 
(3)  The development activity is authorized as a lawfully approved or constructed subdivision for one- and two-family dwellings. The subdivision shall be considered lawfully approved or constructed if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The subdivision plat has been legally recorded and the on-site improvements required by the initial approval are either completed or bonded by the effective date of this Code, and 
(b)  The site plan or construction drawings have been approved prior to the effective date of this Code and their status remains vested pursuant to the site plan provision of Subsection A.2 of this Section. 
(B)  For the purposes of this Section, interruption shall be defined as a cease of construction activity for a period greater than one year or a cease of construction activity not in accordance with an approved Phasing Plan. 
(C)  Any development activity excepted from the provision of this Code pursuant to the provisions of this Section shall remain consistent with the previously approved development order. In the event that a major revision to the development order as defined by Section 229.05 of this Code is requested, the development must comply with the provisions of this Article. 
(D)  Any development activity excepted from the provisions of this Code pursuant to this Section must meet the requirements of the regulations in effect at the time the development order was approved. If the development order expires for any reason, any further development activity shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Article along with all other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 8-1-2016) 
141.02   Certificate of concurrency.
(A)  A valid Certificate of Concurrency shall be required prior to the issuance of any development order. A Certificate of Concurrency shall only be issued where it is determined by the City, in accordance with this Code, that the capacity of those public facilities and services required by the project and necessary to maintain the adopted level of service standards are available when the impact of the development will occur. 
(B)  A Certificate of Concurrency shall be issued as follows: 
(1)  By the City Commission at the time of Conditional Use, Planned Development, Final Site Plan or Final Subdivision Plat approval, whichever is processed first. 
(2)  By the Planning and Zoning Department at the time a Building Permit approval for single-family and two-family dwellings, and at the time of Final Site Plan approval for sub-threshold expansions in accordance with Section 229.03 of this Code. 
(3)  The determination shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Article. 
(4)  An application for a Certificate of Concurrency shall only be processed along with an application for Conditional Use, Planned Development, Final Site Plan, Final Subdivision Plat or Building Permit review. 
(C)  An application for a Certificate of Concurrency shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  The type of development being proposed; 
(3)  The proposed densities and intensities of use; 
(4)  The date of application; 
(5)  Proposed phasing, if applicable; 
(6)  Estimated potable water demand in terms of gallons per day; 
(7)  Estimated sanitary sewer flow in terms of gallons per day; 
(8)  Drainage design in accordance with the stormwater management regulations of this Code; 
(9)  Estimated solid waste demand in terms of pounds per day; 
(10)  Estimated population; if applicable; 
(11)  A traffic impact statement, if required by this Article; and 
(12)  The appropriate development order application. 
(D)  An approved Certificate of Concurrency shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless an alternate phasing plan is approved by the City at the time of site plan review. No extensions may be granted. 
(E)  Any change to an approved development order which results in a greater impact on one or more of the required public facilities shall require the issuance of a new Certificate of Concurrency from the authority granting the original certificate which follows the procedure for development order approval required by this Code. 
(F)  No transfers of capacity shall be allowed from one parcel to another. 
(G)  All development orders and development permits issued and approved after the effective date of this Code shall be based upon and in compliance with, the Certificate of Concurrency issued for that development proposal. A development order or development permit shall be in compliance with its underlying Certificate of Concurrency if the impacts associated with that development order or development permit are equal to or less than those stated on the underlying Certificate of Concurrency. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 8-1-2016) 
141.03   Appeals.
(A)  Any applicant who has been aggrieved by a decision of the City related to the application of a Certificate of Concurrency or administrative interpretation of Section 141.01 relative to excepting a development activity from the terms of this Code for concurrency management may request a review of that decision. 
(B)  The request for appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date of the original decision. 
(C)  The request for an appeal shall be in writing to the City and shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The property involved; 
(2)  The owner of record of the property involved; 
(3)  The date the original decision was made; 
(4)  The file or permit number of the original application; 
(5)  The fee required by this Code. 
(D)  The request for appeal shall be heard by a Hearing Officer from and assigned by the Florida Department of Administrative Hearings. 
(E)  The applicant for appeal shall be required to present substantial competent evidence to the Hearing Officer that establishes the decision relating to the application for a Certificate of Concurrency is not in compliance with this Article and this Code. 
(F)  In reviewing the appeal, the Hearing Officer shall represent the public interest consistent with the requirements of Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, shall follow any applicable requirements of the Florida Administrative Code, and shall follow the provisions of this Code or any other applicable City Ordinance. 
(G)  In reviewing an appeal of an administrative interpretation of exceptions, the burden of proof shall be on the person alleging entitlement to vested rights to demonstrate affirmatively the legal requisites of vested rights. In addition to the requirements of Subsection (F) above, the Hearing Officer shall also consider the following: 
(1)  Whether the person alleging entitlement to vested rights has relied in good faith to his detriment upon some official act or omission of the City of Safety Harbor; and 
(2)  Whether the person alleging entitlement to vested rights has made such substantive change in position or incurred such extensive obligations and expenses that it would be highly inequitable and unjust to destroy the rights he has acquired. 
(H)  In conducting administrative hearings, the Hearing Officer shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the production of books, papers and other documents, and receive evidence. The Hearing Officer, in the conduct of such hearings, shall utilize a procedure similar to that set out in Section 120.57(1), Florida Statutes, and Section 120.58, Florida Statutes. 
(I)  All orders prepared by the Hearing Officer shall conform to the requirements for such orders as set out in Section 120.59, Florida Statutes. The Hearing Officer shall present the Order of Findings of Fact and Conclusions to the City Commission and City Manager. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 8-1-2016) 
141.04   Annual report.
(A)  An annual report relating to the status of the adopted level of service standards, the status of approved development orders, and the status of the adopted Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan shall be presented to the City Commission by the Community Development Department. 
(B)  The annual report shall be prepared in conjunction with the next year's fiscal budget adoption process and shall be presented prior to the end of the calendar year. 
(C)  The capacity of each public facility shall be based upon the calculations set forth in this Article and account for committed development utilizing a reasonable projection for the progress of each proposal and population growth projections. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 8-1-2016) 
141.05   Determination of available levels of service.
(A)  For the purposes of this Code the determination of available levels of service shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Add together the total capacity of existing facilities and the total capacity of new facilities that will become available concurrent with the impact of development. 
(2)  Subtract the demand for the facility evidenced by existing development along with the new demand that will be created by the proposed development along with the new demand anticipated by other presently approved but not completed development orders and presently vested but not completed development orders. 
(3)  The total capacity of new facilities may be relied upon only if one or more of the following conditions can be determined: 
(a)  Construction of the new facility is underway at the time the development order is issued; 
(b)  The new facility is the subject of a binding contract executed for construction at the time the development order is issued; 
(c)  The new facility is included in the adopted CIP of the responsible agency at the time the development order is issued; 
(d)  The new facility is guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement at the time the development order is issued. An enforceable development agreement shall include, but not be limited to, agreements pursuant to Section 163.3220, Florida Statutes, or orders pursuant to Chapter 380, Florida Statutes; or 
(e)  The developer has committed through the development review process to provide the necessary facility improvements. 
(B)  Sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, and potable water facilities shall be in place and available to serve new development no later than the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. 
(C)  Parks and recreation facilities shall be in place or under construction no later than one (1) year after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. Park lands shall be dedicated or acquired prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or funds in the amount of the developer's fair share shall be committed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. 
(D)  Project phasing may be required to maintain required levels of service. 
(E)  In the event that facilities relied upon to maintain required levels of service are not constructed the City shall re-review the impacts of the affected development orders to determine whether existing Certificates of Concurrency remain valid. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 2, 8-1-2016) 
141.06   Potable water.
(A)  Sufficient available capacity to maintain the following levels of service shall be demonstrated: 
(1)  Minimum design flow - 1997: 125 GPCD 
(2)  Minimum design flow by 2005: 120 GPCD 
(B)  The estimated water consumption in terms of gallons per day shall be provided. 
141.07   Sanitary sewer.
(A)  Sufficient available capacity to maintain the following levels of service shall be demonstrated: 
(1)  Minimum design flow: 119 GPCD 
(B)  The additional flow shall not exceed the treatment plant design capacity reserved for Safety Harbor at the time a development order is issued. 
(C)  The estimated sanitary sewage flow in terms of gallons per day shall be provided. 
(D)  The additional flow shall not exceed the flow capacity of transmission lines. 
141.08   Drainage.
(A)  The proposed drainage system shall comply with the development standards for drainage required under Section 161.01 of this Code. 
141.09   Solid waste.
(A)  Sufficient available capacity to maintain the following level of service shall be demonstrated: 
(1)  1.3 tons per year per person 
(B)  Compliance with the City hazardous waste ordinance is required where hazardous materials are involved for storage, transport or disposal. 
(C)  The estimated solid waste disposal in terms of pounds per day shall be provided. 
141.10   Recreation.
(A)  Sufficient available capacity to maintain the following levels of service shall be demonstrated: 
(1)  Recreation facilities: 
Tennis Courts 1 court per 7,500 population Basketball Courts 1 court per 5,000 population Baseball Field 1 field per 4,000 population Boat Ramps 1 lane per 5,000 population Football/Soccer Fields 1 field per 15,000 population Swimming Pools 1 pool per 25,000 population Bicycle Trails 1 mile per 10,000 population Hiking/Nature Trails 1 mile per 10,000 population Picnic Area 1 acre per 6,000 population Handball/Racquetball 1 court per 10,000 population  
(2)  Parks: 
Park Facility Service Area/Population Served Facilities Mini-park 2-3 block area/up to 2,500 Play apparatus areas, benches, and open space, landscaping, picnic tables optional Neighborhood park 1/4-1/2 mile/up to 5,000 Play apparatus areas, recreation buildings, sports fields, multi-purpose fields, landscaping, open space, free play areas District park 30-40 minute drive time/up to 50,000 Play apparatus area, rest rooms, hiking trails, nature center, boating, swimming, picnic areas and sports fields Community park 1/2-3 miles/up to 10,000 All facilities found in the neighborhood park plus facilities to service the entire family. Pools, softball/ baseball fields, tennis courts, play areas, picnic areas, passive and active recreation areas and recreation buildings Open space 1 acre per 1,000 residents Passive recreation area, trails and commemorative structures optional  
NOTE: Need for mini-parks will be mitigated by the surplus of community park facilities and acreage. 
141.11   Transportation.
(A)  The City will continue to use roadway level of service for planning purposes and will review the potential impact on the transportation system for all requests for site plan approval by considering the following: 
(1)  Ability of the surrounding existing and planned transportation network to meet the mobility objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Extent to which the request furthers the intent of the Comprehensive Plan to improve mobility. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 3, 8-1-2016) 
141.12   Traffic impact study.
(A)  All requests for site plan, subdivision, zoning/land use, or conditional use approval which meet one of the following criteria shall prepare and submit a traffic impact study with the application for development approval: 
(1)  Residential development of fifty (50) or more units. Residential density for residential living facilities shall be calculated on the basis of 3.0 beds per unit. 
(2)  Nonresidential development which totals 20,000 or more gross square feet of floor area. 
(3)  All development within one-quarter mile of a State or County maintained roadway which is operating below LOS peak hour C and which generates in excess of 140 vehicle trips per day according to the most recent rates of the ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
(B)  The traffic study shall be designed to predict the impact of the proposed development on the transportation network, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following minimum information: 
(1)  Estimates of the current traffic volumes utilizing the most recently available Pinellas County Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) data. 
(2)  Estimates and projections of the average daily traffic using the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) methodology. 
(3)  Estimates and projections of the peak hour traffic, effect of increased traffic on the peak hour level of service, and whether the peak hour impact results in the degradation of the adopted level of service for the affected roadway. The Planning Director may require estimates and projections of the peak hour of the traffic generator and corresponding impact where the peak hour of the traffic generator is not the peak hour of the adjoining roadway's traffic. 
(4)  Estimates of traffic generation rates utilizing the most recent ITE Trip Generation manual. 
(5)  Estimates of the distribution of turning movements per driveway (percentage) and the number of peak hour turning movements per driveway, and estimates of both the directional and total impact on the affected transportation link. 
(6)  An assessment of the impact of other approved but not built or completed developments which are within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the affected transportation link. 
(7)  Tabulation of the additional traffic upon the impacted roadway and provide the appropriate analysis to determine what capacity improvements, if any, are necessary to maintain the required level of service. 
(8)  Shopping centers shall include the traffic impact of the assumed outparcel uses in the study. 
(9)  The traffic study shall be prepared and signed by a professional traffic engineer. 
(C)  Credit shall be allowed for captured vehicle trips in accordance with the latest available capture rates from the Pinellas County Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO). 
(D)  Available options to maintain the required level of service shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Physical highway improvements, including transportation link improvements, acceleration/deceleration lanes, intersection improvements, and frontage roads. 
(2)  Signal timing improvement and signal removal. 
(3)  Access management techniques, including substantial alternative access, shared access, and median controls. 
(4)  Transit facility improvements and transit usage initiatives, including van pools and ride sharing. 
(5)  The institution of flex time, transportation management associations and scheduled work shifts during off peak hours. 
(6)  Density or floor area reductions. 
(7)  Enhanced pedestrian and bicycle access. 
(8)  The use of traffic calming techniques on local streets. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 3, 8-1-2016) 
141.13   Transportation management plan requirements and multimodal impact fee.
(A)  All development projects generating new peak hour trips shall be subject to payment of a multimodal impact fee. 
(B)  Development projects located within deficient road corridors that generate between 51 and 300 new peak hour trips are required to submit a transportation management plan (TMP) designed to address their impacts while increasing mobility and reducing the demand for single occupant vehicle travel. 
(C)  Development projects located within deficient road corridors that generate more than 300 new peak hour trips are required to submit a transportation management plan (TMP) designed to address their impacts while increasing mobility and reducing the demand for single occupant vehicle travel. These development projects may also be required to submit a traffic impact study if the development triggers the impacts noted in Section 141.12. 
(D)  Multimodal impact fee assessments may be applied as credit toward the cost of implementing transportation management plan (TMP) improvements. 
(E)  Deficient road corridors include parcels, all or a portion of which access a deficient facility as defined below. 
(1)  Sole direct access. A condition where the only means of site ingress/egress is directly onto the deficient facility, regardless of the distance of that site from the facility; 
(2)  Direct access. A condition in which one or more existing or potential site ingress/egress points makes a direct connection to the deficient facility and the site is within one-half mile of the facility; and 
(3)  Sole indirect access. A condition where the only point of site ingress/egress is onto a public non-arterial roadway which makes its first and shortest arterial level connection onto a deficient facility regardless of the distance of that site from the facility. 
(F)  Methodology Applied: Determination of trip generation shall be based on the Pinellas County Multimodal Impact Fee Ordinance fee schedules (Pinellas County Land Development Code Section 150) or the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 3, 8-1-2016) 
141.14   Transportation Management Plan (TMP).
(A)  Transportation management plans are to be submitted by applicants of development projects that meet Section 141.13. Transportation management plans are required for development applications seeking to utilize transportation management strategies/improvements to address their development impacts. The extent of the strategies/improvements included in an approved transportation management plan in terms of the scale of the project(s) and roadway capacity and/or mobility benefits provided shall be based primarily on the projected impact of the development project on the surrounding traffic circulation system. Specific conditions of the deficient road corridor impacted by the development will also be considered. Transportation management plan strategies/improvements applicable to development projects within deficient road corridors will be determined at the time of site plan review. Should the impacts of the development project impact a road under the jurisdiction of an adjacent local government or FDOT, the identification of appropriate TMP strategies shall be coordinated with the affected jurisdiction(s). Transportation management plans must be developed by the applicant and accepted by the City of Safety Harbor. Transportation management plan strategies/improvements include, but are not limited to those listed below. 
(1)  Intensity reduction. The intensity of the proposal may be reduced through an across-the-board reduction of the permitted floor area ratio, as it would otherwise normally apply to the proposal. Other such corrective actions that would reduce the intensity of the proposal may also apply. 
(2)  Density reduction. The density of the proposal may be decreased by a reduction in the number of units per acre below that which would otherwise normally apply to the proposal. 
(3)  Project phasing. A project may be divided into logical phases of development by area, with later phases of the development proposal's approval withheld until the needed facilities are available. 
(4)  Outparcel deletion. Those portions of the proposal characterized as outparcels that create separate and unique impacts may be deleted from the total proposal. 
(5)  Physical highway improvements. A project may construct link capacity improvements, acceleration/deceleration lanes, intersection improvements or frontage roads. 
(6)  Operational improvements (signal). This includes efforts involving signal removal or signal timing improvements. 
(7)  Access management strategies. These include access management controls such as the preclusion of a direct connection to a deficient facility, right-in/right-out driveways, alternative driveway locations, reduction of a driveway, single point access, shared access or the implementation of median controls. 
(8)  Mass transit initiatives. A project may implement a plan to encourage transit (e.g., employer-issued bus passes). Other mass transit initiatives may include, but are not limited to, direct route subsidies, provision of feeder service or the construction of bus stop amenities, bus pull-off areas and dedication of park and ride parking spaces. 
(9)  Demand management/commuter assistance. These include efforts to encourage ride-sharing (e.g., designated parking spaces for carpools, employer-sponsored carpool program, participation in transportation management organization/initiative programs), and to implement flexible work hour and telecommuting programs. 
(10)  Bicycle/pedestrian improvements. These would involve structural improvements or construction of a bikeway or sidewalk connecting an existing bikeway/sidewalk network or providing access to a school, park, shopping center, etc. These improvements may also include pedestrian treatments in parking areas, sidewalks connecting developments with adjacent land uses, trail improvements and bicycle rack and on-street bicycle lane installations, and the planting of trees to provide shade canopy along sidewalks. 
(11)  Intelligent transportation system improvements. This includes improvements pertaining to computerized traffic signal systems that automatically adjust to maximize traffic flow and to permit emergency vehicles to pass through intersections quickly. It also includes freeway management systems, such as electronic message signs, and electronic fare payment on public buses that reduce passenger boarding time. 
(12)  Livable community site design features. These include, but are not limited to, implementation of pedestrian friendly site design features such as orienting buildings toward the street and parking lots to the side or rear of buildings. 
(B)  Transportation management plans seeking to implement strategies that do not involve structural improvements, such as ride-sharing and transit incentive programs, must include a monitoring program to ensure the strategies are carried out in accordance with the plan, as developed by the applicant and accepted by the City of Safety Harbor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, § 3, 8-1-2016) 
142.00-145.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

146.00 - Purpose and applicability. 
(A)  The purpose of this Article is to ensure that new development and redevelopment comply with certain minimum criteria which is required to implement the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  The development standards contained in this Article are provided to also protect the public health, safety, and welfare to ensure the benefits of growth and protect the general public from any potential adverse impacts related to growth. 
(C)  The development standards contained in this Article shall apply to all requests for development order approval and shall be considered as the minimum acceptable design criteria. 
(D)  No development order shall be approved unless assurance is provided that the required improvements will be installed. 
(E)  All development standard requirements shall be installed at the expense of the developer. 
(F)  The development standards contained in this Article do not invalidate deed restrictions or restrictive covenants, nor does the City enforce such private contractual agreements. 
(G)  All existing developments shall continue to comply with the development standards in effect at the time the development received approval from the City. Any expansions or modifications shall conform to the requirements of this Code. 
147.00 - Parking requirements. 
(A)  It is the purpose of Sections 147.00 through 147.05 to establish standards which promote the orderly, efficient, and safe layout of parking areas designed to complement the use they serve. 
147.01   Permit and plans required.
(A)  Prior to application for a permit, construction plans showing the location, type of construction, drainage, landscaping, ingress and egress, parking design and dimensions, and parking calculations in accordance with this Article must be approved in accordance with the Site Plan Review process required by this Code. 
(B)  A permit which includes a copy of the approved construction plans showing location, type of construction, drainage, landscaping, ingress and egress, parking design and dimensions and parking calculations in accordance with this Code is required for: 
(1)  Any proposed new parking lot. 
(2)  Any existing parking lot which is proposed to be expanded or reduced. 
(3)  Any existing parking lot which is proposed to be resurfaced, resealed or restriped in a manner different than previously approved. 
(4)  Any existing lot which is proposed to be paved. 
147.02   Applicability.
(A)  All parking lots or spaces required or provided after the effective date of this Code shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements established herein. 
(B)  Parking areas restriped, resurfaced or resealed are not required to meet the schedule of required spaces in Section 147.04 provided the parking area being improved is the same area which constitutes parking for a use which existed prior to the effective date of this Code. 
(C)  Any change of use which under this Article necessitates an increase in the amount of parking shall provide parking in accordance with all the terms of this Code. 
(D)  Required off-street parking shall not be used for permanent sales, dead storage, repair, dismantling or servicing of any type or kind, display, or for any use other than off-street parking, nor shall areas devoted to such activities count as meeting off-street parking requirements. 
(E)  The Board of Appeals may grant a variance to the parking requirements provided a hardship can be demonstrated in accordance with the applicable variance criteria. 
147.03   Design standards.
(A)  All parking lots shall be designed to meet the standards established herein except where the City Commission determines that compliance with the strict application of a specific standard is technically impractical due to existing conditions, property size, natural conditions, safety constraints, or engineering/design/construction practices. 
(B)  All required parking shall be located as follows: 
(1)  On the same or contiguous lot(s) or parcel(s) of land of the use the parking is intended to serve. 
(2)  On land in the same ownership as the use the parking is intended to serve. 
(3)  On land which has the same zoning classification or a zoning classification which allows the use as Permitted or Conditional, as the use the parking is intended to serve. 
(C)  Alternative locations may be approved as a part of the site plan review process provided the parking provided at the alternative location is within five hundred (500) feet of the use to be served, measured along the most direct pedestrian route. 
(D)  Parking lots shall be improved with a permanent all-weather sealed paving material or acceptable porous paving technique which is graded to drain stormwater in accordance with the stormwater management requirements of this Code. Turf blocks may be used as required by the landscaping requirements of this Code. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the required parking may be mulch in the Community Redevelopment District (CRD) provided that spaces are defined and that aisles and circulation areas are paved, and that the mulch parking is maintained so that there is no detrimental effect due to erosion or other degrading of this area. 
(E)  All paved parking spaces which serve any use other than single-family or two-family dwellings located in driveways shall be marked by durable painted lines. 
(F)  Directional signs and surface markings shall be provided as determined necessary by the City Engineer. 
(G)  With the exception of driveways serving single-family and two-family dwellings, and other uses served by alleyways, no new off-street parking space shall be designed in a manner where a vehicle is required to back into a public right-of-way to gain egress. 
(H)  Fire lanes shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Fire Marshal. 
(I)  Parking lots which serve public parks may be provided with up to one hundred percent (100%) of the required parking in turf block, grass, or mulch. Access aisles serving such spaces must be paved, and the grass spaces must be adequately drained, marked, and maintained. 
(J)  All off-street parking spaces shall have curbs or wheel stops or similar devices for all spaces adjoining streets, and as necessary to prevent vehicles from encroaching upon adjoining property, landscaped areas, or public rights-of-way. 
(K)  The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any interior or perimeter landscaped area or walkway when said area is at least five (5) feet in width and where wheel stops or curbing are provided. Two (2) feet of said landscaped area or walkway may be calculated as part of the required depth of abutting parking spaces. 
(L)  Parking which is provided in excess of that amount required by the parking schedule of this Code, and parking which is provided for any temporary use permitted by Article IV of this Code may utilize grass or mulch. 
(M)  No parking space shall be constructed closer than five (5) feet to any building unless it is under the building, an attached carport or an enclosed garage. 
(N)  The minimum dimensions for all required parking shall be as follows: 
(1)  [Minimum parking dimensions.] 
Angle of Parking 
Degrees Depth of Stall 
Perpendicular to Aisles 
Feet Width of Aisles 
Feet 30 17.0 10 45 19.0 14 60 20.0 18 90 20.0 24 No parking - 20 One way - 10  
(2)  The minimum width of off-street parking spaces shall be nine (9) feet. 
(3)  The provision of compact car spaces at a minimum dimension of 7.5 x 17 may be provided at a ratio of no greater than ten percent (10%) of the total required spaces. All compact car spaces shall be appropriately designated by signage or pavement markings. 
(4)  Parallel parking shall measure a minimum of 9 x 22 with a minimum drive aisle width of 22 feet where parallel parking is used on both sides of the drive aisle. 
(O)  Bicycle parking shall be a steel U-shaped rack, steel wave style rack, or artistic rack. Grid bicycle racks may not count towards the bicycle parking requirement. One U-shaped rack shall count as two spaces. Other bicycle parking devices may be approved by the Community Development Director if they are equivalent to the approved devices with regard to function and quality. Bicycle racks shall be located on private property as close as practical to the main entrance and shall be permanently connected to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 5, 6-18-2018) 
147.04   Parking schedule.
(A)  Parking spaces required on any employee/person basis in this Code shall be based on the maximum number of employees/persons on duty, residing on the premises at any one time, or both. 
(B)  Where a given use or building contains a combination of uses, parking shall be provided on the basis of the sum of the required spaces for each use. 
(C)  Where the required number of parking spaces is not set forth for a particular use, a determination shall be made based upon the requirements for a similar use, and may consider available traffic engineering and planning data from other sources accepted by the profession. 
(D)  When units or measurements determining numbers of required off-street parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, then such fraction greater than one-half shall require a full off-street parking space. In cases where an expansion to an existing use is proposed, the required parking ratio shall be applied to the existing use plus the expansion area to determine the overall parking requirements. 
(E)  Handicapped Parking shall be required as set forth in the Standard Building Code, and shall comply with the design and access requirements of the American Disabilities Act. Required marking shall include blue striping, blue pavement markings, and signage with the international access symbol and the words "Handicapped Parking Only" printed on it. A minimum of one "Van Space" (16 feet wide) shall be provided for every 8 handicap-accessible spaces required. 
(F)  Benches, pews, or other similar seating arrangements shall count each eighteen (18) lineal inches as one (1) seat. 
(G)  Parking ratios shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Residential Uses. 
(a)  Detached Single-family Dwellings; Attached Single-family Dwellings; and Two-family Dwellings: 
2 spaces per dwelling unit 
(b)  Multifamily Dwellings: 
1.5 spaces per dwelling unit plus one guest space per 5 dwelling units. 
(c)  Mobile Home Parks: 
1 space per mobile home lot plus additional spaces as required for clubhouse and recreation facilities. 
(2)  Institutional Uses. 
(a)  Day Care Centers: 
1 space per employee plus 1 space per school vehicle plus 1 space per 10 children. 
(b)  Churches: 
1 space per 10 seats in the principle place of assembly or if there is no fixed seating arrangement, 1 space per 120 square feet of gross floor area in the principle place of assembly; may be provided as grass parking if approved as part of the site plan process, the drive aisles are paved, and paved parking is provided for all weekday employees and visitors. 
(c)  Boarding Houses and Lodging Facilities: 
1 space per 3 beds. 
(d)  Nursing Homes: 
1 space per 4 beds. 
(e)  Private, Civic, Fraternal Clubs or Lodges: 
1 space per 8 persons accommodated in the principle place of assembly; may be provided as grass parking if approved as part of the site plan process, the drive aisles are paved, and paved parking is provided for all weekday employees and visitors. 
(f)  Community Residential Homes: 
1 space per 4 residents plus 1 space per 2 non-resident staff. 
(g)  Congregate Care Facilities: 
1 space per 2 dwelling units plus 1 space per 2 employees. 
(h)  Emergency Shelters, Residential Treatment Facilities, Recovery Homes: 
1 space per 4 residents plus 1 space per each resident staff plus 1 space per 3 non-resident staff. 
(3)  Recreational Uses. 
(a)  Club Houses: 
1 space per 8 seats in the main assembly area. 
(b)  Golf Courses: 
5 spaces per hole plus additional spaces as required for clubhouses and eating establishments. 
(c)  Golf Driving Range: 
1 space per tee plus 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(d)  Miniature Golf: 
3 spaces per hole plus parking as required for other uses on site. 
(e)  Other Commercial Recreation: 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(f)  Arcades, Game Rooms: 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(g)  Health Clubs: 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(h)  Billiard Halls: 
2 spaces per billiard table. 
(i)  Swimming Pools, Community or Private Club: 
1 space per 50 square feet of pool area. 
(j)  Tennis or Racquet Clubs: 
2 spaces per court plus additional spaces as required for clubhouses and eating establishments. 
(k)  Marinas: 
1 space per three slips plus additional spaces as required for clubhouse and eating establishments. 
(4)  Community Service Uses. 
(a)  Hospitals: 
1 space per 4 patient beds plus 1 space per staff doctor plus 1 space per 2 employees on the peak shift plus 1 space per emergency vehicle. 
(b)  Libraries, Museum, Galleries, Cultural Centers and similar uses: 
An area equal to 50% of the gross floor area open to the public. 
(c)  Assembly Halls: 
1 space per 5 seats. 
(d)  School of General Education, Public or Private: 
1 space per employee plus 3 spaces per classroom. 
(e)  Emergency Service Facilities: 
1 space per employee at peak shift plus 1 space per 300 square feet of administrative floor area. 
(f)  Schools of Special Education: 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(g)  Post Office: 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Commercial Uses: 
(a)  Medical Clinic, Offices, Retail Sales Establishments, Retail Food Establishments, Repair Service Establishments, Personal Service Establishments, Financial Institutions, Self-Service Gasoline Stations and Associated Convenience Stores, Laundromat: 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Shopping Centers: 
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Theaters, Indoor: 
1 space per 3 seats. 
(d)  Bowling Alleys: 
4 spaces per alley plus additional spaces as required for eating establishments. 
(e)  Funeral Homes: 
1 space per 8 seats in the main chapel or auditorium. 
(f)  Eating Establishments, Sit Down, Taverns and Fast Food: 
1 space per 4 seats (including outdoor seating). 
(g)  Vehicle Service Establishments (includes service stations): 
2 spaces per service bay plus 1 space per employee. 
(h)  Vehicle Sales and Rental Establishments: 
1 space per 500 square feet of enclosed floor area; plus 1 space per 4,500 square feet of open display area; plus additional spaces as required for vehicle service. 
(i)  Veterinary Clinics, Kennels: 
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
(j)  Furniture, Appliance or Carpet Stores: 
1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(k)  Car Wash Automated: 
1 space per bay plus 1 space per employee. 
(l)  Motels: 
1 space per unit plus additional spaces as required for eating establishments and meeting halls. 
(m)  Hotels: 
For properties inside the Community Redevelopment District: 1 space per 3 bedrooms plus additional spaces as required for eating establishments and meeting halls. 
For properties outside the Community Redevelopment District: 1 space per bedroom. 
(n)  Mini-warehouses: 
1 space per 10 units plus 2 spaces for the office 
(o)  Testing Laboratory: 
1 space per employee plus 1 space per company vehicle. 
(p)  Brewpub: 
1 space per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus one space for every four seats above 50 seats, and 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area of outdoor taproom(s) or tasting room(s). 
(q)  Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery/Regional Brewery: 
1 space per employee plus one space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area for tap or tasting rooms, and 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area of outdoor taprooms or tasting rooms. 
(6)  Industrial Uses: 
(a)  Construction Service Establishments: 
1 space per 1.5 employees plus 1 space per company vehicle or 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area whichever is greater. 
(b)  Warehouses: 
1 space per 1,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Wholesale Trade: 
1 space per 1.5 employees plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(d)  Manufacturing: 
1 space per 4 employees at peak shift. 
(e)  Research and Development: 
1 space per each 500 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per company vehicle. 
(7)  Miscellaneous Uses: 
(a)  Model Home: 
3 spaces per home plus 1 space per employee/ salesperson. 
(b)  Utility Service: 
1 space per 1.5 employees plus 1 space per company vehicle. 
(H)  Drive-through service lanes shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Generally. 
(a)  One-way drive aisles which serve automobile-oriented uses may be reduced to ten (10) feet in width when adequate access for emergency vehicles is provided to the building by other drives. 
(b)  Stacking for drive-through facilities shall be designed to accommodate all vehicles on-site without obstructing any aisles, parking spaces or public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Eating Establishments, Fast Food. Stacking space to accommodate an average of eight (8) vehicles per drive-through lane. 
(3)  Financial Institutions, Drive-Up: 
Number of Drive-Through Lanes Vehicle Stacking Spaces 1 lane 6 spaces 2 lanes 12 spaces 3 lanes 18 spaces 4 lanes 23 spaces Each additional lane 2 additional spaces  
(4)  Car Wash, Automated: 
10 spaces per stall 
(5)  Car Wash, in Conjunction with Gasoline Sales: 
Stacking space to accommodate three (3) vehicles. 
(I)  Bicycle parking shall be required in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Bicycle parking shall be required for the uses listed in Sections 147.04(G)(2)a-f, (G)(3), and (G)(4)-(6) and the number of bicycle parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten (10) percent of the required vehicle parking spaces, with a minimum of one bicycle rack. 
(2)  One (1) space per five (5) units for multifamily residential development. 
(3)  Bicycle parking shall meet the design requirements of Section 147.03(O). 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 6, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 4, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 6, 6-19-2017; Ord. No. 2017-17, § 1, 6-19-2017; Ord. No. 2018-11, § 6, 6-18-2018) 
147.05   Parking credits and flexible parking allocations.
(A)  The City may allow the use of any combination of parking credits or allocations permitted by Section 147.05 during the site plan review process. 
(B)  Tree Protection. 
(1)  The required parking may be reduced by not greater than twenty-five percent (25%) where necessary to preserve protected trees as defined by the tree protection section of this Code. For each parking space that is waived, no less than six (6) inches of trunk diameter (measured at breast height) must be preserved for a tree(s) determined worthy for preservation by the TRC. 
(C)  Historic Preservation. 
(1)  The adaptive re-use of a structure listed on the Florida Master Site File Inventory or National Register of historic structures, or designated as a landmark under Article VIII of this Code which requires an increase in the amount of parking under the terms of this Code shall only be required to provide parking which can be reasonably designed to fit on the site and still preserve the site's historic character. 
(2)  Additions in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing gross floor area of structures which qualify as historic under Subsection (1) above, shall require the provision of parking in accordance with the regulations of this Code. 
(D)  Shared Parking. 
(1)  The use of shared parking may be allowed when the functional nature of the uses result in differing peak hour demands. The number of spaces required shall be determined after the review of a parking study submitted by the applicant. Said study shall be based upon available traffic engineering and planning data available from sources accepted by the profession. Any such use shall also require the recording of a perpetual easement in a form acceptable to the City Engineer. 
(E)  Public Transportation Bus Stops. 
(1)  The required parking may be reduced by not greater than five percent (5%) for development located along a public transportation route where a bus stop is provided. 
(2)  The bus stop shall be designed to PSTA standards, shall contain seating and trash collection facilities, and shall be maintained as a part of the development unless an agreement outlining different maintenance responsibilities is entered into with PSTA. 
(F)  Community Redevelopment District. 
(1)  The required parking for retail, office and service uses in the Community Redevelopment District (CRD) may be reduced to one (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area including outdoor seating areas. The City Commission may approve an alternative parking plan in connection with a site plan application based on substantial, competent evidence establishing that the parking needs for the use(s) will be continuously met through other arrangements or lasting measures determined to be satisfactory to the City Commission. A copy of an approved alternative parking plan must be recorded in the public records for Pinellas County maintained by the Pinellas County Clerk of the Circuit Court in a form approved by the City Attorney. The applicant shall provide proof of recordation prior to approval of the certificate of occupancy. An alternative parking plan may be amended by the same procedure required for the original approval. 
(2)  The required parking for retail, office, and service uses in the Community Redevelopment District may be reduced by one-half (1/2) parking space for every twenty-three (23) contiguous feet of street frontage for which there is adjacent permitted on-street parking or by the number of designated parking spaces that are directly adjacent to the site. Credit shall not be given for a partial space. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 12, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2018-11, § 4, 6-18-2018) 
148.00 - Off-street loading. 
(A)  All structures built or expanded after the effective date of this Code shall provide off-street loading in accordance with the requirements established herein. 
(B)  All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served. 
(C)  Minimum Size: 
Minimum Width: 12 feet 
Minimum Length: 25 feet 
Minimum Vertical Clearance: 14 feet 
The minimum size requirements shall be exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space. 
(D)  All required loading shall be marked on the pavement by diagonal striping. 
148.01   Loading schedule.
(A)  Commercial or Industrial Uses: 
Total Gross Floor Area Loading Spaces 10,000 to 15,000 sq. ft. 1 Space 15,000 to 50,000 sq. ft. 2 Spaces 50,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. 3 Spaces Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. 1 Additional Space  
(B)  Hotel or Motel: 
1 space per 200 units 
(C)  Community Service Uses: 
1 space for the first 10,000 square feet plus 1 space for each 100,000 square feet or major fraction thereof. 
(D)  The following minimum turning paths shall be provided: 
(1)  A minimum turning radius of 26 feet for vans and passenger vehicles. 
(2)  A minimum turning radius of 43 feet for a 30-foot single unit truck, step van, or bus. 
(3)  A minimum turning radius of 40 feet for a 43- to 50-foot semitrailer combination. 
(4)  A minimum turning radius of 46 feet for a 55-foot semitrailer combination. 
149.00 - Driveways and access management. 
(A)  No driveway shall be constructed, improved, or modified without a permit issued by the City, Pinellas County, or FDOT; whichever agency has jurisdiction. 
(B)  All driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of City Engineer, this Code, and any other agency with jurisdiction. 
(C)  Each development shall be permitted one (1) driveway per street frontage provided the following additional requirements shall also apply: 
(1)  One- and two-family dwellings, residential living facilities, and day care centers may be permitted circular drives; 
(2)  A maximum of one (1) additional driveway per street frontage may be permitted for residential development in excess of fifty (50) units and nonresidential development with an excess of two hundred (200) linear feet of street frontage; 
(3)  Each residential development in excess of fifty (50) units shall provide a secondary means of access where feasible; 
(4)  Access permits for nonresidential development shall be designed to discourage traffic on local residential streets where feasible. 
(D)  The minimum driveway width shall be ten (10) feet or a ribbon drive for single-family residential uses. For all other uses, the minimum driveway width shall be twelve (12) feet for one-way driveways, and twenty-four (24) feet for two-way driveways. 
The maximum driveway width for two-way traffic shall be as follows: 
Residential: 24 feet * 
Nonresidential: 30 feet 
* The City Engineer may approve a maximum driveway width of up to 30 feet that provides access to a three-car garage. 
Single-family detached residential driveways shall be a minimum of three (3) feet from a property line and may not be placed within an easement, unless documentation is provided with the permit application demonstrating that there are no utilities or storm sewers within the easement, and the improvements do not impede or restrict drainage flow as approved by the City Engineer. 
(E)  The driveway entrance flare or curb transition shall not be less than 3 feet nor more than 7 feet in width at the edge of pavement or curb line. 
(F)  Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Entrances shall not obstruct the road drainage system, and gutter inverts shall not be modified except as approved by the City Engineer; 
(2)  Culverts shall be sized and designed in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer; 
(3)  Concrete driveways within the right-of-way shall be 6 inches thick and reinforced by 6-inch by 6-inch by 10 gauge wire mesh placed in the center of the form. Expansion joints shall be provided at the edge of curb or pavement at the sidewalk joints and at the property line. Concrete shall be 3,000 psi; 
(4)  Asphalt driveways within the right-of-way shall be compacted with 6 inches of crushed concrete or equivalent base and have a minimum wearing course of one (1) inch; and 
(5)  The use of alternative street surfaces is allowed upon the approval of the City Engineer. 
(G)  Driveways shall align with driveways on the opposite side of the street or be separated by a minimum distance of 20 feet where feasible, measured from pavement edge to pavement edge at the right-of-way line. 
(H)  Driveway entrances, including the flare, shall not be less than 3 feet from the property line extended and shall meet the minimum separation from intersections. No portion of a driveway shall be constructed in front of an adjacent property. 
(I)  Driveways shall be located as far as possible from intersections on either side of the street. The minimum separation, measured from the extended right-of-way line of the intersection to the edge of the driveway along the right-of-way line of the intersecting side street shall be as follows: 
For one- and two-family residential: 20 feet 
For local streets (all other uses): 40 feet 
From/on collector/arterial streets: 75 feet (all other uses) 
(J)  Driveways shall be designed to accommodate vehicle turning movements between garages and roads or alleys in accordance with AASHTO standards. Documentation of compliance shall be approved by the City Engineer. 
(K)  Where sufficient frontage and geometrics exist the City Engineer may require the installation of the following access improvements: 
(1)  Right turn deceleration lanes where the posted speed limit is 35 mph or greater and 40 or more entering right turns occur during the peak hour. 
(2)  Right turn acceleration lanes where the posted speed limit is 35 mph or greater and 75 or more exiting right turns occur during the peak hour. 
(3)  Left turn storage where the driveway left turning movements exceed 1,000 trips per day. 
(L)  Left-hand turning movements from driveways may be prohibited by the City Engineer by requiring the use of channelization or signage where one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Inadequate intersection separation; 
(2)  Inadequate sight distance; 
(3)  Alternative access to a signal is present; 
(4)  Inadequate driveway spacing; and 
(5)  Other capacity, delay, or safety conditions make left turns dangerous. 
(M)  Provisions for joint access and circulation may be required by the City Engineer where necessary to minimize potential traffic congestion and safety hazards. A non-ingress-egress easement may be required for new shopping centers to restrict direct driveway access from development outparcels where joint circulation is required. The development of outparcels at existing shopping centers shall not be permitted direct drive access, and shall utilize cross access and the use of existing shopping center drives for access. 
(N)  A minimum cross access easement of 24 feet in width may be required by the City to adjoining property where necessary to provide for the free flow of traffic between uses without having to enter a street. 
(O)  The driveway and access management requirements of this Code may be modified by the City Engineer in accordance with other agency permits which have jurisdiction or to meet the needs of a specific situation where strict application of the requirement would be technically impractical due to existing conditions, property size, natural conditions, safety constraints, engineering/design/ construction practices or similar conditions. 
(P)  Notwithstanding the driveway and access management requirements of this Code, all driveways onto a State or County maintained roadway must comply with FDOT or Pinellas County specifications. In all instances, the most restrictive governing requirement shall apply. Copies of approved driveway permits from the agency with jurisdiction shall also be required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14, § 3, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2018-11, § 7, 6-18-2018) 
150.00 - Right-of-way reservation and dedication. 
(A)  All development orders which require site plan or subdivision plat approval shall reserve right-of-way in accordance with the following right-of-way needs plan: 
(1)  All future local streets designated by the Traffic Circulation Element proposed; functional classifications shall be 50 feet; 
(2)  All minor collector streets designated by the Traffic Circulation Element proposed functional classifications shall be 60 feet; 
(3)  Enterprise Road (CR 102), 80 feet; 
(4)  Curlew Road, 120 feet; 
(5)  S.R. 580, 120 feet; and 
(6)  McMullen-Booth Road (CR 611), 200 feet. 
(B)  The right-of-way needs required by this Section may be modified for State and County roadways in accordance with the right-of-way plans, specific design requirements, construction plans, or recommendations of the Pinellas County Metropolitan Planning Organization, the Pinellas County Engineering Department, or the Florida Department of Transportation. 
(C)  Generally, right-of-way shall be reserved for one-half (1/2) the required right-of-way, to be measured from the right-of-way centerline, unless property on both sides of the affected right-of-way is the subject of a development order request. 
(D)  The right-of-way to be reserved shall be reserved for future purchase for roadway use, and shall be kept free and clear of all associated private development improvements unless authorized for use by the City; including, but not limited to, parking, landscaping, drainage, signage, and structures. 
(E)  Setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way requirement. 
(F)  Ownership of the reserved area shall be retained by the property owner. 
150.01   Dedications required.
(A)  The City may, as a condition of the vacation of right-of-way, require the dedication by deed of additional right-of-way where necessary to implement the Traffic Circulation Element or enhance ingress/egress in that specific situation. 
(B)  The City may, as a condition to the approval of a site plan or subdivision plat require the dedication by deed of the additional right-of-way necessary to implement the right-of-way needs plan of Section 150.00 or the Traffic Circulation Element where a finding is made that the following rational nexus criteria is present: 
(1)  The affected roadway is functioning below the acceptable level of service as defined by the Comprehensive Plan, and the increased traffic impacts related to the proposed development will further degrade the operating condition of the affected roadway, or the increased traffic impacts related to the proposed development reduce the level of service at which the affected roadway is currently operating; and 
(2)  The improvement of the affected roadway or intersection is scheduled by the 5-year capital improvements plan of the responsible jurisdiction. 
150.02   Transportation corridor reservation maps.
(A)  The City Commission may adopt maps of right-of-way reservation for any transportation corridor within the City's jurisdiction. 
(B)  Any such maps shall delineate the limit of the transportation corridor and the proposed rights-of-way for the eventual widening or improvement of the facility within the proposed corridor. 
(C)  Transportation Corridor Reservation Maps shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Court in Pinellas County. 
(D)  Prior to adopting Transportation Corridor Reservation Maps the City shall advertise and hold a public hearing. All property owners of record within the limits of the proposed transportation corridor shall be notified by first class mail a minimum of twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. Ownership shall be determined from the latest available tax records of the Pinellas County Property Appraiser's Office. Minor amendments to an adopted Transportation Corridor Map which affect less than five percent (5%) of the total area within the transportation corridor may be made within thirty (30) days after notifying by first class mail only the property owners directly affected by the change. 
(E)  Upon recording of a Transportation Corridor Reservation Map, all required setbacks and construction shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way shown by the Transportation Corridor Reservation Maps. 
(F)  Upon recording of a Transportation Corridor Reservation Map, existing nonresidential structures which fall within the limits of the proposed right-of-way as shown by the Transportation Corridor Reservation Map may be renovated provided the cost of the renovation does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the appraised value of the nonresidential structure according to the latest available tax records of the Pinellas County Property Appraiser's Office. The cost of the renovation shall be certified by a licensed contractor hired by the property owner. 
(G)  Upon recording of a Transportation Corridor Reservation Map, no restriction shall be placed upon the renovation of an existing residential structure which falls within the limits of the proposed right-of-way as shown by a Transportation Corridor Reservation Map. 
(H)  If the approval of any renovation or development is prohibited under this Section, the City shall make an offer to purchase the reserved right-of-way for a particular parcel of land as shown by the Transportation Corridor Reservation Map within ninety (90) days of receiving an application for development order approval. If no offer is made in 90 days or if the offer is not accepted within another 30 days, the City shall amend the map, withdraw the map, issue the development order if the application meets all other regulations, or file condemnation proceedings. 
(I)  After recording, any property owner of record located within the limits of the proposed right-of-way as shown by the Transportation Corridor Reservation Map alleging that such property regulation is unreasonable or arbitrary and that its effect is to deny a substantial portion of the beneficial use of such property can petition for a hearing. Any petition for a hearing must submit a written statement as to the beneficial use of such property. Upon receiving a petition of hearing the City shall schedule a hearing before a Hearing Officer from and assigned by the Florida Department of Administrative Hearings. Upon issuance of an order from the Hearing Officer the City shall have 180 days from the date of the finding to acquire the property involved in the petition, to amend the map, withdraw the map, or file other appropriate proceedings. Should the City prevail in the order, the petitioner shall pay one-half (1/2) the cost of the hearing. 
(J)  A Transportation Corridor Reservation Map shall be effective for a period of five (5) years from the date of recording. If the City has not acquired all of the right-of-way within the limits of the transportation corridor the City shall invalidate the maps for said corridor. However, the City shall have the right to extend the effective period of a Transportation Corridor Reservation Map for one (1) additional five-year period after holding a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
151.00 - Streets. 
(A)  Street right-of-way requirements shall conform to the Right-of-Way Reservation and Dedication Section and Subdivision Design Section of this Code, and the Traffic Circulation Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  Public streets shall be designed and constructed according to the standards of the public entity that has right-of-way jurisdiction and maintenance responsibilities. 
(C)  The design and construction of private streets shall comply with the same standards required for public streets. 
(D)  The construction of all local streets shall comply with the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  All local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet; 
(2)  All streets shall be of curb and gutter construction; 
(3)  The minimum pavement width, including curb and gutter, shall be 24 feet; 
(4)  All local streets shall be constructed with a cross-section consisting of a sub-grade, either existing or achieved by Type-B stabilization, of LBR-40, 6 inches of crushed concrete base (or equivalent) and 13/4 inches of PC-3 bituminous surface course. Compaction of sub-grade is to be 98 percent, T-180. Streets designated for carrying heavy truck traffic shall consist of the same materials for local streets in the following configuration: 
(a)  Stabilized sub-grade of 12 inches; 
(b)  Base of 9 inches; and 
(c)  Surface of 21/4 inches. 
(5)  All streets shall be designed and constructed to comply with Standard Drawing C-4 on file with the City of Safety Harbor Engineering Department. 
(6)  Minimum pavement elevation shall be five feet above mean sea level. 
(7)  Tests for base thickness and density shall be located no more than 300 feet apart and shall be staggered to the left, right, and on the centerline of the roadway. Test report shall be submitted to the City Engineer by the Engineer of Record. Where conditions are warranted, the City Engineer may require additional testing. 
152.00 - Sidewalks. 
(A)  As a condition of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or development order, a sidewalk shall be constructed for the length of the site frontage along all abutting streets and rights-of-way, with the exception of alleyways, in accordance with the standards of Sections 152.00 and 152.01. 
(B)  If a sidewalk which pre-existed the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or development order does not comply with the requirements of this Code or is damaged before or during construction, the City Engineer shall require that it be repaired or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(C)  Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed to comply with Standard Drawing C-11 on file with the City of Safety Harbor Engineering Department. 
152.01   Sidewalk waiver.
(A)  Sidewalk construction is not required where the development order or construction is for repair or remodeling to an existing structure, site or facility which constitutes an improvement valued at twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less. 
(B)  The City Commission may permit the waiver of sidewalk construction where one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The existing right-of-way is of insufficient width to allow the installation of a sidewalk, and additional right-of-way is not being conveyed; 
(2)  The existing right-of-way is unimproved, and construction of the street is not included in the responsible jurisdiction's five-year capital improvements plan; 
(3)  Where a sidewalk could not be constructed from a permitting standpoint due to existing natural conditions related to topography or the environment. This condition will not support a waiver where reasonable alternative forms of construction are available; 
(4)  Where the applicant provides evidence that the existence of a sidewalk will create a hazardous condition; 
(5)  Where the applicant's property is within the subdivision or industrial park which meets the following criteria: 
(a)  At least 80% of the lots or the properties in the subdivision or industrial park are built on; and 
(b)  At least 80% of the lots or the properties in the subdivision or industrial park that are built on or have no sidewalks; and 
(c)  The construction of sidewalks in the subdivision or industrial park is not included in the City's five-year capital improvements program; and 
(d)  The boundaries of in a subdivision or industrial park for purposes of this section shall be determined by the approved site plan or plat for the subdivision or industrial park. 
(6)  The property is served by an alternative pedestrian system. 
(C)  All requests for the waiver of sidewalk construction shall include written public notice in accordance with the requirements of Section 225.00 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 6, 5-21-2012) 
153.00 - Tree protection and preservation. 
(A)  The purpose of this Section 153.00 et seq. together with Section 154.00 et seq. is to establish regulations in the City that will have the effect of protecting, promoting and maintaining a healthy, diverse and mature canopy of native and naturalized hardwood and evergreen tree species. Trees preserve the ecological balance of the environment, control erosion, sedimentation and stormwater runoff, provide shade, reduce heat and glare, reduce flooding, enhance property values and aesthetics, abate noise pollution, and buffer incompatible land uses. 
(B)  The intent of this Section 153.00 et seq. and Section 154.00 et seq. is to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Safety Harbor by establishing minimum standards for the protection and preservation of trees, ensure the adequacy of tree numbers, preserve the canopy, encourage the planting of new trees, the protection of natural plant communities, and the installation and continued maintenance of landscaping within the City in order to: 
(1)  Improve the aesthetic appearance of commercial, governmental, industrial, and residential areas through the incorporation of landscaping into development in ways that harmonize and enhance the natural and manmade environment; 
(2)  Improve environmental quality by recognizing the numerous beneficial effects of tree protection and preservation, and landscaping upon the environment, including: 
(a)  Improving air and water quality through such natural processes as photosynthesis and mineral uptake; 
(b)  Maintaining permeable land areas essential to surface water management and aquifer recharge, including reduction in stormwater runoff; 
(c)  Reducing and reversing air, noise, heat and chemical pollution, including the removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide, through the biological filtering capacities of trees and other vegetation; 
(d)  Promoting energy conservation through the creation of shade, thereby reducing heat gain in or on buildings or paved areas; 
(e)  Reducing the temperature of the microclimate through the process of evapotranspiration; and 
(f)  Encouraging the conservation of water through the use of site specific plants, various planting and maintenance techniques, and efficient watering systems. 
(3)  Provide direct and important physical and psychological benefits to human beings through the use of landscaping to reduce noise and glare, and to break up the monotony and soften the harsher aspects of urban development; 
(4)  Establish procedures and standards for the administration and enforcement of these sections; 
(5)  Promote the creative site development concepts in order to promote water and energy conservation; 
(6)  Preserve existing natural trees and vegetation and incorporate native plants, plant communities and ecosystems into landscape design where possible; and 
(7)  Promote landscaping methods that provide for the preservation of existing plant communities, re-establishment of native plant communities, use of site specific plant materials, use of pervious paving materials and other xeriscape concepts in order to promote water conservation. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful to cut down, damage, poison, or in any other manner, destroy or cause to be destroyed any trees, except in accordance with the provisions of Sections 153.00 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-03, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed Section 153.00, which consisted of sections 153.00-153.11, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Section 153.00 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the original Land Development Document codified herein. 
153.01   Definitions.
For the purpose of this Section 153.00 et seq. and Section 154.00 et seq. the following definitions shall apply: 
(A)  Approved Arborist means a trained professional knowledgeable and equipped to provide proper tree care, including pruning, planning and other functions to maintain tree health, who is certified by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) or the American Society of Consulting Arborists (ASCA). 
(B)  City Staff means the Community Development Director or his or her designee. 
(C)  City Tree Bank means funds accrued from fines and mitigation payments made to the City under the terms of Sections 153.05 and 153.07. 
(D)  Clear Trunk is the measurement from the ground to the area where the live fronds emerge from the trunk of a palm tree. 
(E)  Critical Root Zone is the area under the tree that the trees crown extends to, the edge of the trees dripline. 
(F)  Crown means the main mass of branching or foliage of a tree. 
(G)  Dead Tree means a tree with no foliage. 
(H)  Development Permit means any building permit or site plan approval authorizing the construction of any new parking space, the expansion of the gross floor area of a building, the alteration or enlargement of a building envelope, or the alteration of a site configuration through site redesign (right-of-way clearing, easement clearing, mining, borrow pit or lake construction, etc.) or other changes (including grubbing). 
(I)  Diameter Breast Height ("DBH") means the diameter, in inches, of a tree measured at 4.5 feet above the existing grade. If the tree forks between four and one-half and two feet above ground level, DBH is measured below the swell resulting from the fork. Trunks that fork below two feet shall be considered multi-trunk trees. DBH for multi-trunk trees shall be determined by measuring each trunk immediately above the fork and adding the total diameters of the four largest trunks. 
(J)  Drip Line means the perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
(K)  Ecosystem means a characteristic assemblage of plant and animal life with a specific physical environment, and all interactions among species and between species and their environment. 
(L)  Excessive Pruning means the pruning or removal of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the live crown (live branches) of a tree in any one year. 
(M)  Grubbing means the excavation or removal of any type of rooted vegetation from land by digging, raking, dragging or otherwise disturbing the roots of such vegetation and the soil in which such roots are located. 
(N)  Hazardous Tree means a tree with uncorrectable defects in the overall health or structure of the tree severe enough to pose present danger to people or buildings under normal conditions as determined by an Approved Arborist. 
(O)  Multi-Trunk Tree means any self-supporting woody plant reaching a minimum height of 15 feet having two or more distinct trunks originating below breast height (41/2 feet above grade) and growing from a single root mass. 
(P)  New parking lot: The construction or addition of three (3) or more parking stalls for uses other than single family or duplex dwellings. 
(Q)  No Tree Verification means a signed notarized statement by a property owner, or his agent, stating that no trees exist upon the property. 
(R)  No Tree Removal Verification means a signed notarized statement by the property owner, or his agent, upon application for a Development Permit certifying that although protected trees exist on the property for which Development Permit is sought, removal of the protected trees is not required for construction purposes. 
(S)  Plant Community means a natural association of plants that are dominated by one or more prominent species, or a characteristic physical attribute. 
(T)  Protective Barrier means a physical structure limiting access to a protected area, composed of suitable materials which assures compliance with the intent of Section 153.00 et seq. of this Code and meets the requirements of the City tree barricade detail. 
(U)  Protected Tree means any living native shade tree set forth on the table below having a DBH of 4 inches or greater or Sabal Palm/Cabbage Palm (Sabal Palmetto), or Paurotis Palm with a clear trunk of five (5) feet or more. Protected Tree does not include any tree that is specifically excluded from protection herein or is a Dead Tree. 
Table: Protected Tree 
Table Legend: 
Species: Includes the plant's botanical name followed by the common name. 
Native: Classifies whether a tree or shrub is native to Pinellas County or North or Central Florida (YES) or is exotic (NO) meaning not native to North America. 
Use: Describes whether a tree is a shade tree (ST) or an accent (A) tree. A shrub shall be considered a large shrub (LS) is it has a mature height of five (5) feet or greater. A shrub shall be considered a small screening shrub (S) if it has a mature height of less than five (5) feet. 
Soil: Xeric (X) is characterized by soils with coarse texture such as sandy soils and soils with good drainage. Xeric soils are typically infertile. Mesic (M) soils are medium textured loamy soils with a mixture of sand, silt and clay particles. They have average fertility and drainage. Hydric (H) soils are dominated by fine-textured clay particles, have poor drainage (retain water) and high fertility. It is important to match the tree to its soil type. 
Drought: Drought refers to a tree's ability to survive drought periods. A tree with a high drought tolerance can survive extended drought periods. However, even the most drought tolerant plants should receive irrigation in urban areas. 
pH: Soil pH is a measure of a soil's acidity (AC) or alkalinity (AL). The pH scale ranges from 0-14 with 7.0 being neutral and measurements below 7.0 acidic soil and above 7.0 alkaline. Most trees prefer acidic soils but some grow well in soils that are slightly alkaline (SA). 
Light: Light describes a tree's light needs. Some trees prefer full sin and will only flower in full sun (SUN) while other trees either need partial shade (PS) or full shade (SH). 
Salt: Salt refers to a tree's ability to withstand aerosol salt spray. Some trees grow in areas of direct salt spray while other trees can only tolerate minimal salt in the air. 
Scientific Name Common Name Native Use Soil Drought pH Light Salt Acer rubrum and cultivars Red Maple Yes ST M-H MOD AC SUN/PS LOW Acer saccharinum Silver Maple Yes ST M-H MOD AC SUN/PS LOW Acoelorrhaphe wrightii Paurotis Palm Yes A M-H MOD AC SUN MOD Carya glabra Pignut Hickory Yes ST X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Carya illinoensis Pecan Yes ST X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS LOW Celtis laevigata Sugarberry Yes ST M-H HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Diospyros virginiana Persimmon, Common Persimmon Yes ST M HIGH AC-AL SUN HIGH Ilex x attenuata Eagleston Holly Yes ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS/SH MOD Ilex opaca American Holly Yes ST M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS/SH HIGH Juniperus silicicola or viginiana Cultivars Southern Redcedar, Eastern Redcedar Yes ST-A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum Yes ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Magnolia grandiflora Cultivars Southern Magnolia, Magnolia Yes ST-A X-M MOD AC-SA SUN/PS HIGH Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay, Swamp Magnolia Yes ST H LOW AC SUN/PS LOW Nyssa sylvatica Blackgum, Black Tupelo Yes ST M-H HIGH AC SUN/PS MOD Pinus elliottii Slash Pine Yes ST X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS HIGH Pinus palustris Longleaf Pine Yes ST X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN HIGH Pinus taeda Loblolly Pine Yes ST M MOD AC SUN MOD Platanus occidentalis Sycamore Yes ST M-H MOD AC-AL SUN MOD Quercus austrina Bluff Oak Yes ST M-H MOD AC FS/PS MOD Quercus geminata Sand Live Oak Yes ST X-M HIGH AC FS/PS LOW Quercus incana Bluejack Oak Yes ST X-M HIGH AC FS/PS MOD Quercus laurifolia Laurel Oak, Diamond Leaf Oak Yes ST M-H MOD AC-SA FS/PS LOW Quercus laevis Turkey Oak Yes ST X HIGH AC FS LOW Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak Yes ST M-H MOD AC FS/PS MOD Quercus michauxii Swamp Chestnut Oak Yes ST M-H MOD AC FS/PS MOD Quercus myrtifolia Myrtle Oak Yes ST X-M HIGH AC FS/PS MOD Quercus nigra Water Oak Yes ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS LOW Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak Yes ST M-H MOD AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Quercus virginiana Cultivars Live Oak Yes ST X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Taxodium ascendens Pond Cypress Yes ST H HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Taxodium distichum Baldcypress Yes ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Ulmus alata Winged Elm Yes ST M-H HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Ulmus Americana American Elm Yes ST M-H HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Ulmus parifolia and cultivars Lacebark Elm No ST M MOD AC-AL SUN/PS MOD  
(V)  Pruning means the horticultural practice involving the selective removal of parts of a tree such as branches, buds, or roots, and shall include trimming of trees. 
(W)  Remove or Effective Removal means to cut down, damage, top, poison, replace, replant, or effectively remove through excessive injury, or in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any living Protected Tree. 
(X)  Screening means a visual buffer erected between potential incompatible uses utilized to shield or obscure for the purpose of reducing the impact of noise, dust, glare and visual pollution. The screen may consist of walls, fences, and berms of densely planted vegetation. 
(Y)  Shade Tree means a hardwood tree that reaches a minimum height of twenty-five (25) feet at maturity, provides relief from direct sunlight for at least six (6) months each year and is included in Protected Tree table. 
(Z)  Shrub means a woody plant that usually remains low and produces shoots or trunks from the base; it is not usually tree-like nor single-stemmed. 
(AA)  Top or Topping means the removal of any portion of one or more major vertical tree branches or the removal of more than one-third (?) of the tree's leaf canopy. 
(BB)  Tree means any erect standing woody plant together with its root system of a species which normally attains a minimum overall height at maturity of at least 15 feet, including all Mangroves, Sabal Palms, Cabbage Palms, Sabal Palmetto, and that is located within the City's jurisdiction. 
(CC)  Tree Condition Rating means the City Arborist's assessment of the tree's overall structure and systemic health which takes into account the species, appearance, and unique features of the tree as set forth in this Article. 
(DD)  Tree Removal means any act which causes a tree to die within a period of 2 years; such acts include, but are not limited to, cutting, inflicting damage upon a root system by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction, changing of the natural grade above or below a root system or around the trunk, inflicting damage on a tree, permitting infection or pest infestation, excessive pruning, or paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within such proximity as to be harmful to a tree as determined by an Approved Arborist. 
(EE)  Tree Removal Permit means a permit issued by the City allowing the permit holder to remove the trees described therein. 
(FF)  Tree Removal Permit Application means the application submitted to the City to obtain a Tree Removal Permit. The application shall be in the form prescribed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2018-13, § 2, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.02   Maintenance and pruning of protected trees for all properties within the city.
(A)  Owners of private property shall be responsible for the maintenance of trees on their private property and in abutting rights-of-way. Where support staking and guying of vegetation is provided at the time of installation, the stakes and guys shall be removed no later than one year after installation to prevent damage to the vegetation. Owners of private property who are responsible for the maintenance of trees on private property and in abutting rights-of-way shall not be required to pay any permitting or replacement fees if the owner can prove by substantial competent evidence the tree was fatally damaged by any public utility company. 
(B)  All trees shall be maintained free from physical damage or injury, including damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical exposure, insects, disease, blight or other cause. Exceptions regarding damage due to lack of water shall be made when water consumption is limited by emergency orders or declarations by state or local agencies. 
(C)  Except for storm mitigation for those tree species listed as exempt, or following a declared state of emergency in which trees become damaged in such a way that topping or excessive pruning by or at the direction of a governmental agency becomes necessary, it shall be unlawful for any person to cut down, damage, top, poison or in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any protected tree regardless of condition with a DBH of 4 inches or more without a Tree Removal Permit. Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the tree canopy shall be trimmed or pruned in any year, except for the purpose of removing dead limbs. There shall be no topping of any Protected Trees. Protected Trees destroyed by improper pruning shall be replaced with the same species minimum two-inch DBH based on the Tree Replacement Ratio in [subsection] 153.07(D). 
(D)  It is unlawful for a property owner to allow any tree or tree branch that is in such diseased or dead condition so as to be in danger of falling upon any right-of-way or the property of another. 
(E)  It shall be unlawful to directly or indirectly dispose of tree trimmings in the right-of-way, onto the property of another, upon any street or alley, or into waters within the City, the municipal storm sewer system, and/or Tampa Bay. This Subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the placement of tree trimmings in the right-of-way as a temporary measure awaiting collection as otherwise provided in this Code or the Safety Harbor City Code. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the use of mulching lawn equipment. 
(F)  Any individual or entity performing Pruning or other tree maintenance activities for hire shall conform to industry techniques as specified by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Part 1: Tree, Shrub and other Woody Plant Maintenance Standard Practices (pruning) or Best Management Practices-Pruning, second edition. Flush cuts (pruning cuts that remove the branch collar) and stub cuts (pruning that leaves a limb stub) are improper pruning techniques and are prohibited. 
(G)  No palm frond shall be removed from a palm that emanates from the trunk at or above a 90-degree angle that is perpendicular to the trunk unless the frond is dead or severely chlorotic. Where a frond is touching an energized wire, blocking a sign or creating a safety hazard, fronds may be removed outside of this configuration. 
(H)  Any individual or entity performing Pruning or other tree maintenance activities for hire shall conform to the current safety standards as defined in ANSI Z133.1 2006, as may be amended and shall have a Best Management Practices (BMP) certificate issued by Pinellas County. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.03   Exemptions.
The provisions of Section 153.00 et seq. shall not apply to the following: 
(A)  Trees under 4 inches DBH, except and unless the tree is a replacement tree under Section 153.06(E); 
(B)  Pruning of trees as normal maintenance, provided such pruning does not result in excessive pruning, mutilation, death, or removal of the tree or otherwise violates Section 153.02(C) herein; 
(C)  Due to their status as exotic species or invasive species, any trees listed on the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council most recent Invasive Plant List I and II are not protected tree species; and 
(D)  Pruning following a declared state of emergency or storm in which trees become damaged in such a way that topping or excessive pruning becomes necessary by or at the direction of a governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.04   Removal of exotic invasive plant species.
(A)  It shall be unlawful to plant or cause to be planted within the City limits the following exotic and nuisance plant species: Brazilian Pepper tree (Schinus terebinthifolius), Punk tree (Melaleuca quinquenervia), Australian pine tree (Casuarina equisetifolia), Chinese Tallow (Sapium sebiferum). 
(B)  During the site construction process all invasive exotic plants as listed below 'List of Target Invasive Exotic Plant Species' shall be removed. After the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the property owner shall control re-growth of invasive exotic plants in perpetuity. 
List of Target Exotic Invasive Plant Species 
•  Australian pine ( Casuarina spp. ) 
•  Air Potato ( Discorea bulbifera ) 
•  Brazilian pepper ( Schinus terebinthifolius ) 
•  Carrotwood ( Cupaniopsis anacariopsis ) 
•  Caster bean ( Ricinus communis ) 
•  Chinaberry ( Melia azedarach ) 
•  Chinese tallow ( Sapium sebiferum ) 
•  Laurel fig ( Ficus retusa 'nitida' ) 
•  Punk ( Melaleuca quinquenervia ) 
•  Ceaser's Weed ( Urena lobata ) 
(C)  For those platted lots that are less than 1/2 acre in size where a Tree Removal Permit is issued, the owner or applicant shall remove all existing Brazilian Pepper (Schinus terebinthifolius) trees from the lot and remove to the extent practicable any existing air potato vines (Dioscorea bulbifera). 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.05   Permit required.
(A)  Unless exempt pursuant to Section 153.03, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause any Protected Tree to be Removed without first obtaining a Tree Removal Permit. 
(B)  Any person wishing to obtain a Tree Removal Permit to Remove a Protected Tree shall submit a written Tree Removal Permit Application to the City in the form approved by the City Manager accompanied by a Tree Removal Permit Application fee of $25.00 for residential parcels and $100.00 for all other parcels, and pay any replacement fees required by Section 153.07. 
(C)  Where a Development Permit is required, the Tree Removal Permit Application shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  A tree survey reviewed and approved by a certified Arborist showing the following: 
(a)  The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel; 
(b)  The location of existing structures and improvements; 
(c)  The location and DBH of all trees on site and within 25' of the property line, identified by botanical or common name; 
(d)  The location of the canopy drip line; 
(e)  Any proposed tree removal and replacement program; 
(f)  Tree Condition Rating for Protected Trees assigned by the City Arborist in accordance with subsection 153.05(3) below; 
(g)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the City Manager, or his designee; and 
(2)  A statement as to why the tree(s) are proposed to be removed. 
(3)  The Tree Condition Rating shall be assigned by the City Arborist in accordance with the City's tree condition rating guide maintained by the City Arborist and shall range from a low of 0.0 to a maximum of 6.0, with 0 being a Dead Tree and 6.0 being a specimen tree. Increments of 0.5 shall be used to increase accuracy. In determining the Tree Condition Rating, the City Arborist shall consider the following: 
(a)  Elements of structure: The presence of cavities; decayed wood; split, cracked, or rubbing branches; branch arrangements and attachments; evenly spaced scaffold branches as opposed to several branches emanating from the same area of the trunk; codominant stems as opposed to single leader trunk; and presence of branch ridge as opposed to included bark. 
(b)  Elements of systemic health related to the trees overall energy system measured by net photosynthesis as opposed to respiration including the following indicators of healthy systemic systems: live crown ratio (the percentage live crown a tree has relative to its height), crown density (density of foliage), and tip growth (foliated branch tips and shoot elongation). 
(D)  Where a site plan application is required under Section 229 of this Code, the applicant shall follow the procedures set forth therein. 
(E)  City Staff shall have the authority to withhold issuance of Tree Removal Permit Application where a Development Permit is required until site plan approval has been granted. 
(F)  Prior to the issuance of a Tree Removal Permit, City Staff shall conduct an on-site inspection. 
(G)  Prior to the removal of any tree(s), City Staff shall inspect the site in accordance with the requirements of Section 153.08. 
(H)  The tree removal permit must be displayed on site. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2018-13, § 3, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.06   Permit criteria.
(A)  In reviewing a Tree Removal Permit Application, City Staff shall approve a Tree Removal Permit only when one or more of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The Protected Tree(s) to be removed pose a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic, threaten to cause disruption of public services or utility services, pose a safety hazard to persons or buildings or are within the visibility triangle; 
(2)  The Protected Tree(s) to be Removed are weakened by age, fire or other injury or are in major decline, have a fatal and communicable disease, a fatal and communicable insect infestation, or have a defective structure that is a hazard; or 
(3)  The Protected Trees to be Removed must be Removed in order to construct improvements that are proposed as a result of: 
(a)  Need for access immediately around the proposed structure for construction equipment; 
(b)  Need for access to the building site for construction equipment; 
(c)  Essential grade changes; 
(d)  Surface water drainage and utility installations; or 
(e)  Location of primary building pad, primary foundation line, swimming pool, patio pad, or that portion of the driveway within the path of the garage or carport entrance, and these structures cannot be relocated. 
(B)  City Staff may deny a Tree Removal Permit even if one of the above factors is met where there is a need for visual screening between incompatible uses as identified in Section 154.00 et seq. 
(C)  City Staff, upon a determination that Tree Removal Permit Application is to be denied, shall state the basis for such denial specifically and shall notify the applicant in writing of the criteria upon which the denial is predicated. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.07   Permit conditions.
(A)  As a condition of granting the Tree Removal Permit, City Staff shall require the replacement of the tree(s) to be removed as outlined in Section (D)(1) below. 
(B)  The replacement tree(s) shall be a Protected Tree and shall meet the requirements of Sections 154.02(A) and (B). 
(C)  Any and all Tree Removal Permits, issued by the City shall expire within three (3) months of the Tree Removal Permit issue date. Any Tree Removal after the expiration of a Tree Removal Permit requires a new Tree Removal Permit Application and new Tree Removal Permit under the terms of Section 153.00 et seq. If a new Tree Removal Permit is not obtained, Tree Removal conducted pursuant to an expired Tree Removal Permit shall be subject to the penalties in Section 153.10. 
(D)  Except as specifically provided in this Section, all Protected Trees Removed pursuant to a Tree Removal Permit shall be replaced as follows: Tree Replacement Ratio based on the DBH inch of Protected Tree Removed or, where a suitable location for replanting on the property is not available, a fee in lieu thereof shall be paid in the amount calculated pursuant to subsections (1) through (8) below. Replacement trees shall be of a size as outlined in Section 154.02(A) and (B). If replacement trees are installed on developed properties, the applicant shall guarantee the survival of the replacement trees and a follow-up, on-site inspection by City Staff at yearly intervals for two (2) years after planting may be conducted to ensure compliance. All replacement trees shall be regulated as Protected Trees regardless of whether they are less than four (4) inches at DBH. Replacement Trees shall be planted within three (3) months of the issuance of the Tree Removal Permit. 
Failure to comply with these provisions will subject the applicant to penalties under this Section 153.10 and all applicable civil penalties as well as replanting and additional monitoring of replacement trees if necessary. Fees collected in lieu of replacement shall be placed in a fund established as the "City Tree Bank." Such fees are established as follows: 
(1)  All properties: 
DBH Tree Removed Tree Replacement Ratio Inch per Inch Tree Replacement Fee for Properties with Homestead Exemption for Ad Valorem Tax Purposes Inch per Inch Tree Replacement Fee for all Other Properties 4 inches to less than 10 inches 1:1 $10.00 $20.00 10 inches to less than 20 inches 2:1 20.00 40.00 20 inches to less than 30 inches 3:1 30.00 60.00 30 inches to less than 40 inches 4:1 40.00 80.00 40 inches and greater 5:1 50.00 100.00  
(2)  Except as provided in Section 153.07(D)(3), where a property cannot replace the number of trees based on the Tree Replacement Ratio, the property owner will pay the Inch per Inch Tree Replacement Fee for the difference of inches not replaced. Where a partial Tree Replacement Ratio was reached, the Inch Per Inch Tree Replacement Fee will be prorated by the same percentage of Tree Replacement Ratio reached. For site plan applications where an Inch per Inch Tree Replacement Fee is being paid, the Inch per Inch Tree Replacement Fee shall be based on the average value of the total Protected Trees on the site pursuant to Section 153.07(D)(1) with a condition rating of 2.5 or higher that are being Removed, multiplied by the number of Protected Trees that are not being replaced on site. 
Example of a property with a Homestead Exemption for Ad Valorem Tax Purposes: A property owner receives a permit to remove five protected trees as listed below: 
# Species DBH Replacement Cost Per Inch Total Cost Total Replacement Trees 1. Live Oak 44" $50.00 $2,200.00 5 2. Live Oak 41" $50.00 $2,050.00 5 3. Laurel Oak 14" $20.00 $280.00 2 4. Laurel Oak 8" $10.00 $80.00 1 5. Laurel Oak 7" $10.00 $70.00 1 $4,680.00 14  
A suitable location is found to replace ten (10) protected trees on-site, leaving four trees for the replacement fund. The average cost per trees being removed for this site is $936. The property owner will pay $3,744 to replace four trees. 
Example of a property without a Homestead Exemption for Ad Valorem Tax Purposes: A property owner receives a permit to remove five protected trees as listed below: 
# Species DBH Replacement Cost Per Inch Total Cost Replacement Trees 1. Live Oak 44" $100.00 $4,400.00 5 2. Live Oak 41" $100.00 $4,100.00 5 3. Laurel Oak 14" $40.00 $560.00 2 4. Laurel Oak 8" $20.00 $160.00 1 5. Laurel Oak 7" $20.00 $140.00 1 $9,360.00 14  
A suitable location is found to replace ten (10) protected trees on-site, leaving four trees for the replacement fund. The average cost per trees being removed for this site is $1,872. The property owner will pay $7,488 to replace four trees. 
(3)  A property owner who receives a homestead exemption the first year eligible for homestead exemption, may provide proof of homestead exemption to the City and receive a rebate for the difference in the Tree Replacement Fee paid at the time of the Tree Removal Permit and the Tree Replacement Fee for properties with a homestead exemption. Such rebate shall only be available if the Tree Removal Permit was issued to the same property owner who later obtains and provides proof of a homestead exemption. 
(4)  Where the Protected Tree is a Live Oak measuring 26 inches or greater in DBH and is not Removed pursuant to Section 153.06(A)(1) or (2); there shall be no pro rata reduction in the Inch Per Inch Replacement Fee as described in 153.07(D)(2) and the full Tree Replacement Ratio shall be achieved or else the full Tree Replacement Fee shall be paid. 
(5)  Where the tree is a Sabal Palmetto (Cabbage Palm or Sabal Palm), it shall be replaced with another Sabal Palm with five (5) feet of clear trunk or more or one protected replacement tree, or, in lieu of replacement, a fee of $10.00 per DBH inch removed shall be collected. A protected shade tree shall not be replaced with a sabal palm. 
(6)  When a Tree Removal Permit is approved for a Hazardous Tree and the number of existing healthy trees meet the minimum shade tree requirements specified in Sec. 154.03, no trees will be required to be planted and the replant requirement shall be waived, with a flat fee of $100.00 per tree. In lieu of the $100.00 flat fee, a minimum two-inch Protected Tree may be planted on the property. 
(7)  Where the Protected Tree to be Removed is part of a site plan for new development, on a lot larger than 1 acre in size, that preserves at least 30 percent of existing Protected Trees on site having a DBH of 20 inches or greater and where each finished parcel meets the minimum tree requirements established by Section 154.03 of this Code, the Inch Per Inch Replacement Fee shall be waived. 
(E)  Donated Trees-When a tree or trees are to be Removed pursuant to a Tree Removal Permit, the City may accept, as a donation, such trees for replanting on City property or for temporary planting at a tree farm for future City use. If such donation is accepted by the City, the property owner will pay a fee to cover the cost of relocation and care of said trees. The property owner will be credited DBH inch for DBH inch against the replacement requirements prescribed in this Section 153.07. 
(F)  The City Tree Bank Funds will be used by the City for one of the following purposes: 
(1)  To purchase trees for use on city property or for use in a City sponsored reforestation program within the City limits; 
(2)  For the payment of fees by the City to a landscape professional or certified arborist for educating City Staff or the general public with regard to tree protection and preservation; or 
(3)  For such other services or programs deemed by the City Manager to further the intent of Section 153.00 et seq. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than 50% of fees collected in lieu of tree replacement shall be used for anything other than the purchase of trees for use on City property, or for the use in a City sponsored reforestation program. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2018-13, § 4) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.08   Tree protection during construction.
All development and redevelopment on parcels shall comply with the following tree protection requirements: 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any structures or other improvements to place solvents, material, construction machinery, or temporary soil deposits within the Critical Root Zone. 
(B)  Before any development activity begins, a Tree Removal Permit shall be required and a Protective Barrier shall be erected by the developer around all Protected Trees on site and, if the adjacent property owner consent, off site Protect Trees within twenty-five (25) feet of the property line, and other protected environmental areas during site clearing to create a protective radius and shall remain in place until land alteration, site clearing and construction activities are complete. The Protective Barrier shall remain until such time as they are authorized to be removed by City Staff or until the issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy. A fine of up to $250.00 per day shall be assessed to the property owner and/or contractor of record for trees without a Protective Barrier or when existing Protective Barriers have been knocked down or removed or when unauthorized materials have been placed within the Protective Barrier. 
(C)  Installation of artificial barriers such as protective barricades, fences, posts or walls shall not destroy or irreversibly harm the root system of Protected Trees. Footers for walls shall end at the point where larger roots are encountered, and the roots shall be bridged. Post holes and trenches located close to Protected Trees shall be adjusted to avoid damage to major roots. 
(D)  In addition to the above requirements, during construction, no attachments or wires shall be attached to any Protected Tree. 
(E)  All roots to be removed during the site clearing phase shall be severed clean at the perimeter of the designated protective radius. 
(F)  A five-inch layer of mulch shall be applied over the surface of exposed roots of Protected Trees during the site clearing phase. 
(G)  A protective dry well and drainage/aeration system shall be provided where Protected Trees will be adversely affected by raising the grade. 
(H)  A protective retaining wall shall be constructed at the perimeter of the protective radius around a Protected Tree where the Protected Tree will be adversely affected by lowering the grade. 
(I)  All pruning of Protected Trees during development shall be supervised by an Approved Arborist. 
(J)  If it is determined that construction impacts will cause significant damage to any Protected Tree to cause the tree to become hazardous, or cause the tree to be Effectively Removed, or for any live oak with a dbh at or greater than 26", the City shall require the submittal of a tree preservation plan prepared by an approved arborist prior to commencement of construction. The tree preservation plan shall describe how the construction impacts will be mitigated. 
(K)  When a utility must cross a Critical Root Zone of a Protected Tree in good health, directional boring or tunneling shall be required to avoid the tree roots. Sewer lines may be exempted from this requirement, if the functionality of the line will be diminished as a result of this requirement. 
(L)  If new construction necessitates the Pruning or Removal of an off-site tree either in the right of way or on adjacent property and the owner of the adjacent property consents, the owner of the property under construction shall be responsible for all costs (including, but not limited to, permitting and contractor costs) associated with the Pruning or Removal of the off-site tree. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.09   Relationship to building permit.
(A)  No building permit shall be issued without an approved Tree Removal Permit or one of the following verifications: 
(1)  If there are no Protected Trees on the property, an applicant for building permit shall submit a notarized statement of No Tree Removal Verification. 
(2)  If all Protected Trees that exist on the property will not be removed, an applicant for building permit shall submit a notarized statement of No Tree Removal Verification. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.10   Enforcement.
(A)  City Staff has the authority to withhold the final Certificate of Occupancy if the provisions set forth in Section 153.00 et seq., including conditions of any Tree Removal Permits issued, have not been complied with. 
(B)  Whenever City Staff determines that a violation of Section 153.00 et seq. has occurred, City Staff shall cause such violations to be corrected by complying with the following procedure: 
(1)  Written Notice: Immediately issue written notice in the manner specified in Section 162.12, Florida Statutes, as may be amended, to the alleged violator stating the nature and location of the violation and specifying what remedial steps are necessary to bring the project into compliance. Such person shall immediately commence the recommended remedial action and shall have two (2) working days after receipt of said notice, or such longer time as may be allowed by the City Staff, to complete the remedial action set forth in said notice. 
(2)  Remedial Work and Stop Work Orders: If a subsequent violation occurs during the 2 working days, or if remedial work specified in the notice of violation is not completed within the time allowed, or if clearing, development of land, or any site alteration is occurring without a required Tree Removal Permit, City Staff shall issue a Stop Work Order immediately. Said Stop Work Order shall contain the grounds for its issuance, and shall set forth the nature of the violation. The Stop Work Order shall be directed not only to the person owning the land upon which the violation is occurring, but also shall be directed to the person or firm actually performing the physical labors of the development activity, directing him to cease and desist all or any portion of the work upon all or any geographical portion of the project, whichever is greater, except such remedial work as is deemed necessary to bring the violation into compliance. 
(C)  Subsection (B) above shall be supplemental and shall not prohibit the City from enforcing Section 153.00 et seq. by any other legal procedure including, but not limited to, the procedure provided by Chapter 2, Article III, Sections 2.10.01 through 2.10.11 of the Safety Harbor City Code, and/or Chapter 162, Florida Statutes. 
(D)  For the Removal of any Protected Tree in violation of this Code, City Staff shall ensure that the proper permitting procedure is henceforth followed, and the property owner shall be charged four (4) times the Tree Removal Permit fee specified in Section 153.05(B) and Tree Replacement Fee specified in Sec. 153.07(D)(1). 
(E)  In addition to all other available remedies, any individual or entity for hire that Removes any Protected Tree in violation of this Code shall be subject to a progressive fine as listed below: 
First offense: $1,000.00 fine and a three-month suspension on submitting Tree Removal Permit Applications. 
Second offense: $2,000.00 fine and a six-month suspension on submitting Tree Removal Permit Applications. 
Third and all future offenses: $3,000.00 fine and one-year suspension on submitting Tree Removal Permit Applications. 
All fines must be paid prior to the approval of any future Tree Removal Permits. 
(F)  Any individual or entity for hire that improperly prunes a cabbage palm within a commercial or multi-family development shall be subject to a fine of $100.00 per tree. 
(G)  In any prosecution for the removal of a Protected Tree without a Tree Removal Permit, each tree so removed will constitute a separate offense, and mitigation shall be required per Section 153.07. 
(H)  In addition to other remedies and notwithstanding the existence of an adequate remedy at law, the City may seek injunctive relief in the Circuit Court to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(I)  All fines are due within three (3) months of the date of the violation letter or, if appealed, within thirty (30) days of the final order on the appeal. 
(J)  All fines for the Removal of Protected Trees in violation of this Code shall constitute a lien upon the premises served if the fines remains unpaid fifteen (15) days beyond due date. The City Clerk may file with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County a Claim of Lien. The Claim of Lien shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the fines, plus administrative fees, penalties, and attorney's fees. All recorded fines shall bear interest at the current judgment rate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
153.11   Appeals.
Any applicant for a Tree Removal Permit adversely affected by a decision of City Staff in the application or interpretation of any of the provisions of Sections 153.00 et seq., with the exception of Section 153.10, may appeal the decision to the City Commission by filing notice of their appeal with the City Manager within sixty (60) days of the date the decision is rendered. The notice of appeal shall state the basis for the appeal and all pertinent facts surrounding the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 6-6-2016) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following Section 153.00. 
154.00 - Landscaping and screening. 
(A)  No site plan approval shall be issued unless a landscape plan has been approved in accordance with the requirements of Sections 154.00 through 154.07. 
(B)  Landscape plans shall be prepared by landscape architects registered in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 481, Part II, Florida Statutes or persons otherwise exempt thereunder and shall include the following minimum information: 
(1)  The necessary drainage information required by the City Engineer. 
(2)  The existing and proposed parking spaces, access aisles, driveways, and other vehicular use areas, including their surface construction material. 
(3)  The location, height, use and gross floor area of all buildings to be serviced. 
(4)  The location of water sources and type of irrigation proposed. 
(5)  The size, type, spacing, location, and open space calculations of all proposed and existing landscaping. 
(C)  All required landscaping shall be maintained by a one hundred percent (100%) automatic irrigation system. Such systems shall be equipped with a rain gauge trip switch which will not allow irrigation during a rain event, and shall utilize drip irrigation where appropriate in accordance with Section 154.06. Hose bibs may be approved as an alternative by the Community Development Director where deemed appropriate, if located within fifty (50) feet of all required landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 3-16-2015) 
154.01   Reserved for future use.
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2015-04, adopted March 16, 2015, deleted Section 154.01, which pertained to definitions for Sections 154.00 through 154.04 and derived from the original ordinance codified herein. 
154.02   Plant material.
(A)  All trees shall have a minimum of two-inch trunk diameter measured twelve (12) inches above grade, a minimum crown of four (4) feet, minimum height of eight (8) feet upon planting, and a minimum nursery grade of Florida #1 or better according to current edition of Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, published by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services Division of Plant Industry. Trees shall be selected from the approved species listed in Tables X-1 or X-2 unless alternative planting material is authorized by the Community Development Director. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of new required trees shall be of a single species of tree or palms. Existing trees which are preserved and new trees which are provided in excess of the required number of trees shall not be subject to this limitation. Plant material should be selected based on its compatibility with current and anticipated site conditions. Priority should be given to native species. 
LEGEND: 
Species: Includes the plant's Scientific Name followed by the Botanical Name. 
Native: Classifies whether a tree or shrub is native to Pinellas County or North or Central Florida (YES) or is exotic (NO) meaning not native to North America. 
Use: Describes whether a tree is a shade tree (ST) or an accent (A) tree. A shrub shall be considered a large shrub (LS) if it has a mature height of five (5) feet or greater. A shrub shall be considered a small screening shrub (S) if it has a mature height of less than five (5) feet. 
Soil: Xeric (X) is characterized by soils with coarse texture such as sandy soils and soils with good drainage. Xeric soils are typically infertile. Mesic (M) soils are medium textured loamy soils with a mixture of sand, silt and clay particles. They have average fertility and drainage. Hydric (H) soils are dominated by fine-textured clay particles, have poor drainage (retain water) and high fertility. It is important to match the tree to its soil type. 
Drought: Drought refers to a tree's ability to survive drought periods. A tree with a high drought tolerance can survive extended drought periods. However, even the most drought tolerant plants should receive irrigation in urban areas. 
pH: Soil pH is a measure of a soil's acidity (AC) or alkalinity (AL). The pH scale ranges from 0-14 with 7.0 being neutral and measurements below 7.0 acidic soil and above 7.0 alkaline. Most trees prefer acidic soils but some grow well in soils that are slightly alkaline (SA). 
Light: Light describes a tree's light needs. Some trees prefer full sun and will only flower in full sun (SUN) while other trees either need partial shade (PS) or full shade (SH). 
Salt: Salt refers to a tree's ability to withstand aerosol salt spray. Some trees grow in areas of direct salt spray while other trees can only tolerate minimal salt in the air. 
TABLE X-1: APPROVED SPECIES LIST FOR SHADE AND ACCENT TREES 
* Indicates Protected Tree under Section 153.00 et seq. Scientific Name Botanical Name Native Use Soil Drought pH Light Salt Acacia farnesiana Sweet Acacia, Huisache YES A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN MOD Acer rubrum* Red Maple* YES ST M-H MOD AC SUN/PS LOW Callistemon citrinus Bottlebrush, Red Bottlebrush NP A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN MOD Callistemon viminalis Weeping Bottlebrush NO A X-M MOD AC-SA SUN MOD Carya glabra* Pignut Hickory* YES ST X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Carya illinoensis* Pecan* YES ST X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS LOW Celtis laevigata* Sugarberry* YES ST M-H HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Diospyros virginiana* Persimmon, Common Persimmon* YES ST M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Eriobotrya japonica Loquat NO ST X-M MOD AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Ilex cassine* Dahoon Holly* YES ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS/SH MOD Ilex cornuta "Burfordii" Burford Holly NO A M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Ilex opaca* American Holly* YES ST M HIGH AC-SA SUN/P/SHS HIGH Ilex vomitoria Cultivars Yaupon Holly, Tree Yaupon, Weeping Yaupon Holly YES A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS/SH HIGH Juniperus silicicola or virginiana Cultivars* Southern Redcedar, Eastern Redcedar* YES ST-A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Lagerstroemia indica Cultivars Crape Myrtle No A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN MOD Ligustrum japonicum Japanese Privet, Wax Privet, Wax-Leaf Privet NO A X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Liquidambar styraciflua* Sweetgum* YES ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Magnolia grandiflora Cultivars* Southern Magnolia, Magnolia* YES ST-A X-M MOD AC-SA SUN/PS HIGH Magnolia virginiana* Sweetbay, Swamp Magnolia* YES ST H LOW AC SUN/PS LOW Myrica cerifera Wax Myrtle YES A X-M MOD AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Nerium oleander Cultivars Oleander NO A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Nyssa sylvatica* Blackgum, Black Tupelo* YES ST M-H HIG AC SUN/PS MOD Peltophorum pterocarpum Yellow Poinciana NO ST M HIGH AC-AL SUN LOW Pinus elliottii* Slash Pine* YES ST X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS HIGH Pinus palustris* Longleaf Pine* YES ST X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN HIGH Pinus taeda* Loblolly Pine* YES ST M MOD AC SUN MOD Platanus occidentalis* Sycamore* YES ST M-H MOD AC-AL SUN MOD Podocarpus macrophyllus Podocarpus Tree, Yew, Japanese Yew NO A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Prunus angustifolia Chickasaw Plum YES A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS LOW Prunus caroliniana Cherry Laurel YES A X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Quercus geminata Sand Live Oak YES ST X-M HIGH AC FS/PS LOW Quercus laurifolia Laurel Oak, Diamond Leaf Oak YES ST M-H MOD AC-SA FS/PS LOW Quercus laevis Turkey Oak YES ST X HIGH AC FS LOW Quercus nigra Water Oak YES ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS LOW Quercus virginiana Cultivars* Live Oak* YES ST X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Raphiolepis umbellata Round-Leaf Hawthorn, Yedda Hawthorn NO A X-M MOD AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Taxodium ascendens* Pond Cypress* YES ST H HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Taxodium distichum* Bladcypress* YES ST M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Ulmus alata Winged Elm YES ST M-H HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Ulmus Americana* American Elm* YES ST M-H HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Ulmus Americana var. floridana Florida Elm YES ST M-H MOD AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Ulmus parvifolia Cultivars Chinese Elm NO ST X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Viburnum obovatum Walter's Viburnum, Blackhaw YES A M HIGH AC-AL PS LOW  
TABLE X-2: APPROVED SPECIES LIST FOR PALM TREES Scientific Name Botanical Name Native Use Soil Drought pH Light Salt Acoelorrhaphe wrightii Paurotis Palm NO A M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS LOW Bismarckia nobilis Bismarck Palm NO A M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Butia capitata Pindo Palm NO A X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS HIGH Chrysalidocarpus lutescens Areca Palm, Yellow Butterfly Palm, Bamboo Palm NO A M-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS/SH MOD Livistona chinensis Chinese Fan Palm, Fountain Palm NO A X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Phoenix canariensis Canary Island Date Palm NO A X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN MOD Phoenix dactylifera Date Palm NO A X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN HIGH Phoenix reclinata Senegal Date Palm NO A X-M MOD AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Phoenix robellini Pygmy Date Palm NO A X-M MOD AC-SA SUN/PS LOW Sabal palmetto Sabal Palm, Cabbage Palm YES A X-H HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS/SH HIGH  
(B)  Trees shall be separated from buildings, overhead utility lines, and sidewalks as follows: 
(1)  Shade Trees. 
(a)  The main trunks of new shade trees shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from overhead utility lines and buildings. 
(b)  The main trunks of new shade trees shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the nearest edge of an existing sidewalk. 
(c)  New paving shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the main trunk of existing shade trees that are retained. 
(2)  Accent Trees. The main trunks of new accent trees shall be set back ten (10) feet from buildings. 
(3)  Palms. The trunks of palms with small crowns, having a crown diameter of 12 feet or less, shall be set back at least five (5) feet from overhead utility lines and buildings. The trunks of palms with large spreading crowns, having a crown diameter of greater than 12 feet, shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from overhead utility lines and buildings, as approved by the City. 
(C)  All shrubs shall have a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches and minimum twelve (12) inch spread with a three (3) gallon container upon planting, being Florida #1 grade or better. Hedges, where required, shall form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen within one (1) year of planting, being maintained thereafter to specification. Shrubs shall be selected from the approved species listed in Table X-3 unless alternative planting material is authorized by the Community Development Director. 
TABLE X-3: APPROVED SPECIES LIST FOR SHRUBS Scientific Name Botanical Name Native Use Soil Drought pH Light Salt Buxus microphylla Boxwood NO S X-M MOD AC-SA SUN/PS LOW Camellia japonica Camellia NO LS M MOD AC-SA PS LOW Carissa grandiflora Natal Plum, Common Carissa NO LS X-M HIGH AC-AL PS HIGH Carissa macrocarpa Dwarf Natal Plum NO S X-M HIGH AC-AL PS HIGH Cocoloba uvifera Seagrape YES LS X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Elaeagnus pungens Silverthorn, Throny Elaeagnus NO LS X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Feijoa sellowiana Feijoa, Pineapple Guava NO LS X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS HIGH Forestiera segregata Florida Privet, Ink Bush YES LS M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Hamelia patens Firebush, Scarletbush YES LS X-M MOD AC-AL SUN/SH LOW Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Cultivars Chinese Hibiscus, Hibiscus, Tropical Hibiscus NO LS M MOD AC-SA PS LOW Ilex cornuta Cultivars Chinese Holly, Burford Holly, Carissa Holly, Dwarf Chinese Holly, etc. NO LS-S X-H MOD AC-SA SUN/PS MOD/LOW Ilex vomitoria Cultivaris Yaupon Holly, Dwarf Yaupon YES LS-S X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS HIGH Illicium floridanum Red Anise, Florida Anise YES LS M MOD AC-SA PS/SH LOW Illicium parviflorum Yellow Anise, Florida Anise YES LS M MOD AC-SA PS/SH LOW Ixora coccinea Ixora NO LS X-M MOD AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Jasminum multiflorum Downy Jasmine, Star Jasmine NO LS X-M MOD AC-AL SUN/PS LOW Juniperus chinensis Cultivars Torulosa Juniper, Blue Vase Juniper, Parsonii Juniper, etc. NO LS-S X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH/MOD Ligustrum japonica Japanese Privet, Wax Privet, Wax-Leaf Privet NO LS X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Nandina domestica Cultivars Heavenly Bamboo, Scared Bamboo NO S M MOD AC-SA SUN/PS LOW Nerium oleander Cultivars Oleander, Dwarf Oleander NO LS-S X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS MOD Philodendron selloum Selloum NO LS M MOD AC-SA PS/SH LOW Philodendron x "Xanadu" NO S M MOD AC-SA SH LOW Pittosporum tobira Cultivars Pittosporum, Japanese Pittosporum, Varigated Pittosporum, Wheeler's Dwarf Pittosporum NO LS-S X-M HIGH AC-AL PS MOD Plumbago auriculata Plumbago, Sky Flower, Cape Plumbago NO LS X-M MOD AC-SA SUN/PS LOW Podocarpus macrophyllus Podocarpus, Yew, Japanese Yew NO LS X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Raphiolepis indica Indian Hawthorn NO S X-M HIGH AC-AL PS MOD Russelia equisetiformis Firecracker Plant NO S X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN HIGH Schefflera Arboricola Schefflera, Dwarf Schefflera NO S X-M HIGH AC-SA SUN/PS MOD Serenoa repens Saw Palmetto, Silver Saw Palmetto YES LS X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS HIGH Ternstroemia gymnanthera Cleyera, Japanese Ternstroemia NO LS X-M MOD AC-SA PS/SH LOW Viburnum odoratissimum Sweet Viburnum NO LS X-M HIGH AC-AL SUN/PS LOW Viburnum suspensum Sandankwa Viburnum NO LS M LOW AC-AL PS LOW Zamia Floridana Coonite YES S X-M HIGH AC-AL PS HIGH  
(D)  All screening material shall have a minimum height of thirty-four inches (34") with a seven (7) gallon container upon planting, being Florida #1 grade or better. The material shall form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen within one (1) year of planting, being maintained thereafter to specification. The screening material shall be a large shrub selected from Table X-3, Approved Species List for Shrubs, unless alternative planting material is authorized by the Community Development Director. 
(E)  Ground covers shall achieve one-hundred (100) percent coverage within twelve (12) months of installation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 3, 3-16-2015) 
154.03   Minimum tree requirements.
(A)  In residential, commercial or industrial areas, the standards in this section shall be met prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for new construction and prior to the approval of a final inspection for any property improvement that requires a site plan amendment in excess of 50 percent of the property's value as shown on the records of the property appraiser. 
(B)  A minimum number of shade trees shall be required based on development type and area. The minimum number of shade trees shall be as shown below, unless a greater number of trees are required to meet the screening, off-street vehicle use area landscaping or other landscaping requirements in other sections of the code. Within the Community Redevelopment District (CRD) except the Traditional Neighborhood Development-1 and Traditional Neighborhood-2 districts, should site conditions or spatial requirements for shade trees conflict, the minimum number of shade trees may be substituted at a ratio of 3:1 with accent trees, approved native palm trees, or another comparable native landscaping plan approved by the Community Development Director. 
Development Type Number of Shade Trees per Lot or Development Single-Family >1 acre (43,560 sq. ft.) 6 per gross acre >3/4 acre (32,760 sq. ft.)-1 acre (43,560 sq. ft.) 5 >1/2 acre (21,780 sq. ft.)-3/4 acre (32,760 sq. ft.) 4 >1/4 acre (10,890 sq. ft.)-1/2 acre (21,780 sq. ft.) 3 >5,000-10,890 sq. ft. 2 5,000 sq. ft. or less 1 All other development 6 per gross acre*  
* If the site is less than an acre, the minimum tree requirement will be proportionate to the site acreage. 
(C)  Unless otherwise specifically stated elsewhere in this Code, any healthy Protected Tree left in good growing condition on the site may be counted toward these minimum numbers. 
(D)  On a lot or property which contains an approved retention/detention pond, the requirements of this section shall be lessened by the area of such pond to be measured from the top of the bank. 
(E)  Unless City Staff recommends otherwise based on proximity of a proposed tree to overhead power lines or other obstructions, all required trees will be of the shade/canopy type and will in accordance with the standards and specifications of Section 154.02(A). 
(F)  The minimum tree planting requirements set forth in this section shall be integrated with the requirements of Section 153.07. 
(G)  The requirements of this section shall be further lessened at the direction of the Community Development Director where public easements are incorporated into a private parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 4, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 2, 6-6-2016) 
154.04   Parking lot landscaping.
(A)  [Visual relief required.] Parking lot landscaping is required to provide visual relief from building mass and paved areas; eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, and glare; reduce adverse impacts of noise, odor, or danger from fires; and to assist in reducing air pollution hazards. The provisions of this Section shall apply to an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area for which site plan approval is required. 
(B)  Perimeter Landscaping. On any parcel providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, the following perimeter landscaping is required: 
(1)  A minimum five-foot wide landscape buffer strip shall be provided with an average buffer width as follows: 
REQUIRED BUFFER STRIP AVERAGE WIDTH IN FEET (1) Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way: Alley or local street 5 Collector street or minor arterial roadway 10 Major arterial roadway 15 Designated scenic/noncommercial corridor 20 Adjacent to interior property line 5 Adjacent to property zoned or currently used primarily for residential or institutional purpose (2) 10  
(1) To be measured as the distance between the nearest boundary of the abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking area in the front and measured at right angles to the interior property lines. A reduction in buffer strip width of up to 50 percent may be permitted by the City Commission where there is a landscaped parkway of no less than ten (10) feet between a sidewalk and the curb or edge of pavement or the subject of the site plan application involves the adaptive re-use of an existing building with a legal nonconforming parking area. 
(2) The required ten-foot wide buffer strip may be reduced to five (5) feet in width when substituted by a six-foot high opaque, decorative fence, wall, or similar structure and planted with one shrub or vine every five (5) linear feet along with one (1) shade tree every twenty-five (25) linear feet or fraction thereof. If a wall is used, it must be constructed with a lintel on grade to protect the tree's root system. The remaining areas shall be surfaced with grass or other acceptable ground cover. 
(2)  The landscape buffer strip shall contain a screening device of at least two (2) feet in height and no greater than three (3) feet in height along the entire length of the landscape buffer strip that is adjacent to a public right-of-way. For landscape buffer strips that abut a local or collector street, a continuous hedge using small shrubs placed no more than thirty (30) inches on center may be used as a screening device. For landscape buffer strips that abut a minor or major arterial roadway a frontage wall or landscape berm shall be used as a screening device along the entire buffer length exclusive of permitted driveways, pedestrian openings, or any significant natural feature to be retained. Frontage walls shall be constructed of stone, brick, or stucco with a decorative finish and muted color that blends in with the landscape design. 
(3)  If a frontage wall is used, an average of one (1) shrub or vine shall be planted every five (5) feet, but such plants need not be spaced evenly five (5) feet apart. Such shrubs or vines shall be planted along the street side of such barrier unless they are of sufficient height at the time of planting to be readily visible over the top of such barrier. 
(4)  A landscape buffer strip that is adjacent to a public right-of-way shall contain one (1) shade tree for every forty (40) feet of frontage except for properties adjacent to a Scenic/Non-Commercial corridor where the standard shall be no less than one (1) shade tree for every thirty-five (35) feet of frontage. Shade trees shall be spaced at least thirty-five (35) feet on center from another shade tree. If the TRC determines that the required number of shade trees cannot be accommodated because of an existing or potential future growth conflict, the applicant may substitute three accent trees or palm trees for every shade tree that is required. 
(5)  The minimum number of trees in required landscape buffer strips adjacent to an interior property line shall be one (1) Protected Tree for each fifty (50) linear feet or fraction thereof or one (1) accent tree for each fifteen (15) linear feet or fraction thereof. 
(6)  Where a new parking lot abuts land zoned or used for residential or institutional purposes, the screening requirements listed under Section 154.04 shall apply. 
(7)  The remainder of the required landscape area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other approved landscape treatment. 
(8)  A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the width of a required buffer may be used for stormwater retention/detention provided the required composition of the buffer is maintained. 
(C)  [New parking lots.] New parking lots containing ten (10) or more spaces shall be designed in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving at strategic points to guide traffic flow and direction as follows: 
(1)  Terminal Islands. Each row of parking spaces shall end in a terminal landscaped island that measures a minimum of eight (8) feet in width from back of curb to back of curb, and spans the length of the adjacent parking space. 
(2)  Interior Islands. An interior island measuring at least eight (8) feet in width from back of curb to back of curb and spanning the entire length of the adjacent parking space shall be provided for each ten (10) parking spaces. The required area of interior islands may be added to terminal islands or combined with other interior islands to form larger planting areas. 
(3)  Divider Medians. If a surface parking lot contains more than fifty (50) spaces, a continuous landscaped divider median no less than ten (10) feet in width from back of curb to back of curb shall be provided between every other row of abutting rows of parking spaces. The required square footage of divider medians can be combined with other required parking lot landscaped areas in lieu of providing a divider median. 
(4)  Required Landscaping. Parking lots shall be landscaped according to the following standards: 
(a)  At least fifty (50) percent of the total required on-site parking spaces shall be located within fifty (50) feet from the trunk of a shade tree. Each island or divider median, if applicable, shall contain at least one (1) shade tree or two (2) accent trees. 
(b)  All landscape islands shall have one-hundred (100) percent coverage with shrubs planted with a maximum spacing of three (3) feet on center or a ground cover with a maximum spacing of one (1) foot on center, excluding turf, that have a maximum height of three (3) feet for driver visibility except that divider medians may be interrupted by brick or paver block walkways if needed to provide safe pedestrian access. 
(c)  All required landscape areas shall be protected by the use of curbing or wheel stops. Curbing or wheel stops shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet from a tree, shrub or vine. 
(d)  The TRC may require the installation of turf blocks or other preservation measures where necessary to protect the critical root zone of an existing tree. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 4, 3-16-2015) 
154.05   Screening.
(A)  All uses shall provide screening between potentially incompatible uses in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
(B)  Screening for the length of the development area along the perimeter property lines shall be provided under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Commercial and Community Service uses shall screen against the following zoned or used land: 
(a)  Residential. 
(b)  Office. 
(c)  Institutional. 
(2)  Institutional, Multifamily, and Mobile Home Park uses shall screen against the following zoned or used land: 
(a)  Residential except multifamily, mobile home and recreational vehicle. 
(b)  Office. 
(c)  Commercial. 
(d)  Industrial. 
(3)  Industrial uses shall screen against the following zoned or used land: 
(a)  Residential. 
(b)  Office. 
(c)  Institutional. 
(d)  Commercial. 
(e)  Community Service. 
(C)  Screening shall consist of one or a combination of the following: 
(1)  A minimum eight-foot wide buffer strip planted with one (1) Protected Tree every twenty-five (25) feet and a continuous screen maintained at a minimum height of between four (4) and six (6) feet above grade. The required screen shall be spaced at five (5) feet on center. The remaining areas shall be surfaced with grass, ground cover, or with at least two (2) inches of wood chips or bark; 
(2)  A minimum three-foot wide buffer erected with a minimum six-foot high, opaque, decorative fence wall or similar structure planted with one shrub or vine every fifteen (15) linear feet along with one (1) tree every fifty (50) linear feet. The remaining areas shall be surfaced with grass, ground cover, or with at least two (2) inches of wood chips or bark; 
(3)  A minimum four-foot high berm with a slope not exceeding thirty (30) degrees planted with trees, shrubs and ground cover; 
(4)  A minimum 15-foot wide natural area left completely undisturbed. The existing natural vegetation shall be sufficient to provide at least eighty (80%) percent opaqueness between two (2) and six (6) feet above grade; 
(5)  A vegetated wetland which straddles property lines may be utilized to satisfy the screening requirement provided it is left completely undisturbed; 
(D)  Screening shall not be required which conflicts with fence height limitations or required visibility triangles. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 4, 3-16-2015) 
154.06   Open spaces and preservation of native vegetation.
(A)  All open spaces and drainage areas shall be stabilized in order to prevent erosion, sand infiltration into the public drainage system, and to permit water to permeate into the ground. 
(B)  Large open spaces shall be left in a natural state, including ground cover and understory, where determined feasible by the City. The following upland communities, even when small in terms of area, are significant in terms of wildlife habitat and shall be preserved in an internal state when encroachment by developed areas can be avoided: 
(1)  Longleaf Pine/Xeric Oak. 
(2)  Sand Pine. 
(3)  Pine/Mesic Oak. 
(4)  Xeric Oak. 
(5)  Oak/Pine/Hickory. 
(6)  Temperate Hardwood. 
(C)  The following techniques can be required in the preservation of trees and other native vegetation: 
(1)  The installation of drain tiles. 
(2)  Dry well construction. 
(3)  Terracing. 
(4)  Retaining walls. 
(5)  A reduction in grade change. 
(6)  Shallow excavation and fill. 
(7)  Tunneling as opposed to trenching. 
(8)  The removal of exotic and nuisance species of vegetation. 
(D)  Natural areas shall be protected during construction by silt barriers, solid or ribboned barricades (2" x 2" stakes 3 feet high placed 4 feet apart), or other appropriate measures; and shall remain in a natural state upon completion of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 4, 3-16-2015) 
154.07   Water conservation techniques.
(A)  The purpose of this Section is to address water conservation. A water conservation landscape will help implement the following objectives: 
(1)  Promote water-efficient landscaping; and 
(2)  Proactively reduce water usage; and 
(3)  Increase irrigation efficiency; and 
(4)  Educate the public in the need for and benefits of a water-efficient landscape; and 
(5)  Preserve existing plant communities. 
(B)  Definitions for Section 154.07. 
(1)  Automatic controller: A mechanical or electronic timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
(2)  Emitter: The drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly from the system to the soil. 
(3)  Ground cover: Plants, other than turfgrass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches in maturity. 
(4)  Infiltration rate: The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
(5)  Irrigation system: A permanent, artificial watering system designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
(6)  Mulch: Nonliving organic and synthetic materials customarily used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture. 
(7)  Pervious paving materials: A porous asphaltic or concrete surface and a high-void aggregate base which allows for rapid infiltration and temporary storage of rain on, or runoff delivered to, paved surfaces. 
(8)  Rain sensor equipment: A low voltage electrical component placed in the circuitry of an automatic lawn irrigation system which is designed to turn off a sprinkler controller when it rains enough to meet the needs of the landscape. 
(9)  Site specific plant: A selection of plant material that is particularly well suited to withstand the physical growing conditions that are normal for that location. 
(10)  Soil texture: The classification of soil based on the percentage of sand, silt, and clay in the soil. 
(11)  Turf: Continuous plant coverage consisting of grass species suited to growth in Pinellas County. 
(12)  Vegetation, native: Any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all, or part, of the State of Florida. 
(C)  The following activities shall be exempt from the terms of this Section: 
(1)  Sites that compute an area less than a 1,000 square foot area for water conserving planting; 
(2)  One-family and two-family dwellings. 
(D)  The following water conservation techniques shall be utilized in the implementation of the landscape requirements of Sections 154.00 through 154.07 in order to conserve water: 
(1)  A soil analysis shall be used to provide information that will enable proper plant selection. This analysis shall indicate soil texture, approximate soil infiltration rate, percentage of organic matter, measurement of pH, and total soluble salts. The local County Extension Service should be consulted; 
(2)  Areas of native vegetation shall be preserved; 
(3)  Plants with similar water and cultural (soil, climate, sun, and light) characteristics shall be grouped together and irrigated separately based upon their water requirements. Site specific plants shall be utilized as landscape species; 
(4)  The landscape plan shall indicate the various water usage zones based upon the following water requirements: 
(a)  HIGH - plants associated with moist soils and require supplemental water in addition to natural rainfall to survive; 
(b)  MODERATE - plants which survive on natural rainfall with supplemental water during seasonal dry periods; 
(c)  LOW - plants which survive on natural rainfall. 
(5)  The irrigation system shall be designed to correlate to the organization of plants into the various water requirement zones; 
(6)  Moisture/rain sensor and/or rain shut-off switch equipment shall be required on all automatic irrigation systems; 
(7)  The use of low volume, emitter, or target irrigation is recommended for trees, shrubs and groundcovers; 
(8)  Turf areas shall be irrigated on separate irrigation zones from tree, shrub, and groundcover beds; 
(9)  The use of freeze and drought tolerant plant species shall be utilized most frequently; 
(10)  Turf areas shall be consolidated and limited to those areas on the site that receive pedestrian traffic, provide for recreational use, provide soil erosion control, and where used as a design unifier; 
(11)  Mulches shall be used to retain moisture, reduce weed growth, and prevent erosion. Mulch can also be used where conditions are not adequate or conducive for growing quality turf or groundcovers; 
(12)  Landscaping shall be watered and fertilized only as needed, and excessive watering shall be avoided; 
(13)  Irrigation shall occur in accordance with all applicable water restrictions, including but not limited to restrictions imposed by Pinellas County or the Southwest Florida Water Management District; 
(14)  Shrubs shall be pruned to the intended height; 
(15)  An irrigation system with an automatic controller shall be required except that low water use zones may be permitted to provide a readily available water supply within fifty (50) feet; 
(16)  The use of pervious paving materials shall be considered where appropriate; 
(17)  Berm designs shall incorporate the use of a concave top where landscaping is used; 
(18)  A regular maintenance schedule shall be provided which includes checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting the automatic controller; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning and weeding in all landscape areas. 
(E)  Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy the landscape architect or other professional responsible for the landscaping plan shall conduct a field observation and provide the Building Official with a certificate of substantial completion/compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, §§ 4, 5, 3-16-2015) 
154.08   Maintenance and enforcement.
(A)  The property owner shall be solely responsible for the continued maintenance of all landscape areas in accordance with the approved plan so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, and all landscaped areas are to be kept free from refuse and debris. For required landscape areas which die from lack of maintenance, disease or other natural occurrence, the City shall require re-landscaping. This shall be applicable to all required landscaping, whether installed under the terms of this Code or a previous ordinance. Failure to take such corrective action shall constitute a violation of this Code and may be enforced by any legal means available. 
(B)  No Final Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all required landscaping is installed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 4, 3-16-2015) 
155.00 - Fire protection. 
(A)  Fire protection shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Standard Building Code, Standard Fire Prevention Code, National Fire Code, Life Safety Code, the standards contained in this Code, and all other applicable City building codes. 
(B)  The Fire Chief, or his designee, shall have the primary authority to administer and interpret fire protection requirements, and shall have the authority to modify said requirements where there are particular difficulties related to specific circumstances when carrying out the strict letter of the requirement. 
155.01   Fire hydrants.
(A)  The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall determine the precise location of all fire hydrants. 
(B)  The installation of fire hydrants shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All hydrant threads shall be national standard threads (NST) and meet National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards. 
(2)  All hydrants shall have right-hand turn stems with two 21/2-inch hose connections and one 41/2-inch hose connection. The 21/2-inch connections shall be located a minimum of 18 inches above grade. 
(3)  The 41/2-inch connection shall face the street that the hydrant is located on and shall be located a minimum of 18 inches above grade. 
(4)  Fire hydrants shall be located a minimum of six (6) feet behind the curb where feasible and shall have no obstructions within five (5) feet. 
(5)  Parking shall not be permitted within fifteen (15) feet of a hydrant, sprinkler, or standpipe connection. "Fire Lane" signs shall be provided in such instances and posted no less than seven (7) feet above grade to the bottom of the sign. 
(6)  No hydrant shall be located below street grade. 
(7)  The minimum line size for hydrant placing shall be a six (6) inch looped line. Dead end lines shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in size and shall not exceed 600 feet in length. Dead end lines shall be avoided unless impractical. 
(8)  For one- and two-family residences hydrants shall be installed every 500 feet beginning at the subdivision entrance, as determined by the Fire Chief or their designee. 
(9)  Hydrants in all other situations shall be installed every 300 feet beginning at the project entrance, as determined by the Fire Chief or their designee. 
(10)  All hydrants shall produce a minimum flow acceptable to the Public Works Director, and shall be pressure tested in a manner determined by the Fire Chief or Public Works Director prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(11)  All hydrants located on public streets shall be dedicated. In all other situations the hydrants shall be privately maintained. 
(12)  All submissions for construction drawing, site plan, or subdivision plat approval shall include a hydrant assembly detail. 
(13)  In accordance with NFPA-1 Chapter 18 (18.5.3) for Fire Hydrant Clearance, a 36-inch clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of the fire hydrant except as otherwise required or approved by the Fire Chief or their designee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-15, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
156.00 - Potable water and sanitary sewer. 
(A)  All potable water and sanitary sewer facilities, whether public or private, shall be constructed to the specifications of the City, and all applicable building codes of the City. 
(B)  The installation of oversize facilities by the development to serve a logical distribution or collection area may be required by the Public Works Director. An oversizing credit may be provided for where the oversizing is designed to serve property other than that owned by the developer. 
(C)  Compliance with the required levels of service standards shall be demonstrated. 
156.01   Potable water.
(A)  The issuance of all development orders where the site has access to an adequately sized potable water distribution line shall require connection to the public water supply. 
(B)  Individual water supply systems shall only be allowed where approved by the Pinellas County Health Department. 
(C)  Dead end distribution lines shall not be allowed where an alternative is feasible. Water line looping shall be required for water quality and quantity. 
(D)  Flushing connections shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Works Director. 
(E)  Privately maintained potable water facilities shall be master metered. 
(F)  Unmetered connections shall not be allowed. 
156.02   Sanitary sewer.
(A)  All existing structures and uses within one hundred fifty (150) feet public gravity sewer line shall connect to the public sanitary sewer system within one hundred eighty (180) days after notification by the Public Works Director that service is available. Existing individual septic systems shall be abandoned in accordance with the requirements of the Pinellas County Health Department, and any other applicable regulations. 
(B)  The issuance of all development orders where the site is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a public sewer line shall require connection to the public sanitary sewer system. The distance shall be measured by following the most direct route along an easement or public right-of-way from the closest point of the property to the point of connection to the public sewer line. 
(C)  The minimum line size shall be eight (8) inches. The sanitary sewer pipeline shall be designed so that the minimum velocity under full or partial flow conditions will not be less than two (2) feet per second, and the maximum velocity will not be greater than ten (10) feet per second. 
(D)  A manhole shall be provided at the end of any sewer line, and a manhole shall be provided at all changes in direction of a sewer line. In no case shall the spacing between manholes exceed four hundred (400) feet, and all manholes subject to periodic inundation shall be waterproofed to minimize the infiltration of stormwater. 
(E)  If the sanitary sewer connection cannot be made by gravity flow the Public Works Director may require connection to a force main or require that the sewage shall be lifted by an approved means under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The use does not comply with the requirements of the Pinellas County Health Department for an individual septic system; 
(2)  The use is an isolated occurrence and has no other means of connecting to the public sewer; 
(3)  The area is not in the City's Capital Improvement Program for eventual connection to the public sanitary sewer system; or 
(4)  The public sanitary sewer system has adequate hydraulic capacity to accept the quantity of sewage to be generated by the proposed development. 
(F)  The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall evaluate the feasibility of providing sanitary sewer for requests for site plan or subdivision plat approval where the site is greater than 150 feet but less than one-quarter (1/4) mile from the public sanitary sewer system with accessibility via public right-of-way. In determining feasibility the TRC shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The calculated sewage flow of the proposed development; 
(2)  The improvements necessary to connect to the public sanitary sewer system in relation to the size and scope of the proposed development; 
(3)  Soil conditions and water table elevation; 
(4)  The potential for ground or surface water degradation; 
(5)  The potential use of the site in relation to the storage, use, or disposal of toxic, hazardous, or industrial wastes. 
(G)  Flow calculations shall be provided by a Florida Registered Engineer demonstrating that the capacity of the sanitary sewer collection lines will not be exceeded by the proposed development. 
(H)  The minimum slope for a sanitary sewer gravity collection line shall be .004 per foot. 
156.03   Individual septic systems.
(A)  The use of individual septic systems shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 381.272, Section 381.00655, Florida Statutes, the Pinellas County Health Department, and all provisions of this Code. 
(B)  No site plan or subdivision plat approval shall be granted for any development located within 1/4 mile of the public sanitary sewer system which utilizes the individual septic system in any area zoned or used for industrial or manufacturing purposes, or where toxic, hazardous, or industrial wastes as defined by this Code are generated or used. 
(C)  All applications for development orders not governed by Subsection (B) above must obtain written authorization from the Pinellas County Health Department for use in an individual septic system and such notification must be provided prior to the issuance of any development order approval. The City reserves the right for final denial of the use of septic systems. 
(D)  In permitting the use of any individual septic system, all necessary utility easements shall be provided to assure the eventual construction and extension of the public sanitary sewer system. 
(E)  Malfunctioning or damaged individual septic systems shall connect to the public sanitary sewer system in accordance with the requirements of Section 156.02 of this Code. 
157.00 - Reclaimed water usage. 
(A)  All development orders shall comply with the City reclaimed water usage program when adopted. 
158.00 - Drainage and utility easements. 
(A)  Unless otherwise provided for by this Code, utility easements along side lot lines shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and shall be provided where necessary to accommodate all required utility facilities. 
(B)  Unless otherwise provided for by this Code, drainage easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. Drainage easements for Mullet, Bishop, Alligator, and Possum Creeks shall be a minimum forty (40) feet in width. 
(C)  Additional utility easements may be required when determined by the Public Works Director to be necessary for the continuity of utility service or maintenance. 
(D)  Separation between potable water lines, non-potable water lines, and sanitary sewer lines shall be maintained as required by State and local building codes. 
(E)  Ground elevations or grades shall not be modified within a drainage easement so as to materially alter an approved drainage plan or existing drainage patterns. 
(F)  Permanent structures or other items causing a physical obstruction to the function of a drainage easement or structure are prohibited inside a drainage or utility easement. 
(G)  Temporary structures, including fences, may be permitted in a drainage or utility easement with the consent of the Public Works Director or his designee provided the property owner signs and records an affidavit assuming full liability for all costs associated with the repair or replacement of the temporary structure should the City damage or remove it. The Public Works Director shall consider the impact the temporary structure will have on gaining access, drainage flow, and any known objections from outside utility companies or other affected party. 
(H)  Landscaping within a utility easement shall be limited to turf, mulch, or other ground cover and small accent trees and shrubs no taller than 24 inches. 
(I)  Landscaping within a drainage easement shall be limited to turf, ground cover and shrubs no taller than 24 inches unless a swale is present in which case no shrubs or other plantings are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-06, § 2, 5-7-2018) 
159.00 - Central storage facilities for solid waste. 
(A)  The issuance of all development orders shall require the provision of central storage facilities for solid waste in accordance with the requirements of Sections 159.00 through 159.04. 
159.01   Definitions for Sections 159.00 through 159.04.
(A)  Containerized unit: A detachable metal container to be mechanically dumped into a packer-type garbage truck and ranging in size from 2 cubic yards to 8 cubic yards, also known as a dumpster. 
(B)  Noncontainerized unit: A can, not exceeding 30 gallons, constructed of light gauge steel, galvanized metal, or plastic, with a tight-fitting lid, or a waterproof bag of similar size. 
159.02   Standards for central storage facilities.
(A)  Central storage facilities for solid waste collection shall be provided by a containerized unit for commercial, industrial, and multifamily development in excess of six (6) units. 
(B)  All central storage facilities shall be located on the site the facilities are intended to serve. 
(C)  All central storage facilities and their enclosures shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any property line. 
(D)  No central storage facility shall be located within any right-of-way, easement, or required visibility triangle. 
(E)  Central storage facilities shall be located so that they do not cause excessive nuisance or offense to adjoining properties and are not unsightly. 
(F)  Central storage facilities shall be located to allow ease of access and pickup by the collection vehicle. 
(G)  No parking, stacking lanes, or other obstructions shall be permitted to inhibit the access area for disposal pickup. 
(H)  A vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet shall be provided. 
(I)  All food service establishments shall comply with Chapter 100-13, Florida Administrative Code. 
(J)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to repair and maintain central storage facilities in accordance with the requirements of Sections 159.00 through 159.04. 
(K)  In the case of multiple tenants or users, central storage facilities shall be conveniently located, and shall be of sufficient number and capacity based upon the number of users and the frequency of collection. Additional containers requested after the initial construction shall be provided in accordance with the requirements Sections 159.02 through 159.04. 
(L)  No connection between a central storage facility and the sanitary sewer system shall be permitted. 
159.03   Construction.
(A)  All central storage facilities shall be located on a concrete pad with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches reinforced by 6-inch by 6-inch by 10 gauge wire mesh placed in the center of the form. 
(B)  The minimum dimension of the concrete pad shall be ten (10) feet deep by ten (10) feet wide. 
(C)  The concrete pad shall be equipped with pin stops for securing the enclosure doors. 
(D)  All central storage facilities shall be completely screened from view by an opaque enclosure of wood, concrete block, brick, stucco masonry or other suitable material. Gates with a minimum opening of ten (10) feet shall be required for access. The use of chain link fencing with slats for screening shall only be allowed in industrial districts. 
(E)  Bollards or bumper posts shall be installed at the rear of the container to prevent the container from hitting the enclosure. 
(F)  All screening enclosures shall be six (6) feet high. 
(G)  The design of the enclosure shall be compatible with the architectural design of the development. 
159.04   Waivers.
(A)  The Public Works Director may allow the use of noncontainerized unit for the storage of solid waste under the following conditions: 
(1)  Lack of space for the placement of a containerized unit where a redevelopment project is involved; 
(2)  Lack of accessibility to the containerized unit where a redevelopment project is involved; or 
(3)  The project generates amounts of loose garbage capable of being serviced by noncontainerized units. 
(B)  Noncontainerized central storage facilities shall be shown on the site plan in an accessible location, on a concrete pad with a screened enclosure of 31/2 feet in height, and shall be sized to accommodate a minimum of four (4) cans. 
160.00 - Electric and communication lines. 
(A)  All utility lines including, but not limited to, those required for electrical services, telephone, street lighting, and CATV shall be installed underground. 
161.00 - Stormwater management. 
(A)  Uncontrolled stormwater runoff causes erosion, sedimentation, flooding, pollution and prevents recharge of the aquifer. Therefore, it is necessary to impose minimum standards to control stormwater runoff and conserve the ground and surface water resources of the City. 
(B)  The intent of Sections 161.00 through 161.06 is to allow landowners reasonable use of their property while promoting the following objectives: 
(1)  To protect the quality and quantity of all ground and surface waters, thereby limiting or reducing the pollution of water sources. 
(2)  To prevent the lowering of existing ground water table elevations to the detriment of these or other stated objectives of this Code. 
(3)  To perpetuate recharge into the ground water system. 
(4)  To prevent and reduce salt water intrusion. 
(5)  To reduce erosion, the loss of top soil and sedimentation of surface water bodies. 
(6)  To alleviate the potential for flooding. 
(C)  The following development activities may potentially alter or disrupt the existing stormwater runoff and will require the approval of a stormwater management plan by the Public Works Director prior to the issuance of development permits for: 
(1)  The clearing and/or draining of land. 
(2)  The subdividing of land. 
(3)  The replatting of recorded subdivisions and the development of recorded or subdivisions. 
(4)  The construction of a structure, change in the size of one or more structures, or the addition of impervious surface to a parcel of land. 
(5)  The altering of the shoreline or bank of any surface water body. 
(6)  The filling of depressed areas or excavation of land. 
(7)  The lowering of the water table. 
161.01   Stormwater facilities required.
(A)  All proposed development projects shall be required to submit site and drainage plans to the Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD) for application, approval, or exemption as specified in applicable Florida Statutes. Building permits shall not be issued for any development for which Florida Statutes require a SWFWMD permit unless and until such permit or exemption has been issued. 
(B)  Facilities that are approved by SWFWMD as to design, construction, and continuing operation will suffice as meeting City standards for stormwater management. Development projects that properly obtain a SWFWMD exemption must show the proposed drainage scheme for the property with the building plans submitted for building permit for review and approval by the City Engineer. When one of the three commonly used grading plans styled "Type A", "Type B", or "Type C" as depicted in the Federal Housing Administration Land Planning Bulletin Number 3 or other acceptable drainage scheme approved by the City Engineer are used, the drainage plan must identify the off-site drainage path of the stormwater discharge. 
161.02   Ownership and maintenance.
(A)  All stormwater pipes, channels, swales, catch-basins or other means of conveying stormwater which are located within a public street right-of-way and collect water from the street are the property of the City, including the means by which the stormwater is conveyed from the street via a drainage easement to the inlet of a SWFWMD required treatment facility. 
(B)  Privately-owned ponds, vaults, inlet structures, outlet structures, discharge pipes, channels or any feature associated with the stormwater treatment or attenuation required and permitted by SWFWMD, whether or not such facilities are located within an easement, are not the responsibility of the City and shall be maintained by the holder of the SWFWMD Permit in whose name the permit was issued or to whom it may legally be subsequently conveyed. 
(C)  All subdivisions and developments for which a plat is to be recorded and which involves the construction and operation of SWFWMD-required stormwater facilities, must include, prominently in the plat notes, the exact language appearing in Subsections 161.02(A) and (B). 
(D)  The owner or authorized agent must provide the Engineering Department with a copy of the Statement of Completion and Request for Transfer to Operation Entity for the surface water management system signed by an authorized SWFWMD representative prior to the performance security being released by the City per Section 184.05. 
162.00 - Endangered/threatened species protection. 
(A)  The Planning Director may require the provision of a professionally prepared study by the developer where a request for site plan, subdivision, conditional use, or zoning approval exceeds ten (10) acres or involves potential impacts to open space or preservation areas designated by the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  The study shall inventory the wildlife habitat, identify the presence of any endangered and threatened species and species of special concern under current protection by the Florida Game and Wildlife Service (FGFWFC) and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), assess the impacts of the proposed development on the identified species and habitat, and propose appropriate habitat or wildlife management, mitigation, or relocation plans. 
(C)  Land proposed or required for preservation shall be adjacent to existing viable habitat and shall be of such quantity and quality so as to provide a viable remaining habitat. 
(D)  All habitat or wildlife management, mitigation, or relocation plans shall be in accordance with the rules, regulations, and requirements of the FGFWFC and USFWS and applicable Florida Statutes. 
163.00 - Reserved. 
164.00 - Floodplain management. 
(A)  All development activity within areas designated as a special flood hazard according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its latest Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall comply with the City of Safety Harbor Flood Prevention and Control ordinance, the requirements of the FIRM maps and the requirements and regulations of FEMA. 
165.00 - The maintenance of common private improvements and open space. 
(A)  Prior to final development plan or final subdivision plat approval documents or other assurances to the satisfaction of the City Attorney shall be submitted which establish a means of common ownership, management and maintenance of all common private open space and common private improvements. 
165.01   Definitions for Sections 165.00 through 165.02.
(A)  Common improvements (private): All streets, driveways, drainage, signage, utilities, parking or storage areas, structures and other private improvements designed and provided for the common use, benefit and enjoyment of all residents, owners or occupants of a specific private development or neighborhood. 
(B)  Common open space (private) : All open areas, including landscaping and buffering, designed and provided for the common use, benefit and enjoyment of all residents, owners, or occupants of a specific private development or neighborhood, or as required by this Code. 
(C)  Common ownership: Ownership of common private open space or common private improvements which grants common rights of use of specific lands or improvements to the residents, owners, or occupants of a development or neighborhood. 
165.02   Requirements.
(A)  All documents required to ensure the continued maintenance of common improvements and open space shall contain the following minimum information: 
(1)  Establishment of a nonprofit organization or other legal entity under the laws of the State of Florida for the ownership, care, and maintenance of all common open space and improvements. 
(2)  A description of all common open space and improvements to be maintained. 
(3)  A method of assessment and payment of dues. 
(4)  All covenants shall be in full force and effect for a period of not less than 25 years, and shall be automatically extended for successive periods of 25 years. 
(5)  The organization shall not dissolve or dispose of any common open space or improvements except to an organization concerned and designed for the continued maintenance in accordance with the requirements of the original development approval. 
(6)  The required documents shall be recorded and become part of the final subdivision plat or final development approval. 
(7)  The required documents shall grant the right of entry upon such private property to City and County personnel, including, but not limited to, law enforcement officers, emergency services providers, meter readers and inspection officers. 
(8)  Any other information determined necessary by the City. 
166.00 - Transfer of development rights. 
(A)  The transfer of development rights is established as a mechanism to implement the preservation designations of the Comprehensive Plan while recognizing the property rights associated with those parcels and the unique physical circumstances associated with their designation. 
166.01   Definitions for Sections 166.00 through 166.03.
(A)  Coastal submerged lands: Land encompassed, submerged either seasonally or year round and affected by the waters of the state where either tidal influences exist or where saline water occurs, the landward limit of which is delineated by the dominant vegetative communities subject to the jurisdiction of the FDER. 
(B)  Development rights: Equal to each dwelling unit or total gross square footage of commercial/industrial floor area capable of being developed or transferred in accordance with the requirements of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(C)  Preservation area: Land which due to the unique characteristics of its habitat or size, shape or location are not developable without significant adverse environmental alteration and impacts detrimental to the public interest. These areas will be preserved in their natural state through the use of the transfer of development rights. 
(D)  Upland habitat: Well drained areas elevated above land classified as wetlands which are significant in terms of rarity, water recharge, or native plant and animal wildlife habitat value. 
(E)  Wetland habitat: Areas characterized by flooding, standing water, and a high water table which are subject to the jurisdiction of the FDEP, USACOE, and SWFWMD. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 13, 3-16-2015) 
166.02   Development rights.
(A)  The environmental and jurisdictional nature of coastal submerged lands is such that they have no development potential in and of themselves. Therefore, there shall be no transfer of any development rights from coastal submerged lands. 
(B)  There shall be no transfer of any development rights to lands within the Coastal High Hazard Area (CHHA) as defined in the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Plan. 
(C)  The unified development of a parcel or parcels of land which contain areas proposed for designation as preservation along with other property may develop at the intensity of the applicable land use designation(s) allowed for the entire site by the Comprehensive Plan for upland areas by concentrating the development rights on those non-environmentally sensitive portions of the site, and in accordance with (D) below for wetland areas or the 25-year floodplain. 
(D)  In the event that parcels of land are designated by the Comprehensive Plan for preservation, development rights may be transferred in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Development rights may be transferred at the rate of one (1) unit per acre for residential land use designations and a floor area ratio of .05 for commercial/industrial land use designations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 2, 10-1-2018) 
166.03   Requirements for off-site transfer.
(A)  The off-site transfer of development rights may be authorized by the City Commission only at the time of site plan, subdivision, or planned development approval. 
(B)  The property sending the transferred development right and the property receiving the transferred development right shall be clearly defined by legal description. 
(C)  The development right to be transferred shall be clearly established and may only be transferred for a particular property once, even if the entire right allowable is not requested. 
(D)  The sale and transfer of development rights shall be recorded in the same manner as the sale and transfer of real property. 
(E)  Authorized transfers shall be clearly defined by a recorded instrument in a form approved by the City Attorney. 
(F)  A conservation easement limiting the use of the transferring property to open space shall be recorded. 
167.00 - Bonuses for affordable housing. 
(A)  The City Commission may authorize the following bonuses for the provision of affordable low to moderate income housing: 
(1)  A density bonus of up to one (1.0) dwelling unit per acre; 
(2)  A minimum lot width reduction of up to ten (10) feet and a minimum lot area reduction of up to ten percent (10%); 
(3)  A minimum net floor area reduction of up to ten percent (10%). 
(B)  The provision of low to moderate income housing shall be defined as housing targeted to a market which earns eighty (80%) percent or less than the current median annual adjusted gross family income for Pinellas County. To be affordable the housing cost (principle, interest, taxes, utilities and insurance or rent) shall not exceed thirty (30%) of the gross family income. 
(C)  No density bonuses, including density bonuses for affordable housing as provided in this section, may be authorized to lands within the Coastal High Hazard Area (CHHA), as defined in the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 3, 10-1-2018) 
168.00 - Addressing. 
(A)  Addresses shall be assigned by the City. 
(B)  The display of address numbers and figure size shall comply with the requirements of Pinellas County. 
169.00 - Archaeological zone analysis. 
(A)  Archaeological zones within the City shall be defined as areas in which it has been determined by the City that the areas may reasonably be expected to yield information on local history or prehistory based upon prehistoric or historic settlement patterns. 
(B)  The following procedures shall apply before a development order is issued for property determined to be in this zone: 
(1)  Any development involving excavation, site plan, or subdivision review proposal shall require a study performed by a qualified archaeologist to determine the effect that any such project may have on the archaeological resources. Where no effect or adverse effect is found, the project shall proceed in accordance with the other procedures set forth in this Code or the City's building codes. 
(2)  Where an effect or adverse effect is demonstrated by the survey in combination with the proposed development, the Planning and Zoning Department shall require one of the following: 
(a)  Preservation of the identified resources. 
(b)  Mitigation of the identified resources by adjusting the development proposal to minimize its impact. 
(c)  Excavation of the identified resources as a last resort when alternatives (a) and (b) above are not possible due to one of the following: 
(1)  Where the strict application of the requirement would effectively deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the land, due to its unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions or location, provided: 
(a)  Such effect upon the owner is not outweighed by a valid public purpose in imposing the requirements in this case, and 
(b)  The unusual conditions involved are not personal to, nor the result of actions of the developer, property owner or their predecessors in interest; 
(2)  Where strict application of the requirement would be technically impractical in terms of engineering, design, or construction practices, due to the unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions or location of the land or due to improved efficiency, performance, safety, or construction practices which will be realized, provided; 
(a)  The development will provide an alternative adequate to achieve the purposes of the requirement; 
(b)  Any unusual conditions creating the impracticality are not personal to, nor the result of the actions of the developer or property owner; 
(3)  Where all or any part of the requirement has no relationship to the development, or to the impact of the development on historic resources. 
(C)  If, in the course of construction, a previously undefined archaeological site is discovered, whether the site is determined to be in an archaeological zone or not, the owner of the property shall immediately notify the Planning and Zoning Department for assistance in consulting with a qualified archaeologist. The final disposition of the archaeological resources shall consider appropriate measures for mitigation, excavation or preservation of the identified resources. 
170.00 - Hurricane evacuation impact study. 
(A)  All requests for site plan, subdivision, zoning/land use, or conditional use approval which entails residential development, congregate care facility, nursing home, hospital, recovery home, emergency shelter, or similar facility of fifty (50) or more units (beds) located where evacuation in a Category 3 Storm is required shall prepare and submit an analysis which indicates that available shelter space will not be exceeded or can be provided. 
(B)  Shelter space demand shall be estimated based upon the assumption that twenty-five percent (25%) of the evacuating population will seek public shelter. Population for an individual project shall be based upon the number of units times the average number of persons per household. The average number of persons per household shall be based upon the most recent U.S. Census, Florida Statistical Abstract, or other acceptable documented source. 
(C)  The study shall provide solutions for mitigation where a shelter deficit is projected. The solutions must provide a mitigation equivalent to the proposed development's anticipated hurricane preparedness impacts, and may utilize any single or combination of the following mitigative techniques: 
(1)  The donation of land for public facilities. 
(2)  The donation or use of private structures as hurricane shelter space. 
(3)  The provision of payments to upgrade existing shelters, to include the addition of storm shutters, provision of electric generators, provision of a food supply, provision of potable water storage capacity, and other items which are determined necessary by the Red Cross and Pinellas County Emergency Management Division to upgrade existing shelters. 
(4)  The provision of on-site shelter space when the project includes a community center or other suitable facility. The provision of on-site shelter space shall be at the ratio of 10 to 20 square feet per resident, and shall equal the proposed development's anticipated hurricane shelter space demand. 
(5)  The provision of funds to be used for the purpose of training shelter volunteers for the purpose of enhancing existing public information programs. 
(6)  The provision of a limitation on density, or project phasing. 
(7)  The provision and maintenance of a public information program and hurricane evacuation fund within a homeowners association. 
(8)  The provision for the elevation of all roads within the proposed development above the flood level of a category three hurricane event, making evacuation more feasible. 
(9)  The provision of improvements to the evacuation routes, including roadway capacity improvements and the provision of funds for the posting of evacuation routes. 
(10)  The provision of funds to be used for the purpose of procuring communication equipment which would upgrade the existing warning and notification capability of the Fire Department. 
(11)  Nothing contained in this Section shall preclude the use of alternative mitigative techniques. 
(12)  Any mitigation technique shall provide reasonable assurance regarding the alternative's ability to reduce the development's impact upon demand for hurricane shelter space. 
(D)  The study shall utilize the most recent available data from the Pinellas County Emergency Management Division and the Tampa Bay Regional Planning Council. 
171.00 - Lighting. 
(A)  All outdoor lighting, with the exception of lighting for outdoor recreational facilities, tree up lighting, and street lighting, shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  All outdoor lighting devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this article and the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Outdoor lighting poles should be placed outside of protected tree drip lines. Poles proposed within drip lines shall include a trench plan approved by the City Arborist. 
(3)  Lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded to cast light down onto the subject property. 
(4)  Light fixture bulbs may not emit light above the horizontal plane. 
(5)  Outdoor lighting shall be designed and situated to contain emitted illumination on the subject property. Lighting shall not project onto any abutting property. No lighting shall be directed onto any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 2, 5-23-2018) 
172.00 - Design incentive bonus program. 
(A)  Development that includes defined design elements may earn design incentive points that may be accumulated to earn design incentive bonuses as provided in this Article. 
(B)  The following documentation is required to be submitted by the owner of the property, or their duly authorized representative, and received by the City prior to the submittal of a building permit to qualify for a design incentive bonus as provided in this Article: 
(1)  A completed design incentive bonus application. 
(2)  Architectural drawings that demonstrate design elements eligible for design incentive points as provided in this Article. 
(3)  A list of design elements that are included, design incentive points requested to be awarded pursuant to this Article, and the specific design incentive bonus being requested pursuant to this Article. 
(C)  The following design elements for single family detached residential dwellings, single family semi-detached dwellings, and single family attached dwellings, have been assigned design incentive points based on the priority of the design element, with the most points given to the highest priority element: 
Type of Element Description Points Garages and Driveways Driveway and/or garage access from an alley for interior or corner lots with improved alley access 5 Driveway and/or garage access from a secondary front yard for corner lots without alley access 5 Side facing garage door or side driveway for interior lots without alley access 4 Pervious or Ribbon Driveway 3 Garage recessed a minimum of 5 feet from front façade of the primary structure 2 Complexity of Massing Unenclosed front porch with a minimum depth of 8 feet and measuring a minimum of 60% along the horizontal width of the primary structure (front façade) 5 Wrapping of façade materials from primary front to secondary front on corner lot 4 Tower or turret (front façade) 3 Roof with cross gable or dormer (front façade) 3 Bay window (front façade) 3 Bay window (side façade) 2 Wrapping of façade materials from primary front to side on interior lot 2 Architectural Features Traditional inspired base course/water table and termination of siding above finished floor with transition to foundation 3 Decorative shutters, awnings or other shade devices 3 All window, sill, and door trim with a minimum of 3.5 inches in width on the primary front façade 2 Exposed rafters, expressed rafter tails, or simulated rafter 2 Front porch column and railings with expressed base and capital (to be combined with the unenclosed porch design element in the complexity of massing list) 1 Scale Porch ceiling or implied height below 8 feet 6 inches 3 Quality Materials Fiber cement or wood siding (no vinyl siding) on the entire structure façade 5 Smooth stucco finish with stucco window trim 3 Recessed windows (minimum of 2.5 inches) 3 Masonry and/or stone accents on a minimum of 15% of the front façade 3 Traditional inspired wood or simulated wood doors 2 Setbacks Front setback 5 feet or more above required setback 5 Side setbacks 2 feet or more above required setback on both sides 5  
(D)  The following design elements for non-residential and mixed use development have been assigned design incentive points based on the priority of the design element, with the most points given to the highest priority element: 
Type of Element Description Points Mixed Use Second story residential dwellings over non-residential use(s) 8 Scaling and Diversity Design variations for building walls with a maximum linear length of an uninterrupted façade facing a public street of 20 feet * 5 Recessed front door by a minimum of 5 feet * 4 Driveways and Parking Lots Pervious parking spaces which make up 50% or more of the required parking spaces 5 Pedestrian Amenities Pedestrian arcade, overhang, or awning a minimum of 5 feet in depth along at least 50% of the front façade 5 Setbacks Front setback 5 feet or more above required setback 5 Side setbacks 3 feet or more above required setback on both sides 5 Quality Materials Fiber cement or wood siding (no vinyl siding) on the entire structure façade 5  
* not applicable to projects subject to site plan review and located within the CTC or MSM character districts 
(E)  The total number of earned design incentive points, when added together, shall meet or exceed 25 points and include at least one setback increase to qualify for a design incentive bonus. Only one design incentive bonus may be applied to each single family detached residence, residential development with multiple units, non-residential, or mixed use development: 
(1)  Design Incentive Bonus: Fast track permit review with a minimum one week turn around for each review on single-family residential and three weeks for non-residential and multi-family developments and City-paid reimbursement of sewer, sanitation, park facilities, public safety, and library impact fees at time of issuance of certificate of occupancy. The maximum City-paid reimbursement for a single family detached residential dwelling is $1,500.00. The maximum City-paid reimbursement for a non-residential or mixed use building is $3,500.00. For semi-attached residential or attached residential units, a maximum of 25% of the impact fees listed above for the entire development are eligible for City-paid reimbursement, not to exceed $10,000.00. 
(F)  The Community Development Director shall be responsible for reviewing applications and approving design incentive bonuses, based solely on the provisions of this Article. Applicants aggrieved by any decision by the Community Development Director may submit a written review request to the City Manager within 10 days after the decision setting forth all facts, circumstances and bases for City Manager review. The City Manager's decision upon such review shall be final and binding upon the determination of design incentive points and bonuses. Neither the Community Development Director nor the City Manager have any authority to deviate from the specific, defined criteria set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12, § 2, 8-20-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-12, adopted Aug. 20, 2018, enacted new provisions to be designated as § 171.00. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 171.00, said new provisions have been redesignated as § 172.00. 
173.00-180.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

181.00 - General requirements. 
(A)  No person shall subdivide land regardless of zoning after the effective date of this Code without first following the development procedure and complying with the design standards established by this Code. 
(B)  No person shall sell or transfer any land subdivided after the effective date of this Code without the prior authorization for the subdividing of the land by the City Commission and the recording of a Final Subdivision Plat which meets all the requirements of this Code and Chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
(C)  No Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any lot, parcel, or structure which was created in violation of the provisions of this Code. 
182.00 - Subdivision defined. 
(A)  The term subdivision shall mean the following: 
(1)  The division of land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, tracts, or tiers for the purpose, whether immediate or future of the transfer of ownership; 
(2)  The creation or establishment of new access by a street, alley, easement or other primary means of access, whether private or public; 
(3)  The resubdivision of an approved recorded subdivision plat if such resubdivision affects any street layout, reserved or dedicated area or easements for public use, any increase in residential density or increase in number of lots is provided for. 
(B)  The subdivision requirements of this Code shall not apply to the granting of public rights-of-way. 
183.00 - Design standards. 
183.01   General.
(A)  In addition to the requirements of this Article, all subdivisions shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  The development standards of Article X, and all other applicable provisions of this Code; 
(2)  The Comprehensive Plan; 
(3)  All applicable building codes of the City; 
(4)  All other applicable Federal, State, and local laws which govern the development of property or the transfer of land. 
(B)  No subdivision of land shall be permitted where the site is unsuitable for the intended development due to flooding, poor drainage, unstable soil or other such conditions which may constitute a danger to the public welfare unless adequate measures to mitigate such conditions can be, and are, undertaken in the development of the property. 
(C)  The provision of adequate public facilities in accordance with adopted level of service standards shall be required. 
(D)  The preservation of significant cultural and environmental features, including, but not limited to, historic sites, scenic vistas, wetlands, and trees shall be required. 
(E)  Every subdivision shall be provided with a name. Such name shall not be the same as, or similar to any other recorded plat located in the City which will in any way confuse the public; except that when an existing subdivision is expanded or resubdivided as an additional unit or section. 
183.02   Lots.
(A)  All lots shall be designed to meet the minimum zoning dimensional regulations applicable to the property as designated by this Code. Those dimensional regulations shall include, but not be limited to lot width, lot depth, lot area and density. 
(B)  The depth and width of property subdivided for nonresidential use shall be of adequate size to permit off-street parking and other improvements required by this Code and required by the type of use and development anticipated. 
(C)  Side lot lines shall be as close as practical to right angles at street lines or radial to curving street lines. 
(D)  Each lot shall have access to a public or private street. 
(E)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except that reverse frontage lots shall be provided along thoroughfare streets. Where reverse frontage streets or one (1) tiered blocks are utilized the following may be required: 
(1)  A non-ingress/egress easement along the thoroughfare street. 
(2)  A lot depth fifteen (15%) percent greater than the minimum required by this Code. 
(3)  The installation of a buffer strip in accordance with the screening requirements of this Code. The continued maintenance of such buffer strips shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(F)  The minimum frontage of all lots at the street line shall not be less than thirty-five (35) feet, except that flag lots may be permitted where allowed by this Code. 
(G)  Corner lots shall be designed not less than fifteen (15%) percent wider than the minimum lot width required by this Code. 
183.03   Blocks.
(A)  Block width, depth, shape, and orientation shall consider the need for access, circulation, traffic control and the safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement. 
(B)  Block width shall be sufficient to provide for two (2) tiers of lots with the minimum depths required by the zoning district regulations applied to the property. Exceptions to the two (2) tiered block width shall be permitted along thoroughfare streets, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or exterior property lines of the development. 
(C)  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,400 feet, or be less than 500 feet in length, except where necessary to intersect an existing street. 
(D)  Blocks along thoroughfare streets shall not be less than 1000 feet in length except where necessitated due to the size and shape or other characteristic of the property. 
183.04   Streets.
(A)  All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfare and local streets. 
(B)  Subdivision streets shall be arranged in a manner which discourages their use by through traffic. 
(C)  Subdivision streets shall be extended to the property limits of the subdivision to allow for logical future extension of the streets into adjoining undeveloped land. 
(D)  Streets shall be designed to intersect at right angles. The approach to an intersection shall be at right angles for a distance of one hundred thirty-five (135) feet on all streets. 
(E)  "T" intersections shall be preferable to four-way intersections, and no intersection shall have more than four street approaches. 
(F)  New intersections along one side of an existing street shall coincide with existing intersections on the opposite side of the street. Intersection jogs on local streets shall not be less than 150 feet apart measured from centerline to centerline of the jogging streets. Intersection jogs on thoroughfare streets shall not be less than 300 feet apart measured from centerline to centerline of the jogging streets. 
(G)  Curve radii on all subdivision streets shall be adequate for the design speed of the street. 
(H)  The minimum curb return radius for intersections shall be as follows: 
Local street with a local street: 25 feet 
Local street with a thoroughfare: 35 feet 
Thoroughfare with a thoroughfare: 50 feet 
(I)  All subdivision streets shall be integrated with the adjoining topography to provide adequate sight distance. 
183.05   Rights-of-way.
(A)  The minimum street right-of-way shall be as indicated by Section 150.00 of this Code for thoroughfare streets. 
(B)  The minimum street right-of-way for local streets shall be 50 feet wide when constructed with curb and gutter. 
(C)  The creation of reserve strips which deny access from adjoining property to a public street shall be prohibited except where dedicated as a controlled limited access strip. 
(D)  Half streets shall be prohibited. 
(E)  Subdivision streets shall be dedicated along with the required right-of-way. Where the use of private streets is authorized by the City Commission, continued maintenance shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article X for common improvements. 
(F)  The right-of-way access easement widths for private streets shall comply with the requirements of this Section for public streets. 
183.06   Dead end streets.
(A)  A temporary dead end street shall be allowed when such street is to ultimately provide for the continuation of streets between adjoining properties. A temporary turn-around shall be constructed to the requirements of the City Engineer when a temporary dead end street exceeds 200 feet in length. Barricades shall be erected at the termination of a temporary dead end for public safety. 
(B)  Where a road is not intended to extend beyond the limits of the subdivision a cul-de-sac or T-Turn shall be provided. Dead end cul-de-sac or T-Turn streets shall not exceed 600 feet in length. 
(C)  The cul-de-sac design shall be a minimum of 72 feet of pavement with a 92-foot diameter right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 8. 6-18-2018) 
183.07   Utility easements.
(A)  Easements, a minimum of five (5) feet in width, for the purpose of accommodating overhead, surface, and underground utilities and drainage shall be required along all side and seven and one-half (7.5) feet along all rear lot lines. 
(B)  An easement along the perimeter of the subdivision shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width. 
183.08   Common private improvements.
(A)  The continued maintenance of common private improvements shall be established in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(B)  Entrance signage, landscaping and other common private improvements located within the public right-of-way shall only be allowed upon the execution of an agreement by the City Commission. 
183.09   Permanent reference monuments (PRMs) and permanent control points (PCPs).
(A)  PRMs and PCPs shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
(B)  PRMs shall be set before the recording of the final subdivision plat and will be so stated in the surveyor's certificate on the face of the plat. 
(C)  PCPs shall be set prior to expiration of the performance security where required improvements are installed after recording or prior to recording of the final subdivision plat where improvements are in place. 
183.10   Street signs and names.
(A)  Traffic control signs shall be installed by the developer prior to final inspection. All traffic control signs shall be installed in accordance with the standards and specifications prescribed in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(B)  All streets shall be provided with street signs at each intersection. One hundred (100) percent of the initial installation cost shall be paid by the developer. Street signs shall be in accordance with standard FDOT construction details. 
(C)  Street names shall be approved by the City. There shall be no duplication or similarity of street names with any other street located in the City service area for fire protection, potable water and sanitary sewer. 
(D)  Generally, north/south streets shall be designated as avenue, terrace or drive; east/west streets shall be designated as street, place, or lane; cul-de-sacs shall be designated as courts; and diagonal streets shall be designated as road. 
183.11   Street lights.
(A)  Prior to final subdivision plat approval, street lighting shall be installed by the developer at the developer's cost in all subdivisions. 
(B)  The subdivider shall submit to the City an amount of money for street lighting that will generate an investment that will cover the required monthly charge if invested at the interest rate for the one-year Treasury Bill as of September 30th of each year. This interest rate will then be used to calculate the required fee for the following year. 
184.00 - Administration. 
(A)  The review, approval, and acceptance procedure for all subdivisions shall be divided into the following phases: 
(1)  Site Plan Review. 
(2)  Construction Drawing Review. 
(3)  Installation of Required Improvements. 
(4)  Final Subdivision Plat Review. 
(B)  Phased development and the associated timing shall be indicated on and approved by the site plan. For phased developments, an overall master plan is required at the time of site plan review. 
(C)  All construction phases of a subdivision shall be capable of operating independently with respect to the required improvements. 
184.01   Site plan review.
(A)  A site plan shall be prepared, submitted and reviewed in accordance with the requirements of this Code for Site Plans. 
(B)  Approval of a site plan shall not authorize recording of the final subdivision plat, nor effect the acceptance of any land or improvements proposed to be dedicated to the City. 
(C)  Site plan approval shall expire one (1) year from the date of approval unless the submission of construction drawings or final subdivision plat has been made. Site plan expirations, extensions and revisions shall be in accordance with Section 229.05 of this Code. 
184.02   Construction drawing review.
(A)  Within one (1) year of the approval of a site plan the required construction drawings for the installation of all required improvements shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
(B)  Construction drawings shall be prepared and certified for all required improvements by a Florida Registered Professional Engineer in a format and manner as required by the City Engineer. 
(C)  Construction standards shall conform to the requirements of this Code, the City's Standards and Procedures Manual, standard engineering practice, and all other applicable building codes. 
(D)  Construction drawings shall conform to the approved site plan, including any conditions of approval required by the City Commission or Technical Review Committee. 
(E)  The review of construction drawings shall be an administrative process coordinated by the Engineering Department. 
(F)  Upon approval of the construction drawings by the City Engineer, permits for site development and installation of required improvements may be requested. 
(G)  Construction drawings shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from the date of approval by the City Engineer. 
(H)  The improvements must be constructed in accordance with the plans that have been approved. If any changes must be made in the plans, the plan changes must be reviewed and approved prior to commencement of any work on the changes. 
(I)  The City of Safety Harbor reserves the right to make inspections to enforce any provisions of its code, or to ensure that the approved construction plans are being complied with. Whenever the inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists any condition or code violation which makes such construction unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the City Engineer may enter the construction site to inspect the same and to perform any duty imposed upon him by the City's codes. Upon notice from the City's inspector, construction work that is being performed contrary to the provisions of the City's codes, contrary to the construction plans or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice will be in writing and will be given to the property owner or his agent, or the person doing the work. When an emergency exists, the City inspector shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. The City may revoke approval of the construction plans if it is later determined that there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans upon which the approval was based. 
(J)  By approving the construction plans, the City is not authorizing the permittee to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the City's technical codes, nor shall approval of the construction plans prevent the City from hereafter requiring a correction of errors in the plans, construction or from requiring abatement of any violation of the City's codes. 
(K)  The approved set of plans, which has been stamped, shall be kept at the work site and shall be open to inspection by the City inspector. 
(L)  The construction work shall be performed in accordance with the approved plans, all state and local rules, regulations and codes. 
184.03   Installation of required improvements.
(A)  No clearing, grading, drainage, or other site preparation with the exception of brush removal for the purpose of surveying shall commence until all required construction drawings have been approved by the City Engineer and all required City, State, and County permits have been obtained. 
(B)  Prior to approval of the final subdivision plat the developer shall install all the improvements required under this Code in accordance with the specifications of the approved construction drawings. 
(C)  During construction the City shall inspect all the required improvements for compliance with the specifications of the approved construction drawings. 
(D)  Upon the completion of all required improvements, as-built drawings, prepared and certified by the engineer of record, showing the actual installation of all required improvements shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The as-built drawings shall have a sealed certification from the engineer of record stating that all the required improvements have been installed and are completed in substantial compliance with the approved construction drawings or as noted on as-builts. 
(E)  Upon receipt of the required as-built drawings and certification from the engineer of record, the City Engineer shall certify that all required improvements and inspections comply with the approved construction drawings. Upon the City Engineer's certification that all required improvements comply with the approved construction drawings, the Engineer of Record shall provide to the City a complete computer file of all as-built drawings in ACADD format. 
184.04   Maintenance security.
(A)  Prior to the certification of completion by the City Engineer, the subdivision shall post maintenance security for the purpose of correcting any defect in the design, materials, or construction of all required on-site and off-site improvements. 
(B)  Maintenance security shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be in the form of a letter of credit from a bank licensed to do business in Florida, a maintenance bond where the bonding company is duly organized and licensed to issue bonds in the State of Florida, or a cash deposit held in escrow by the City. 
(C)  The amount of maintenance security shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the actual installation costs of all required improvements. 
(D)  The effective period of maintenance security shall be two (2) years. 
(E)  It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to notify the City Engineer for an inspection three (3) months prior to the expiration date of the maintenance security. No maintenance security shall be returned until an inspection by the City has been completed which determines that the required improvements are free of defects or any identified defects have been corrected. 
(F)  Upon identification of a default, the City Commission may exercise its rights under the maintenance security instrument by providing thirty (30) days written notice, certified, return receipt requested to the developer. 
184.05   Performance security.
(A)  Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the City Engineer may in unusual circumstances, permit the posting of performance security for the installation of required improvements in lieu of actual installation prior to final subdivision plat approval. 
(B)  Performance security shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be in the form of a letter of credit from a bank licensed to do business in Florida, a performance bond where the bonding company is duly organized and licensed to issue bonds in the State of Florida, or a cash deposit held in escrow by the City. 
(C)  The amount of performance security shall be based upon an estimate of completion cost by the engineer of record, shall be subject to verification by City Engineer, and shall total 110% of the estimate of completion. 
(D)  The effective period of performance security shall not exceed one (1) year from the date of approval of the final subdivision plat. 
(E)  Performance security provided under this Section shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners at the time of final subdivision plat approval. 
(F)  The City shall receive payment in full in accordance with the procedure established by law for all required improvements not completed at the termination of the performance security. 
184.06   Minor subdivision review.
(A)  A minor subdivision is a subdivision containing not more than four (4) lots and not involving the creation of any new street, any new access or the extension of other public facilities. 
(B)  A minor subdivision in which two lots are proposed to be created from a single parcel of land may be approved by the Technical Review Committee upon a finding of consistency with all applicable standards of this Code. A minor subdivision involving the creation of three or four lots is subject to site plan review and approval by the City Commission. However, the City Commission may waive the final requirement for final subdivision plat review. 
184.07   Final subdivision plat review.
(A)  Upon satisfactory completion and certification of all required improvements a final subdivision plat shall be submitted. 
(B)  The final subdivision plat shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee (TRC) for conformance with the approved site plan and compliance with Chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
(C)  Prior to approval by the City Commission, all required improvements and as-built drawings shall have been completed and certified in accordance with the requirements of this Article. 
(D)  Upon determination by the Technical Review Committee (TRC) that the final subdivision plat and required improvements are compete in conformance with the requirements of this Code, the final subdivision plat shall be sent to the City Commission for approval. 
(E)  Upon approval of the final subdivision plat by the City Commission, the plat shall be forwarded along with all other related legal documents to the Pinellas County Clerk of the Circuit Court for recording. 
(F)  Approval of a final subdivision plat shall constitute dedication and acceptance of all improvements, easements, and rights specified on the plat as public. 
(G)  A final subdivision plat application shall conform to the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  The requirements of Chapter 177, Florida Statutes; 
(2)  The plat shall be made under the direction of a registered land surveyor who shall certify the plat; 
(3)  The plat shall be submitted in the form of one original on good grade linen tracing cloth, one reproducible mylar, and blueline copies in the number required by the City; 
(4)  The sheet size shall be 22" by 24" with a 3-inch margin on the left side and a 1/2-inch margin on each of the remaining sides; 
(5)  Multiple sheets shall have clearly labeled match lines; 
(6)  A scale, north arrow, and legend shall be provided; 
(7)  Section, Township, Range shall be provided; 
(8)  PRMs and PCPs shall be clearly marked; 
(9)  Section and quarter section lines shall be shown; 
(10)  Location, width, and name of all streets, waterbodies, or other rights-of-way shall be provided. 
(11)  Location, width and purpose of all easements shall be provided; 
(12)  All contiguous property shall be identified by subdivision title, plat book, and page, or noted "not platted"; 
(13)  Lot and Block numbering shall be clearly indicated; 
(14)  Lot dimensions shall be provided; 
(15)  Street centerlines shall be shown; 
(16)  Park, open space, or other public parcels (with dimensions) shall be shown; 
(17)  Interior outparcels shall be labeled "not a part of this plat" (with dimensions); 
(18)  Location, purpose, and width of all dedications shall be provided; 
(19)  Building setback lines if greater than that required by normal zoning shall be shown; 
(20)  Name of City and County shall be shown; 
(21)  Name of Subdivision shall be shown; 
(22)  Each plat shall show a description of the lands to be subdivided; 
(23)  The survey closure data for the lands to be subdivided shall be provided; 
(24)  All common improvements and open spaces shall be noted on the plat as privately maintained; 
(25)  The continued maintenance of common improvements and open spaces shall be provided for in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
(H)  All final subdivision plat applications shall include the following certifications: 
(1)  A title certification completed by an attorney licensed in Florida or title company showing the apparent record title to the land described on the plat and any outstanding mortgages on same; 
(2)  A certificate of ownership and dedication executed by all persons or companies having a record interest in the land to be subdivided in accordance with the title certification. All mortgagees having a record interest shall either sign the certificate of dedication or submit a separate instrument joining in and ratifying the plat and dedications. No private improvements or open space shall be dedicated to the City, and so indicated or labeled on the final subdivision plat; 
(3)  Surveyors Certification; 
(4)  Certificate of Approval of the City Commission; 
(5)  Certificate of Approval of the Clerk of the Circuit Court; 
(6)  Reservation of easements; 
(7)  A special assessment liens search by the City Clerk and Collector. 
185.00 - Waivers. 
(A)  In connection with the approval of a site plan for the purpose of subdivision approval, the City Commission may waive or modify any design requirement of this Article. However, the City Commission may not waive the development standards contained in Article X of this Code or the zoning district dimensional regulations of this Code, except as provided for in Subsection (D) of this Section. 
(B)  No waiver or modification may be granted unless one or more of the following circumstances exist and where Subsection (C) of this Section is met: 
(1)  Where the waiver or modification is necessary to preserve or enhance significant existing environmental or cultural features, such as trees, scenic areas, historic sites or public facilities related to the development site. 
(2)  Where the strict application of the requirement would effectively deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the land, due to its unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions or location, provided: 
(a)  Such effect upon the owner is not outweighed by a valid public purpose in imposing the requirement in this case, and 
(b)  The unusual conditions involved are not personal to, nor the result of actions of the developer, property owner or their predecessors in interest; 
(3)  Where strict application of the requirement would be technically impractical in terms of engineering, design, or construction practices, due to the unusual size, shape, topography, natural conditions, or location, of the land or due to improved efficiency, performance, safety, or construction practices which will be realized, provided; 
(a)  The development will provide an alternative adequate to achieve the purposes of the requirement; 
(b)  Any unusual conditions creating the impracticality are not personal to, nor the result of the actions of the developer, property owner or previous property owner. 
(4)  Where all or any part of the requirement has no relationship to the development, or to the impact of the development on the public facilities, land use, traffic, or environment of the neighborhood and the general community, due to the location, scale or type of development involved. 
(C)  Where the development will provide an alternative which will achieve the purposes of the requirement through clearly superior design, efficiency or performance. 
(D)  In older established areas, where it is deemed necessary to create a development consistent with the established land use pattern, the City Commission may consider a waiver to the lot dimension requirements of this Code in conjunction with the approval of a site plan for the purpose of subdivision approval. 
186.00-195.00. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII - SIGN REGULATIONS 

196.00 - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  It is the purpose and intent of this Section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City of Safety Harbor through reasonable, consistent, and non-discriminatory sign standards. The sign regulations in this Article XII are not intended to censor speech or regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to regulate the time, place, and manner of speech as well as regulate the impact signs have on aesthetics and traffic and pedestrian safety. In order to preserve and enhance the City of Safety Harbor as a desirable community in which to live, visit, and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of the foremost importance. These sign regulations have been prepared with the intent of enhancing the visual environment of the City of Safety Harbor and promoting its continued well-being. The City of Safety Harbor has the following objectives in implementing these sign regulations: 
(1)  Pinellas County has an economic base which relies on seasonal residents and tourists, and enhancing the visual attractiveness of the environment is important to making the City of Safety Harbor a desirable place to visit; 
(2)  To foster a good visual environment and enhance the economic well-being of the community as a place in which to live, visit, and conduct business; 
(3)  To preserve the aesthetic, natural, and historical qualities of the community; 
(4)  To contribute to the safe movement of traffic by controlling the excessive height, area, and bulk of signs, as well as certain types and lighting of signs which can distract the attention of pedestrians and motorists so as to constitute hazards to traffic safety; 
(5)  To encourage creativity and allow the sufficient conveyance of a message in a manner which promotes traffic safety and avoids visual blight; 
(6)  To control the use of signs determined to be detrimental to the aesthetic sense and welfare of the community; 
(7)  To regulate signs in a manner so as not to interfere with, obstruct the vision of or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(8)  To encourage signs appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located and consistent with the category of use to which they pertain; 
(9)  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the City; 
(10)  To allow for traffic control devices consistent with national and state standards and whose purpose is to promote highway safety and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on streets and highways, and that notify road users of regulations and provide warning and guidance needed for the safe, uniform, and efficient operation of all elements of the traffic stream; 
(11)  To allow for government signs placed within the community that promote the City's tourism and provide information to citizens and visitors. These signs contribute to tourism by assisting tourists in finding where they want to go with ease; 
(12)  To allow signs that are compatible with their surroundings and contribute to wayfinding, while precluding the placement of signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct land uses and/or signs; 
(13)  To regulate the appearance and design of signs in a manner that promotes and enhances the beautification of the City and that compliments the natural surroundings in recognition of the City's reliance on its natural surroundings and beautification efforts; 
(14)  To foster the integration of signage with architectural and landscape designs; 
(15)  To ensure that signs are installed, constructed, and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner, and protect the public from unsafe signs, except to the extent such action is expressly preempted by state or federal law; and 
(16)  To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 1, 8-1-2016) 
197.00 - Applicability. 
(A)  All signs erected, altered, or displayed on or after the effective date of this Code shall be subject to its provisions, and unless specifically exempted, shall require the prior issuance of a Sign Permit from the City. 
(B)  Signs or other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in strict conformity with the City's building codes and all other applicable regulations. 
(C)  All signs shall comply with other applicable Federal, State and County laws, ordinances, and regulations, including the applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan. 
198.00 - Definitions. 
(A)  Abandoned sign: Any sign or sign structure that was or is installed for the purpose of affixing a sign, which bears no sign or sign copy, or advertises a discontinued business use for ninety (90) consecutive days. 
(B)  Animated sign: Any sign which includes action or motion or the optical illusion of action or motion, or color changes of all or any part of the facing, requiring electrical energy, or set in motion by movement of the atmosphere. "Animated Sign" shall include electronic reader boards, any type of screen using animated or scrolling displays, such as an LED screen or any other type of video display. 
(C)  Awning (canopy) sign: A shelter structure attached to or cantilevered from a building, wholly or partially supported by a building and/or columns, braces, or poles extending to the ground, and composed of non-rigid materials except for the supporting framework. 
(D)  Banner: A single sign or outside advertising display having the character, letters, illustrations, ornamentations, symbol, color, or visual representation applied to cloth, paper, vinyl, fabric, plastic, or like kind of malleable material with or without frame. The term banner shall not include a pennant or flag. 
(E)  Beacon light: Any light with one or more beams having a wattage which exceeds seventy-five (75) watts capable of being directed at any direction or directions, or capable of being revolved automatically or capable of having any part thereof revolve automatically. Excluded from this definition are the lights used to illuminate either directly or indirectly, any lawful sign. 
(F)  Bench sign: A bench upon which a sign is indelibly drawn, painted, printed, or otherwise affixed thereto. 
(G)  Billboard sign: Any sign composed of a flat, continuous, and uninterrupted surface (including cut-outs) which measures seventy-two (72) square feet in sign area or more and upon which advertising or other matter may be displayed promoting goods, services, or other things not sold or available upon the site where the sign is located. "Billboard Signs" may include changeable copy signs. 
(H)  Building frontage: The linear length of a building facing the street right-of-way. For multiple occupancy parcels, building frontage may be that portion of a building facing a street, parking area or other means of customer access. 
(I)  Building official: The City official or his designee, responsible for the administration, interpretation and enforcement of the building codes of the City. 
(J)  Changeable copy: A sign or portion of a sign which message copy is changed manually in the field, through the utilization of attachable letters, numbers, symbols, and other similar characters, but not other copy made of material not designed for use on a changeable copy sign. 
(K)  Commemorative sign: A sign or banner erected by the City which honors the memory of a historical or other special event. 
(L)  Construction sign: Any sign giving the name of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included thereon. 
(M)  Copy: The letters, text or other graphics which compose the message displayed upon the sign surface area. 
(N)  Electronic reader board: A sign by which the message copy may be electronically changed and controlled. 
(O)  Erect: Erect shall mean to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall also include the painting of wall signs. This term shall not apply to copy changes or existing permitted signs. 
(P)  Exempt signs: All signs for which permits are not required but which must, nonetheless, conform to the other terms and conditions of this Article. 
(Q)  Flashing sign: A flashing sign is an activated sign on which any electric lighting by any device is either alternated on and off or raised and lowered in brightness or intensity. 
(R)  Freestanding sign: Any sign located on or in the ground for support, and which is not affixed to a building, fence, vehicle or other object. 
(S)  Frontage: The length of the property line for a single parcel which runs parallel to, and along, a public right-of-way line or street, exclusive of alley-ways. 
(T)  Government signs: Any sign erected by or on the order of a governmental body or a public official in the performance of his office or duty. 
(U)  Height: The vertical distance measured from street grade nearest the base of the sign to the highest point of any sign. 
(V)  Identification sign: Any sign which indicates no more than the name, address, company logo and occupation or function of an establishment or premises. 
(W)  Illegal sign: Any sign which is inconsistent with the terms of this or any previous ordinance, or any sign which was erected without a valid permit when one was required. 
(X)  Illuminated sign: Any sign which is illuminated by artificial light, either from an interior or exterior source, including reflective or phosphorescent light. 
(Y)  Institutional sign: Any sign erected on site for a nonprofit or quasi-public use such as a church, library, school, hospital, or government owned building. 
(Z)  LED Sign: A sign that utilizes light emitting diodes arranged to create a message changeable by electronic means. 
(AA)  Maintain: Maintain shall include general servicing and upkeep in a safe, operable, and attractive condition. 
(BB)  Marquee sign: Any sign which is attached to or hung from a permanent, roof-like structure (marquee) which is supported by a building wall and which projects out from the building line usually but not necessarily over a public right-of-way such as a sidewalk. 
(CC)  Monument sign: A sign that is erected on an opaque base and having a width equal to or greater than seventy-five (75) percent of the width of the sign for the entire vertical dimension of the base. If the width of the base is less than seventy-five (75) percent of the width of the sign, the sign is a pole-mounted sign. 
(DD)  Multiple occupancy parcel: Any parcel which is occupied by more than two (2) establishments, businesses, or uses. 
(EE)  Multiprism sign: Signs made with a series of triangular vertical sections that turn and stop to show three pictures or messages in the copy area, and includes all signs which are composed of 3-dimensional objects. 
(FF)  Noncommercial copy: An expression or message where more than 50% of the sign is dedicated to noncommercial copy and which is not solely related to advertising the economic interest of the advertiser. A sign advertising the event of a non-profit entity shall not be considered to be related to the economic interest of the advertiser. 
(GG)  Nonconforming sign: Any sign lawfully in existence and lawfully permitted on the effective date of this Code which does not conform to the requirements of this Article. 
(HH)  Nonresidential zone: Any Zoning District where the purpose and intent is to permit commercial, professional, and industrial establishments as a primary use. 
(II)  Offsite sign: Any sign containing advertising message concerning any business, goods, products, services, or facilities which are not manufactured, produced, sold, provided, or located on the premises upon which the sign is erected or maintained. 
(JJ)  Onsite sign: Any sign which identifies a business or advertises a product for sale, or service to be rendered on the immediate parcel where the sign is located. 
(KK)  Parcel: An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use or commonality of ownership, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
(LL)  Pennant: Any series of small flag-like or streamer-like pieces of cloth, plastic, or paper attached in a row to any staff, cord, building, or other object at only one or two edges, the remainder hanging loosely. 
(MM)  Portable signs: Any sign designed or intended to be readily relocated whether or not it is permanently attached to a building, structure or on the ground. The term includes signs on wheels or on portable structures, tent signs, mobile signs, A-frame signs, sidewalk signs and similar devices. 
(NN)  Pole-mounted sign: Any sign, independent of support from any building, that is mounted on freestanding poles or other supports so that the bottom edge of the sign face is eight feet (8) or more above grade. 
(OO)  Projecting sign: Any sign which is attached to and which projects more than 12 inches from the outside wall of any building or structure, excluding wall signs as defined herein. 
(PP)  Real estate sign: A sign which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the parcel upon which it is located. 
(QQ)  Revolving or rotation sign: Any sign so erected or constructed as to periodically or continuously change the direction toward which any plane containing the display surface area is oriented. 
(RR)  Roof line: The top edge of the roof or parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette when viewed from the ground level. 
(SS)  Roof sign: Any sign erected, constructed or maintained on the roof of any building. 
(TT)  Sign: Any combination of structure and/or message in the form of a display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, advertising structure, advertisement, logo, symbol, graphic or other form, designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform. Drawings of articles for sale on the premises that is related to the business and or is intended to advertise or inform, rather than being merely aesthetic, shall be classified as a sign under this Article. The term does not include an official traffic control sign, official marker, national or state flags permitted by this Article, athletic scoreboards, or the official announcements or signs of government. "Sign" includes sign structure. 
(UU)  Sign area: The surface area of a sign is the entire areas within the periphery of a regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed, but not including the sign structure bearing no advertising matter unless it forms a sign frame, or an integral part of the sign or display, or is capable of displaying an advertising message. The surface area of the sign shall be measured from the outside edges of the sign. The sign area shall include the aggregate sign area upon which copy or advertising could be placed. 
(VV)  Sign cabinet: A three-dimensional structure which includes a frame, continuous borders on all sides and sign face within the frame on which the sign letters and logos are placed. 
(WW)  Sign face: The part of the sign that is or can be used to identify, display, advertise, communicate information or for visual representation which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. 
(XX)  Sign structure: Any structure which is designed specifically for the purpose of supporting a sign, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign. This definition shall include any decorative covers, braces, wires, supports or components attached to or placed around the sign. 
(YY)  Single occupancy parcel: Any parcel which is occupied by one (1) or two (2) establishments. 
(ZZ)  Snipe sign: Any sign which is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence post, or any other similar object whether located on public or private property. 
(AAA)  Temporary sign: A sign or advertising display intended to be displayed for a specified and limited period of time. 
(BBB)  Use: The purpose for which a building, lot, sign, or other structure is arranged, intended, designed, occupied or maintained as established by the authorized legislative body. 
(CCC)  Vehicle or trailer signs: Any sign erected upon a vehicle where the principal purpose of the vehicle is not general transportation, but the support of the sign itself. Such signs are normally strategically placed so as to be intended for viewing from a street for the basic purpose of providing the advertisement of products/services or directing people to a business or activity. Signs mounted upon taxis, buses or other modes of general public transportation when in the course of their normal service are excluded from this definition. Vehicle or trailer signs shall not be deemed to include signs incorporated on a vehicle which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed or carried by the vehicle. 
(DDD)  Wall signs: A sign which is painted on, fastened to, or erected against the wall of a building with its face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building facade or wall. 
(EEE)  Warning sign: Any sign which is designed to provide public notice of a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
(FFF)  Window sign : A window sign is one which is painted on, attached to or visible through a window excluding displays of merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 2, 8-1-2016) 
199.00 - Permit procedures. 
199.01   Permit required.
(A)  No person shall paint, erect, demolish, alter, rebuild, enlarge, extend, relocate, demolish, repair, do any work upon, attach to, or suspend from a building or structure, any sign unless a permit for such sign has been issued by the Building Official or unless such sign is specifically exempted from permit requirements. 
(B)  No permit shall be required to change the advertising copy or message on signs which are specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. This shall not include the replacement of sign panels. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of a sign permit without the prior written approval of the Building Official. A written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit application and maintained in the files of the Building Official. 
(D)  Applications for permits required by this Article shall be in writing upon forms to be furnished by the Building Official. 
(E)  Any repair work on a sign of a structural nature shall require a separate permit. Simple, non-structural maintenance of a sign shall not require a permit. 
199.02   Form of permit application.
(A)  In order to obtain a permit under the provisions of this Article, an applicant shall submit to the Building Official a sign permit application which shall set forth in writing a complete description of the proposed sign including the following minimum information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and the lessee of the sign, and the sign contractor or erector of the sign. 
(2)  The legal description and the street address of the property upon which the sign is to be erected. 
(3)  Other information as required in the permit application forms provided by the Building Official, including a site plan, elevation drawings of the proposed sign, and identification of the type, height, area and location of all existing signs on the subject parcel. 
(4)  Lot frontage on all street rights-of-way and building frontage on all street rights-of-way. 
(5)  Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings, certified by a Florida Registered Engineer where required by the Standard Building Code or other applicable building codes of the City, of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground. Plans on file with the Building Official may be used to satisfy the engineering requirements of this section. 
(6)  A copy of stress diagrams and calculations certified by a Florida Registered Engineer, showing that the structure is designed for deadload and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this Article or the City's building codes. 
(7)  All the required information for an electrical permit for illuminated signs. 
(8)  An affidavit by the applicant that the owner or lessee of the building, structure or land on which the sign is to be erected has consented to its erection. 
(9)  Approval of the Federal Aviation Authority, or any other governmental entity where required by law. 
199.03   Permit limitations.
(A)  The Building Official shall act upon an application for a permit with plans as filed, or as amended, without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this Article or any other City building codes, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this Article or any other City building codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is completed and inspected within six (6) months after its issuance. 
199.04   Inspections required.
(A)  All signs for which a permit is required by this Article are subject to inspection by the Building Official. If an electrical inspection is required, it shall be the duty of the sign permit holder to first obtain an electrical permit and pay the appropriate electrical permit fee. 
(B)  Upon notice from the Building Official, any work that is being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Code, the City's building codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and given to the owner or lessee of the property, to the owner's or lessee's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the Building Official may verbally order the work to be stopped or corrected. However, within five (5) working days of such verbal warning, written notice shall be issued by the Building Official. 
(C)  Whenever a reinspection of any stage of work is made necessary because the work was not ready for the inspection requested, because of inaccessibility to the work to be inspected, or because corrections are necessary for the work to be approved, said reinspection will not be made until the required reinspection fee has been paid. 
199.05   Permit fees.
(A)  Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this Article, the applicant shall pay a fee as provided by a schedule of fees adopted by the City Commission. 
(B)  Fees based upon sign area shall be calculated per each sign face. 
(C)  Should any person, firm, or corporation begin work without taking out a valid permit in violation of this Article, the Building Official shall ensure that the proper permitting procedure is henceforth followed, charging double (2 times) the regular fee required. 
200.00 - Sign permit exemptions. 
(A)  The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this Article, provided that all other applicable Sections of this Article are met: 
(1)  Bench and bus shelter signs when approved by the City Commission pursuant to Chapter 337.407(2)(a), Florida Statutes, except that the identification of the transit company or its route schedule shall not require approval; 
(2)  Government signs; 
(3)  Warning signs, not to exceed six (6) square feet; 
(4)  Murals, statues, paintings, designs or other decorative features, not including any text, provided no drawings or imagery of products or services provided by a commercial or industrial use located onsite, graphic representations of the business name, trademark, logo, or other commercial related imagery are present; 
(5)  Construction Signs in accordance with Section 212.03; 
(6)  One (1) non-illuminated real estate sign per parcel per street frontage in accordance with Section 212.05; 
(7)  Window signs in nonresidential zones not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the total window area per building frontage in which they are displayed which identify or advertise activities, services, goods, or products available on the parcel, within two feet of the window and visible from the exterior of the building, and not including electronic reader board or LED signs; 
(8)  Interior electronic reader board or LED signs that are a maximum of 4 sq. ft., within two feet of the window and visible from the exterior of the building, exhibit stationery text only, and have a minimum dwell time of 24 hours. One sign is exempted per address. 
(9)  Signs incorporated on machinery, equipment, or vehicles at the manufacturer's or distributor's level, which identify or advertise only the product or service dispensed by the machine, equipment, or vehicles, and signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone booths, gasoline pumps, taxi cabs, buses, or other modes of general public transportation; 
(10)  Interior signs which are displayed on the inside of a building and not visible from a public street; 
(11)  Addressing numbers displayed in accordance with Pinellas County requirements; 
(12)  Two (2) directional signs per driveway which signs shall be located on and pertain to a parcel of private property. Each sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in sign area per face. The maximum height shall be three (3) feet. If such sign area is to be illuminated, then a sign permit shall be obtained in accordance with the requirements of this Article. Signs may be placed with a two-foot setback from the right-of-way provided that such signs meet all other applicable regulations and do not block visibility; 
(13)  One (1) identification sign, professional name plate or occupational sign for each multifamily establishment not to exceed two (2) square feet in aggregate sign area, denoting only the name of the complex, and the street and/or number of the premises; 
(14)  Government/public/religious flags (limited to 3 per parcel); 
(15)  Corporate or company logo flags, limited to one (1) per parcel; 
(16)  Commemorative signs erected by the City; 
(17)  Public/Semi-public off-site permanent directional signs provided that the maximum sign area shall not exceed four (4) square feet per sign face, and the sign shall be located within a 2,500-foot radius of the property the sign is intended to serve. These signs shall only serve a quasi-public or non-profit use such as a library, school, church, hospital, government building or similar use. Such signs shall be permitted in the right-of-way in order to aid in the safety of the traveling public who will utilize these signs to reach their final destinations; 
(18)  One professionally designed hanging sign that is six square feet or less and substantially affixed to a single post four inches in diameter or less with a maximum height of six (6) feet that is adequately secured at least 18 inches into the ground on non-residential parcels located inside the Community Redevelopment District with no other freestanding signs on site. 
(19)  For multitenant non-residential parcels where individual suites or offices have secondary public entrances, one (1) identification sign or professional name plate not to exceed two (2) square feet in aggregate sign area is exempt per secondary entrance. 
(20)  Signs with a non-commercial message not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, and not exceeding four (4) signs per parcel or site. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2016-19, § 3, 8-1-2016) 
201.00 - Signs specifically prohibited. 
(A)  The following types of signs are expressly prohibited except as otherwise provided by this Article: 
(1)  Abandoned signs; 
(2)  Animated signs; 
(3)  Exterior electronic reader board or LED signs; 
(4)  Interior electronic reader board or LED signs, except interior signs that comply with the requirements of section 200(A)(8); 
(5)  Festoons, searchlights, twirling signs, pennants, flags, banners that do not meet Section 209.02(B), balloons, and inflatable objects; 
(6)  Snipe signs; 
(7)  Flashing signs; 
(8)  Revolving or rotating signs; 
(9)  Multi-prism or 3-dimensional signs; 
(10)  Portable signs, including A-frame or sandwich board signs, except as provided for elsewhere by this Article; 
(11)  Off-site signs, including billboard signs; 
(12)  Beacon lights; 
(13)  Vehicle signs or trailers when such are used exclusively for the purpose of displaying a sign; 
(14)  Signs which imitate or resemble official traffic or government signs and signals; 
(15)  Roof signs; 
(16)  Any sign which obstructs any firefighting equipment or presents a fire hazard; 
(17)  Any sign which obstructs any window, door, or opening used as a means of ingress and egress required for fire escape purposes; 
(18)  Any sign which obstructs an opening required for proper light and ventilation purposes; 
(19)  Any sign which emits audible sound, vapor, smoke, odor, particles, or gaseous matter; 
(20)  Any sign which violates community standards for obscenity; 
(21)  Signs attached or painted to piers or seawalls, except warning signs; 
(22)  Pavement markings, except those of a customary traffic nature; 
(23)  Any sign which obstructs, conceals, hides, or otherwise obscures from view any official traffic or government sign, signal or device; 
(24)  Any sign which has unshielded illuminated devices that produce glare or are a hazard or nuisance to motorists or occupants of adjacent properties; 
(25)  Unless otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful to erect, relocate, maintain, display, or use any sign in or upon any river, bay or other body of water within the limits of the City of Safety Harbor; 
(26)  Any sign which presents a potential traffic or pedestrian hazard, including signs which obstruct visibility; 
(27)  Signs which are erected upon or project over public rights-of-way, including sidewalks, except government signs or as otherwise provided by this Article; 
(28)  Window signage which exceeds the allowable area or which is displayed in residential zones; 
(29)  Any sign that is not specifically permitted by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 4, 8-1-2016) 
202.00 - Abandoned signs. 
(A)  When a business use of a parcel of land or a service is discontinued, or an off-site advertising sign ceases to display advertising matter, all signs or sign structures relating to the business use, service, or off-site advertising sign shall be removed by the sign owner, sign contractor, or landowner within ninety (90) days of the date of discontinuance. 
(B)  An abandoned sign is one which advertises an activity or purpose which is no longer conducted or that which has not been in use, or that which bears obsolete or no advertising copy for a period of at least ninety (90) days. 
(C)  When any sign is relocated, made inoperative, becomes obsolete, or removed for any reason, except for maintenance, all structural components, including the sign face and sign structure, shall be removed or relocated with the sign. All structural components of freestanding signs shall be removed to ground level. The structural components of all other signs, including painted wall signs, shall be removed back to the original building configuration. 
(D)  An abandoned sign is prohibited by this Article and shall be removed by the advertiser, sign owner, sign contractor, or landowner within fifteen (15) days after written notice has been provided by the City. If the advertiser; sign owner, lessee, sign contractor, or landowner fails to comply with said procedure, the City Manager shall cause to be removed such signs at the expense of the property owner, and may place in lien against the property for the cost of removing the sign. 
(E)  The frame or structure of an abandoned sign may not be required to be removed by the Building Official if it conforms to all applicable Sections of this Code and the City's building codes. 
203.00 - Maintenance of signs. 
(A)  All signs, supports, braces, guys, and anchors thereof shall be kept in good repair, refurbished and repaired from time to time, as necessary, and perpetually maintained in safe condition, free from deterioration, defective or missing parts, or peeling or faded paint, and able to withstand the wind pressure for which it was originally designed. Any sign not in compliance with this provision is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(B)  Weeds and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath and around the base of signs for a distance of ten (10) feet, and no rubbish or debris shall be permitted under or near such signs. 
(C)  The Building Official may order the repair of signs declared a nuisance; 
(D)  The Building Official through the City Manager, without notice, may cause any unsafe or insecure sign to be immediately removed if, in his opinion, the sign presents an immediate peril to the public health or safety. 
204.00 - Certain signs to be removed. 
(A)  The following signs shall be removed or made to conform to this Article within ninety (90) days from the effective date of this Code: 
(1)  Pennants, festoons, searchlights, flags, banners, and balloons or other gas-filled figures; 
(2)  Snipe signs; 
(3)  Flashing signs; 
(4)  Portable signs; 
(5)  Vehicle signs; 
(6)  Beacon lights; 
(7)  Nonpermitted temporary signs; 
(8)  Any sign, except government signs, located upon a public right-of-way; 
(9)  Illegal signs. 
(B)  In view of the inexpensive nature of these signs and the administrative burden which would be imposed by elaborate procedural prerequisites prior to removal, the Building Official is hereby given the authority to remove, or cause to be removed said signs in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Three (3) days written notice to the property owner or sign owner, or representative of the property or sign owner; 
(2)  Written notice of the removal to the property owner or sign owner within 14 days of removal of the sign and notice shall advise where the sign can be retrieved, and that if the sign is not retrieved within thirty (30) days, that it will be disposed of by the City; 
(3)  However, if the sign is on public property, and no party is identified as the owner of said sign, then no notice is required. 
(C)  The procedures set forth in this Section shall not apply to an illegal sign made of temporary material including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, plastic, or wood. Any such sign may be removed and disposed of without notice at any time. 
205.00 - Nonconforming signs. 
(A)  It is the intent of this Article to achieve the eventual elimination of nonconforming signs. 
205.01   Provisions-Nonconforming signs.
(A)  Nonconforming signs, except as otherwise provided by this Article, may be continued in operation in accordance with the regulations in effect at the time the sign was erected, provided that no nonconforming sign shall be: 
(1)  Changed to or replaced with another nonconforming sign including changing the sign face, except on changeable copy signs and billboards; 
(2)  Structurally altered so as to extend their useful life, except that normal maintenance may be permitted; 
(3)  Expanded in any manner; 
(4)  Increased in height; 
(5)  Relocated; or 
(6)  Modified in any way that would increase the degree of nonconformity. 
(B)  A renovation or redevelopment of the property on which a nonconforming sign is located which exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the assessed value of the property at the time of the improvement shall require that the sign be made to conform to the requirements of this Article. 
(C)  Any nonconforming sign which is destroyed or damaged to the extent of twenty-five (25%) percent or more of its replacement value shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of this Article. 
(D)  Existing signs which have been installed, constructed, placed or maintained in violation of any City, State, or federal law, statute or ordinance shall not qualify as a nonconforming sign. 
(E)  Existing signs to be removed as provided by Section 204.00 and abandoned signs as provided by Section 202.00 shall not be deemed nonconforming. 
206.00 - General sign regulations. 
(A)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Article, any permitted sign may contain noncommercial copy in lieu of any other copy. 
(B)  All freestanding signs shall be located in a landscaped area of at least eight (8) feet wide and containing no fewer than eighty (80) square feet. Landscaped areas should contain at least three (3) shrubs with the remaining area surfaced with grass, ground covers, or with at least two (2) inches of wood chips or bark. The landscaped area shall be curbed if located internal to the parking lot. 
(C)  For any sign which presently projects or is allowed to project over the public right-of-way under the terms of this Article, the owners shall waive any right to compensation it may have related to its use of the right-of-way should the City, state or other government agency ever determine that the area is needed for use by the City, state or other government agency. 
(D)  Signs shall be designed to complement the architectural design of the building, utilizing the same materials, colors, finishes and details. In addition to color, freestanding signs shall incorporate at least one (1) additional element (such as, but not necessarily limited to, building material, architectural feature) to reflect the architectural design of the building. 
206.01   Illumination and construction.
(A)  No floodlights shall be utilized as a part of a sign illumination system which shine or cause to shine light directly upon adjacent property. 
(B)  No sign shall reflect or emit a glaring light so as to impair the vision of others using a public right-of-way. 
(C)  Illuminated signs, including neon signs, shall not produce more than one foot-candle of illumination four (4) feet from the sign, when measured from the base of such sign. 
(D)  All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and designed to meet all applicable requirements of the City's building codes. 
206.02   Visibility obstructions.
(A)  There shall be no sign or obstruction of vision between the height of two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above grade in the required visibility triangle, except that poles not in excess of four (4) inches in diameter may be permitted with the approval of the City Engineer. 
(B)  Required visibility triangle shall be defined in accordance with the definition of visibility triangles provided in Section 37.00 of Article III, (Supplementary District Regulations). 
206.03   Protection of trees, utility facilities.
(A)  No signs, except permitted seasonal, commemorative, or special event, or government signs shall be erected or displayed on any shrub, rock formation, utility pole, fire hydrant, light standard, bridge, or other signs or sign supports. 
(B)  All signs shall be coordinated with landscape plans to identify and eliminate potential conflicts with existing and proposed trees. 
(C)  No signs shall be erected, displayed or attached on any tree. 
(D)  Grand opening and temporary signs may be placed on another sign or sign support on the site where the event is taking place. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 5, 8-1-2016) 
207.00 - Institutional signs. 
(A)  Institutional uses in residential zones shall be permitted one (1) onsite advertising sign per street frontage subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Maximum Sign Area: 30 square feet per sign face; 
(2)  Maximum Height: 8 feet; 
(3)  Minimum Setback: 5 feet from all property lines. 
(B)  Institutional uses in non-residential zones shall be permitted the same sign allowance as business establishments. 
(C)  Hospital related uses in the hospital facilities zone shall be permitted on-site signs subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Hospital identification/directory signs: 
a.  One freestanding campus entry sign adjacent to the Mease Drive entrance not to exceed 500 square feet per sign face or 25 feet in height. 
b.  One freestanding hospital identification sign on each outparcel fronting McMullen Booth Road not to exceed 140 square feet or 12 feet in height. 
c.  One freestanding hospital identification sign in front of the main building entrance to the hospital not to exceed 100 square feet per sign face or eight feet in height. 
d.  One freestanding directory sign at each building entrance not to exceed 75 square feet or 11 feet in height. 
(2)  Directional signs: 
a.  One directional sign at each driveway entrance from Mease Drive not to exceed 60 square feet per sign face or eight feet in height. 
b.  Other directional signs along internal drive aisles within the vehicular use area not to exceed 40 square feet or six feet in height. 
(3)  Wall signage for building identification/naming purposes shall not exceed 300 square feet or five (5) percent of the facade area per building face whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-19-2014) 
208.00 - On-site signs permitted in residential zones. 
208.01   Residential development signs.
(A)  A sign may be located at each entrance to a platted subdivision, mobile home park, multifamily project, or residential planned development. The sign may consist of a single sign with two (2) single-faced structures equal in size located on each side of the entranceway or one double-faced sign located in an entrance median, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Any individual firm, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity shall be responsible for perpetual maintenance of the subdivision sign and associated landscaped area; 
(2)  The maximum sign area shall be 24 square feet per sign face for a single sign and 24 square feet of aggregate area for two (2) single-faced structures excluding the area of fences or walls on which such sign is displayed; 
(3)  The maximum height shall be 6 feet when measured from the grade of the street nearest the base of the sign to the top of the sign; 
(4)  The minimum setback shall be: 
(a)  Located outside the required visibility triangle; 
(b)  Fifteen (15) feet from the perpendicular right-of-way line, when located in the median entrance of a street; 
(c)  A maintenance agreement shall be required for signs located within the public right-of-way when an active homeowner association exists. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 6, 8-1-2016) 
208.02   Nonconforming uses in residential zones.
(A)  One (1) wall or monument, nonilluminated sign, not exceeding 30 square feet in total sign area. 
209.00 - On-site signs in nonresidential zones. 
209.01   General regulations for freestanding signs.
(A)  All pole-mounted signs shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet measured from grade. 
(B)  Projection over a right-of-way shall be prohibited for all pole-mounted signs. 
(C)  One (1) freestanding pole-mounted or monument on-site advertising sign shall be permitted per street frontage per parcel. 
(D)  The maximum allowable sign area per sign face shall be based on linear feet of street frontage as follows: 
Street Frontage Maximum Sign Area Less than 100 feet 16 square feet 100-149.9 feet 32 square feet 150-199.9 feet 48 square feet 200 feet or more* 64 square feet  
* Except that freestanding signs associated with a shopping center with a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or more shall be limited to 120 square feet on the principal frontage and 100 square feet on the secondary frontage. 
(E)  The maximum sign height for a pole-mounted sign shall be fifteen (15) feet when located along an arterial roadway and twelve (12) feet along all other roads. The maximum sign height for a monument sign shall be ten (10) feet when located along an arterial roadway and eight (8) feet along all other roads. 
(F)  The minimum required setback for a freestanding sign shall be as follows: 
(1)  Outside the required visibility triangle; 
(2)  Five (5) feet from all property lines. 
(G)  The minimum clearance from primary power lines as required by the National Electric Safety Code shall be maintained. 
209.02   Wall-mounted signs.
(A)  Wall signage shall be located on the side(s) of the building facing a public street, sidewalk, or alley, or providing a customer entrance. For multitenant parcels, one (1) wall sign may be permitted on the side wall of the building with exposure to a public way for business identification signage of the individual establishments located in the building on which it is displayed. 
(B)  Wall-mounted signage shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the facade of the building on which it is located. No wall sign shall exceed eighty (80) percent of the width of the tenant space occupied by a business, with a minimum of ten (10) percent clear area on each outer edge of the tenant space. The aggregate sign area of wall signage shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet per business establishment; provided however, the Planning and Zoning Director may authorize an increase of up to sixty (60) additional square feet per business establishment on a parcel with no freestanding pole-mounted or monument sign or for an anchor tenant occupying a gross floor area of 40,000 square feet or more provided all other requirements of this section are met. A banner that is attached to a wall and within a sign cabinet shall be calculated as part of the total allowable sign area. 
(C)  Wall signs may not project beyond the roofline of the establishment to which the sign is attached. 
(D)  Wall signs may not project more than twelve (12) inches from the wall to which it is attached. 
(E)  Wall signs may project over a street right-of-way in the Community Redevelopment District, provided the extension is over a pedestrian sidewalk and the projection is at least eight (8) feet above grade. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 7, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 1-21-2014; Ord. No. 2014-09, § 2, 5-19-2014; Ord. No. 2016-19, § 7, 8-1-2016) 
209.03   Projecting signs as a substitute for freestanding signs.
(A)  One (1) projecting sign may be substituted for, but not used in conjunction with, a permitted freestanding sign provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The projecting sign does not project more than four (4) feet from the building wall to which it is attached and each sign face is not greater than eight (8) square feet. 
(2)  The projecting sign is not located above the roofline of the building, nor more than twenty-five (25) feet above the grade of the street. 
(3)  Projecting signs which project over any pedestrian way shall be elevated to a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet above the grade of the pedestrian way. 
(4)  Projecting signs may project over a street right-of-way in the Community Redevelopment District (CRD), provided the extension is over a pedestrian sidewalk and the vertical clearance is at least eight (8) feet above grade. 
210.00 - Marquee and awning signs. 
(A)  Marquee and awning signs shall be allowed for each establishment in nonresidential zoning districts subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  One (1) sign located on a marquee or awning shall be affixed flat to the surface and shall not rise in vertical dimension, above the marquee or awning. 
(2)  An identification sign may extend vertically below a marquee (not awnings) but may not exceed the dimensions of one (1) foot by six (6) feet, nor exceed the width of the marquee, whichever is less. 
(3)  Awning signs consisting of letters and/or an identification emblem, insignia, or other feature not exceeding nine (9) square feet may be placed anywhere on the awning. 
(4)  Marquee and awning signs shall be allowed in addition to any other sign or sign area permitted by this Article. 
(5)  Marquees and awnings may project over a street right-of-way in the Community Redevelopment District, provided the extension is over a pedestrian sidewalk. 
(6)  The vertical clearance for marquee and awning signs shall be at least eight (8) feet above grade. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 8, 8-1-2016) 
211.00 - Special purpose signs. 
211.01   Signs accessory to the sale of gasoline.
(A)  A separate sign advertising the price of gasoline shall be permitted at gasoline service stations. One (1) sign shall be permitted per street frontage located not closer than five (5) feet to the abutting street right-of-way. The size shall not exceed nine (9) square feet per sign face. In the event the sign is attached to the pole-mounted sign, then the sign shall be subject to the area provisions for freestanding signs. 
(B)  Signs which are placed on the top of gasoline pumps in order to provide required information to the public regarding price per gallon, type of fuel and octane rating are permitted, provided that such signs may not exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet per sign face. 
(C)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Article, pursuant to section 553.79(20), Florida Statutes (as may be amended from time to time) to the extent any regulation contained in this Article either: (1) conflicts with or impairs corporate trademarks, service marks, trade dress, logos, color patterns, design scheme insignia, image standards, or other features of corporate branding identity on real property or other improvements thereon used in activities conducted under chapter 526, Florida Statutes (Sales of Liquid Fuels; Brake Fluid); and/or (2) prevents signage advertising the retail price of gasoline from being clearly visible and legible to drivers of approaching motor vehicles from a vantage point on any lane of traffic in either direction on a roadway abutting the gas station premises and such signage otherwise meets height, width, and spacing standards for Series C, D, or E signs, as applicable, published in the latest edition of Standard Alphabets for Highway Signs published by the United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads, Office of Highway Safety; such regulation shall not be enforceable against such property so long as the property owner, or its duly authorized representative, first provides the City with evidence sufficient to demonstrate the conflict and/or impairment of the regulation at issue, or the prevention of clearly visible signage and compliance with height, width, and spacing standards for Series C, D, or E signs, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2019-02, § 3, 3-18-2019) 
211.02   Home occupations.
(A)  A maximum of one (1) nonilluminated on-site wall sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in area on the principal residential building not more than two (2) feet from an entrance shall be permitted. 
211.03   Menu signs.
(A)  One (1) menu sign for drive-through eating establishments shall be permitted per drive-through service lane provided the sign is set back 25 feet from the right-of-way or residentially zoned property and does not have a surface area exceeding forty (40) square feet. 
(B)  One (1) menu sign for walk up service limited to an aggregate sign area of nine (9) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 1-21-2014) 
211.04   Commercial directory signs.
(A)  Directory signs for the purpose of guiding pedestrians or motorists throughout the City including the Community Redevelopment District, shall be permitted. The surface area shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet and should incorporate a map or directions to increase the signs effectiveness, a complete listing of businesses in nonresidential districts shall be required. Such signs shall comply with the zoning district setback requirements. 
(B)  Directory signs for the purpose of guiding pedestrians throughout the Community Redevelopment District shall be permitted as follows: 
(1)  The surface area of directory signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet and shall include a multiple listing of businesses on the block where such sign is to be located; 
(2)  The signs shall only be erected and maintained by the City; 
(3)  The design and material shall be consistent throughout the District and shall be compatible with the landscaping, street lighting, street furniture and other streetscape improvements installed by the City as a part of the downtown redevelopment program. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 9, 8-1-2016) 
211.05   A-frame or sandwich board signs.
(A)  A-frame or sandwich board signs shall be permitted in the Restricted Commercial (C-1A) District and Community Redevelopment District subject to the following: 
(1)  The signs shall be located directly in front of the business frontage either next to the building face or at the street side of the sidewalk by newstands, streetlights or other amenities. During events, when Main Street is closed, an A-frame sign not exceeding 25" X 45" advertising a minimum of two businesses may be placed on Main Street for side street businesses located between 2nd Street N. and 2nd Street S. No more than one of this type of A-frame sign may be placed in each intersection. 
(2)  Only one sign shall be permitted per business address. 
(3)  The sign shall be removed from the right-of-way at the end of the business day and not left outdoors overnight. 
(4)  The sign shall not exceed 2 feet wide by 31/2 feet high. 
(5)  A-frame signs shall be constructed of durable materials (steel, iron, metal, wood, or corrugated plastic) and shall be maintained in good condition. The use of cardboard, paper, canvas or similar impermanent material is prohibited. Synthetic materials such as chalkboard and whiteboard are acceptable. 
(6)  The use of metallic or fluorescent paint shall be prohibited, and all permanent lettering must be of professional quality. Creativity is encouraged, and all signs shall be maintained and kept in good repair. 
(7)  The signs shall not be lighted. 
(8)  The signs shall not interfere with streetlights, street trees, utility poles, benches, ramps, fire hydrants or other structures, and shall not impede traffic visibility. 
(9)  The content shall be limited to the name and trademark of the business establishment, a listing of products for sale and prices, or the advertisement of special products and prices. 
(10)  The signs shall not advertise a business or products, goods and services located on another property. 
(11)  Signs located on the sidewalk shall not impede pedestrian traffic, shall not cause the minimum accessible path to be less than 3 feet in width, and shall not interfere with the turning movements of a wheelchair. 
(12)  A temporary sign permit is required prior to the installation of the sign when it is placed in a public right-of-way. Only one temporary sign permit for an A-frame sign is allowed per business and such permit is not transferable. Permits are valid for one calendar year from the date of its issuance. 
(13)  If the sign is to be located within the public right-of-way, the business owners must agree to indemnify the City from any and all liability arising out of the placement of the sign in a public right-of-way. The business owner also must provide the City with proof of a minimum general liability insurance of $100,000.00 per person, $200,000.00 per occurrence in a form satisfactory to the City Manager, and indicating the City as an additional insured. 
(14)  A sketch including the dimensions, content, materials, and location of the A-frame sign must be attached to the permit application. The permit application must be approved and signed by the City's Planning and Zoning staff before the A-frame sign may be displayed. If a sign is displayed prior to obtaining an A-frame sign permit, the application may be denied. 
(15)  A-frame signs placed in violation of this section will result in the immediate removal of the sign and the business' temporary sign permit privileges will be revoked upon the second violation for the remainder of the permit year. A-frame signs displayed without approved permits shall be disposed of by the City at the business owner's expense. After the first violation, the City will issue a written warning to the business owner. Upon the second violation and thereafter, the business owner will be fined $150.00 for each occurrence. 
(16)  A-frame signs within the public right-of-way may be moved or removed by the City for municipal purposes, including for the benefit of the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, §§ 10, 20, 8-1-2016) 
Editor's note- Sec. 20 of Ord. No. 2016-19, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 211.05, time and temperature devices, which derived from the original codification. Sec. 10 of said ordinance renumbered § 211.06 as § 211.05. 
212.00 - Temporary signs.[1] 
212.01   Types of temporary signs.
(A)  Temporary signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this Article, provided that all other applicable requirements of this Article are met. 
(B)  A sign that otherwise requires a permit under this code shall not be considered a temporary sign. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 13, 8-1-2016) 
212.02   Allowance of temporary signs.
(A)  Each address within the City shall be allowed temporary signage at any given time pursuant to Section 212.04(A)(6). Each individual sign shall be no more than 2 square feet in size and each address shall have no more than 2 total temporary signs. 
(B)  Beginning 90 days prior to and extending no more than 7 days following any election in which residents of the City are eligible to vote temporary signage shall be allowed up to a maximum of 5 signs per address. Each sign shall be no more than 10 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 14, 8-1-2016) 
212.03   Construction signs.
(A)  A temporary sign displaying the name of a construction company, contractor, builder, architect, engineer, or similar message shall be allowed without a permit in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1)  The sign is located on a construction site which has a valid building permit; 
(2)  The sign area shall not exceed 16 square feet per street frontage per site in residential zones and 32 square feet in nonresidential zones; 
(3)  All signs shall not exceed a maximum height of 6 feet; 
(4)  All signs shall be removed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or when construction activity ceases for a period of ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 11, 8-1-2016) 
212.04   Grand openings, new business, or promotional signs.
(A)  A temporary sign announcing a grand opening, new business, special or promotion shall be allowed subject to obtaining a permit in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1)  The sign is on site; 
(2)  The sign, including banners, does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in aggregate area; 
(3)  A minimum setback of five (5) feet from all property lines is required; 
(4)  The maximum height shall be 8 feet; 
(5)  The sign shall not be illuminated; 
(6)  The sign shall not be erected more than a total of fourteen (14) days within a three-month period; 
(7)  Flags shall not be subject to the maximum sign area; 
(8)  Balloons, inflatable objects, portable signs and pennants shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 15, 8-1-2016) 
212.05   Real estate signs.
(A)  Real Estate signs may be erected in all districts without a permit in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1)  The property is for sale, rent or lease; 
(2)  The sign is on site; 
(3)  Multiple listing strips, in addition to the maximum sign area, broker identification strips and sold signs are allowed when attached to a real estate sign; 
(4)  Signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the date when ownership has changed or the property is no longer for sale, rent or lease; 
(5)  The maximum sign area shall be limited to six (6) square feet with a maximum sign height of six (6) feet for residential districts; 
(6)  The maximum sign area for other properties shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet for properties less than two (2) acres, and thirty-two (32) square feet for properties of two (2) acres or more in size; 
(7)  A sign shall be allowed for each street frontage; 
(8)  The sign shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 16, 8-1-2016) 
212.06   Open house signs.
(A)  Open House Signs may be erected in all districts subject to the following: 
(1)  The maximum sign area shall not exceed six (6) square feet; 
(2)  Not more than one (1) sign per street frontage is permitted; 
(3)  The signs shall only be permitted on those days when there is an open house; 
(4)  Directional off-site signs shall not be located upon the public right-of- way; 
(5)  The sign shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 17, 8-1-2016) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Secs. 11-17 of Ord. No. 2016-19, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, amended § 212.00 in its entirety to read as herein set out. 

213.00 - Appeals. 
(A)  The Board of Appeals is authorized to grant variances from the strict application of the requirements of this Article, in accordance with the standards and provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 18, 8-1-2016) 
213.01   Authorized variances.
(A)  Variances may only be granted from the following restrictions: 
(1)  The amount of sign area; 
(2)  The required sign setbacks or location, provided no change to the required visibility triangle is involved; 
(3)  The required sign height, provided a finding is made that the variance is necessary to clear an obstruction or interference by excessive grades, buildings, bridges, trees, or other related obstacles. However, an existing sign shall not be considered an obstruction; 
(4)  Variances which would permit the use of signs prohibited by this Article; 
(5)  Variances which would increase the number of allowable signs or change the permitted types of signs. 
213.02   Unauthorized variances.
(A)  In no event shall variances be granted for the following: 
(1)  Variances in any way related to nonconforming, obsolete, or abandoned signs; 
(2)  Variances which purport to modify any definition of this Article; 
(3)  Variances for sign location which would require the removal of trees. 
214.00 - Miscellaneous. 
214.01   Permitted commercial signs.
(A)  Any permitted commercial sign is allowed to include non-commercial speech on the sign. Nothing in this Article XII is intended to in any way hinder the placement of non-commercial content on any legally permitted commercial sign. 
(Ord. No. 2016-19, § 19, 8-1-2016) 
214.02   Severability.
(A)  If any one or more provisions of this Article XII is held to be invalid, illegal, or unenforceable in any respect by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity, legality, and enforceability of the remaining provisions hereof shall not in any way be affected or impaired thereby and this Article XII shall be treated as though the invalidated portion(s) had never been a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2106-19, § 20, 8-1-2016) 
215.00-223.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

224.00 - General provisions. 
(A)  No development activity shall be undertaken unless it conforms to the provisions of this Code. 
(B)  The administration and enforcement of this Code shall be the responsibility of the Director of Planning and Zoning for the City. 
(C)  The duties of the Community Development Director shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To determine compliance with the relevant provisions of this Code. 
(2)  To coordinate the required requests for development order approval contained in this Code. 
(3)  To report to the City Manager, City Attorney, and City Commission regarding the administration of this Code. 
(4)  To notify persons responsible for violations of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(5)  To maintain written records of all official actions related to the administration of this Code. 
(6)  To receive applications for, forward to the appropriate bodies, and review for compliance with all the applicable provisions of this Code for development order approval related to, but not limited to, the following requests: 
(a)  Amendments to the Official Zoning Atlas; 
(b)  Amendments to the Land Use Plan; 
(c)  Certificates of Concurrency; 
(d)  Conditional Uses; 
(e)  Site Plans; 
(f)  Subdivisions; 
(g)  Variances and Appeals. 
(7)  Prepare and submit to the City Commission for its consideration a schedule of fees. 
(8)  Periodically review the provisions of this Code to evaluate the need for updating the provisions of this Code. 
(9)  To provide administrative, technical, and consultative assistance to the Board of Appeals, Planning and Zoning Board, and Historic Incentives Board. 
(10)  To perform such other duties and functions required to administer the provisions of this Code. 
(D)  Every application required under the provisions of this Code, unless otherwise specified, shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City. No application shall be deemed complete unless all the information and materials required by this Code and the City have been submitted. 
(E)  The Building Official shall administer the building, construction, and sign codes of the City and determine that conditions attached to all development orders are met prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07, § 2, 6-6-2016) 
225.00 - Public notice requirements. 
(A)  No public hearing shall be held unless the required notice has been satisfied and supporting documentation of such is in the applicable file. 
(B)  All hearings shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify, either in person, or in writing, or by an authorized agent or attorney. 
(C)  The hearing body may prescribe the exact procedures for the conduct of hearings; however, the order of public hearings shall be generally as follows: 
(1)  Statement of subject matter; 
(2)  Comments by staff; 
(3)  Applicant presentation; 
(4)  Public comment for; 
(5)  Public comment against; 
(6)  Rebuttal; 
(7)  Closure of public comment; 
(8)  Questions by the Board; 
(9)  Motion; 
(10)  Vote; and 
(11)  Findings of Fact. 
(D)  Cross examination of witnesses by the applicant or a representative of any organized opposition shall be permitted. 
(E)  All findings of fact shall be based upon the evidence of record. 
(F)  A hearing may adjourn to a date certain within 60 days without the necessity of additional notice. 
(G)  A hearing adjourned to a date uncertain or to a date not within 60 days shall require additional notice. 
(H)  Official minutes shall be kept of all public hearings. Copies may be made available to the public upon request. 
(I)  An agenda shall be posted in a conspicuous location approximately seven (7) days prior to the hearing. 
(J)  All legal notice, whether by publication or mail, shall contain substantially the following information: 
(1)  Who is conducting the hearing; 
(2)  Date, time, and place of all scheduled hearings; 
(3)  The subject matter to be discussed; 
(4)  Where the application or subject matter may be inspected by the public; 
(5)  That interested parties may appear and be heard; 
(6)  That written comments will become part of the record; 
(7)  That the hearing may be continued as necessary; and 
(8)  That transcripts of the proceedings are required if an affected party wishes to appeal. 
(K)  Written legal notice shall be constituted by the following: 
(1)  Mailed notice to each property owner or authorized agent whose real property is the subject of a request; 
(2)  Mailed notice to each property owner within 500 feet of the entire contiguous property which is owned by the person or persons whose property is to be affected by the request, regardless of what portion of such land is involved in the request; 
(3)  Written legal notice shall be by first class mail; 
(4)  Determination of property ownership shall be by reference to the latest available tax records of the Pinellas County Property Appraiser's Office; 
(5)  Written legal notice shall occur a minimum of seven (7) days prior to the first and second scheduled hearing on the request, and shall include the dates of any subsequent scheduled hearings. 
(L)  Any interested individual, group, agency or government may register with the City Clerk to receive a copy of all written legal notices of all public hearings scheduled by the City under the Land Development Code. This subsection shall not require the City to provide a copy of legal notices pertaining to individual parcels of property. 
(M)  Where required by this Code, legal notice publication shall occur as follows: 
(1)  In a newspaper of general circulation as defined by Chapter 50.031, Florida Statutes; 
(2)  Legal notice publication shall occur approximately fourteen (14) days with a minimum of five (5) days prior to the scheduled hearing on the request. 
(N)  Ordinance publication shall occur in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 166.041, Florida Statutes. 
(O)  Land use plan amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be noticed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(P)  Amendments initiated by the City to the Official Zoning Atlas or the text of this Code shall be noticed as required by Section 166.041, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(Q)  Absence of the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent at any hearing may constitute grounds for a continuance or deferral at the discretion of the acting Board. 
(R)  In addition to the public notice requirements of other Sections of this Code, the posting of property shall be required for all land use plan or zoning atlas amendments, conditional use applications and variance applications. The posting shall occur a minimum of five (5) days prior to the scheduled hearing on the request. Postings shall not be required for City initiated amendments which constitute greater than five percent (5%) of the total land area of the City. 
226.00 - Amendments. 
(A)  Amendments to this Code or the Comprehensive Plan shall follow the procedures established by this Section, which supplement the mandatory requirements of State law. 
(B)  An amendment may be initiated as follows: 
(1)  Atlas amendments may be initiated by the property owner of record, or an authorized agent of the property owner of record. 
(2)  The City Commission may initiate an atlas or text amendment by motion after considering its merits at a public meeting. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Board may initiate an atlas or text amendment by adopting a resolution expressing their intent. 
(4)  The City Manager or Planning and Zoning Director may initiate a text amendment in order to update this Code where necessary. 
(5)  The property owners of an area may request an atlas amendment by filing a petition by the owners of 50 percent or more of the area involved with the City Manager. The City Commission shall consider the merits of said petition at a public meeting and initiate or not initiate the request by motion. 
226.01   Procedure for amendments.
(A)  Application for amendments shall be filed with the City Clerk on forms provided by the Planning and Zoning Director and shall include the required fee established by this Code. 
(B)  The Director shall forward all applications to the City's Technical Review Committee (TRC) for an administrative and completeness review to determine compliance with the provisions of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable building codes. 
(C)  Upon receiving a determination from the Technical Review Committee (TRC) that the application is complete and ready for processing the City Clerk shall notice the application for public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Board and City Commission. 
(D)  Notice for public hearing shall constitute written legal notice, and legal notice publication in accordance with the requirements of this Article. 
(E)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application for the purpose of submitting a recommendation to the City Commission. The recommendation shall contain any provisions of this Code pertaining to the request and determine compliance with those provisions, state the policy considerations of the Comprehensive Plan pertaining to the request and determine compliance with those provisions, and shall include written comments filed pertaining to the application and comments entered at the public hearing pertaining to the application. 
(F)  The recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Board shall be for approval, approval with modifications, or denial; and shall include its reasons for denial. 
(G)  The City Commission shall review the application and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board and render a decision regarding same. Approval shall be in the form of an Ordinance. 
(H)  No amendment shall be recommended for approval or approved without an affirmative vote for a majority of the full membership of the Board rendering the decision. 
(I)  Recommendations for approval with modifications, or an action of approval with modifications shall not involve a greater land area or a more intensive classification without the proper renotification for an additional public hearing before the Board rendering the decision. 
(J)  Any application may itself be amended prior to public notice by the property owner, authorized agent of the property owner, or the City in the case of a City initiated application. 
(K)  Any application may be withdrawn at any time. A request for withdrawal shall be made in writing to the Planning and Zoning Director. 
(L)  An application seeking action identical to a prior application that was denied cannot be filed for a period of one (1) year from the date the denial became final. 
226.02   Amending the comprehensive plan.
(A)  Any application which includes an amendment to the Future Land Use Map Series of the Comprehensive Plan shall follow the procedures set forth by Section 226.01, Subsections (A) through (F), thence continue the process of this Section as outlined by Subsection (B) through (F) below, except as authorized otherwise by Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, or the Pinellas Planning Council (PPC) Countywide Rules. 
(B)  Upon review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Board the City Commission shall hold a transmittal public hearing for the purpose of making a recommendation to the Pinellas Planning Council (PPC) and State Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO) or its successor entity. 
(C)  Upon affirmative action by the City Commission the Director shall submit same application to the Pinellas Planning Council (PPC) for review in accordance with the procedures established by the Pinellas Planning Council (PPC) Countywide Rules. 
(D)  Upon affirmative action by the Pinellas Planning Council (PPC) the Director shall submit same application to the State Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO), or its successor entity, in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 163, Florida Statutes. 
(E)  Upon affirmative action by the Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO), or its successor entity, the Director shall submit same application to the City Commission with an updated summary of all action for final adoption. 
(F)  Comprehensive Plan amendments directly related to proposed small scale development activities as defined by Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, may be presented to the City Commission for final adoption prior to transmittal of the application to the State Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO), or its successor entity. The procedure for this option shall be in accordance with Chapter 163, Florida Statutes and any rules established by the State Department of Economic Opportunity (DEO), or its successor entity. 
(G)  Notice of public hearing shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Article and Chapter 163, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, § 2, 12-17-2018) 
226.03   Standards for review of amendments.
(A)  No amendment shall be recommended for approval or receive a final action of approval unless a positive finding, based upon substantial competent evidence either presented at a public hearing held by the Board or reviewed personally by the Board members is made on each of the following standards: 
(1)  Conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  The available uses to which the property may be put are appropriate to the property in question and are compatible with the existing and planned uses in the area. 
(3)  The amendment is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of all Elements of the City Comprehensive Plan. 
(4)  The amendment will not result in significant adverse impacts to the environment or historical resources. 
(5)  The amendment will not create an isolated district unrelated to the scale and character of adjoining land uses. 
(6)  The amendment will not adversely affect adjoining property values. 
(7)  The amendment will not adversely impact nor exceed the capacity or the fiscal ability of the City to provide available public facilities, including transportation, water and sewer, solid waste, drainage, recreation, education, fire protection, library service and other similar public facilities. Compliance with the adopted Levels of Service standards can be demonstrated if necessary. 
(8)  The amendment shall provide for efficient and orderly development considering the impact upon growth patterns and the cost to the City to provide public facilities. 
227.00 - Annexations. 
(A)  Upon annexation the area annexed shall be subject to all laws, ordinances, and regulations in force in the City and shall be entitled to the same privileges and benefits of other parts of the City. 
(B)  The area annexed shall be subject to the regulations of the Pinellas County land use plan and zoning code until the area is zoned and designated with a land use district by the City to comply with its Comprehensive Plan. 
227.01   Compliance of annexations with the city/county interlocal planning agreement.
(A)  The property subject of an annexation may be zoned and designated with a land use district after annexation provided the district shown in the City's Future Land Use Map Series and proposed zoning is equal to or less intensive than the restrictions of the current County designations for same property. 
(B)  Existing or proposed designations more intensive than the restrictions of the current County designations shall require the processing of a zoning and land use plan amendment in accordance with the procedures contained in this Article. 
228.00 - Conditional uses. 
(A)  Conditional uses shall be established by the use restrictions of the various zoning districts in this Code and shall be subject to the approval procedures of this Section. 
(B)  All conditional uses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Site plan approval in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Compliance with the use, dimensional and other restrictions of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(4)  Compliance with the provisions of the City Comprehensive Plan. 
(C)  In connection with the approval of any Conditional Use the City Commission may make the granting conditional upon such restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Code and the Comprehensive Plan. Violation of such conditions shall be deemed a violation of this Code and shall be enforced as such. 
(D)  Applications for conditional use approval shall be filed with the City Clerk on forms provided by the Planning and Zoning Director and shall include the required fee established by this Code. 
(E)  The Director shall forward all applications to the City's Technical Review Committee (TRC) for administrative and completeness review to determine compliance with the provisions of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable building codes. 
(F)  Upon receiving a determination from the Technical Review Committee (TRC) that the application is complete and ready for processing the City Clerk shall notice the application for public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Board and City Commission. 
(G)  Notice of public hearing shall constitute written legal notice. 
(H)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application for the purpose of submitting a recommendation to the City Commission. A recommendation shall contain any provisions of this Code pertaining to the request and determine compliance with those provisions, state the policy considerations of the Comprehensive Plan pertaining to the request and determine compliance with those provisions, and shall include written comments filed pertaining to the application and oral comments entered at the public hearing pertaining to the application. 
(I)  The recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Board shall be for approval, approval with stipulations, or denial; and shall indicate reasons for denial. 
(J)  The City Commission shall review the application and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board. Approval by the City Commission shall be in the form of a Resolution containing all stipulations of approval. 
(K)  Approval of a conditional use shall be by a majority of those Board members voting on the application. 
(L)  Any application may be withdrawn at any time. A request for withdrawal shall be made in writing to the Planning and Zoning Director. 
(M)  An application seeking action identical to a prior application that was denied cannot be filed for a period of one (1) year from the date the denial became final. 
228.01   Standards for review of conditional uses.
(A)  No conditional use shall be recommended for approval or receive a final action of approval unless a positive finding, based upon substantial competent evidence either presented at a public hearing held by the Board or reviewed personally by the Board members is made on each of the following standards: 
(1)  Conformance with the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  The use to which the property may be put is appropriate to the property in question and is compatible with existing and planned uses in the area. 
(3)  The conditional use is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of all Elements of the City Comprehensive Plan. 
(4)  The conditional use will not result in significant adverse impacts to the environment or historical resources. 
(5)  The conditional use will not adversely affect adjoining property values. 
(6)  The conditional use will not adversely impact nor exceed the capacity or the fiscal ability of the City to provide available public facilities, including transportation, water and sewer, solid waste, drainage, recreation, education, fire protection and emergency services, police protection, library service and other similar public facilities. Compliance with the adopted Levels of Service standards can be demonstrated if necessary. 
(7)  The conditional use shall provide for efficient and orderly development considering the impact upon growth patterns and the cost to the City to provide public facilities. 
229.00 - Site plans. 
(A)  Site plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of any building permit, public works construction permit, Certificate of Occupancy or Occupational License, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The approval of a Subdivision in accordance with the requirements of Article XI of this Code except for minor subdivisions involving the creation of two lots from a single parcel of land specified under Section 184.06(B). 
(2)  The establishment or expansion of any conditional use. 
(3)  The establishment, expansion, or change of any use, activity or structure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 229.00 through 229.05. 
(B)  Prior to application for site plan approval a pre-application conference with the Planning and Zoning Department staff is recommended. 
229.01   Site plan exemptions.
(A)  The activities and improvements listed below shall be specifically exempt from the requirement to obtain site plan approval in accordance with the provisions of Sections 229.00 through 229.04: 
(1)  The installation of mobile homes and recreational vehicles in mobile home and recreational vehicle parks where the infrastructure is installed and site plan approval has been previously granted and has not expired. 
(2)  Where Final Development Plan approval has been granted in accordance with the provisions of Article V of this Code. 
(3)  One- and two-family dwellings on a lot of record or in an approved and constructed subdivision. 
(4)  Any change of use to existing structures when such change requires no addition to the gross floor area. 
(5)  Temporary uses established pursuant to the requirements of this Code. 
(6)  Additions, improvements, or alterations to existing uses and structures when such changes result in a one-time only increase in gross floor area of 500 square feet or less and do not require City Commission approval under Section 229.03. 
(7)  Any request for Sign Permit in accordance with the provisions of Article XII of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 2, 6-18-2018) 
229.02   Site plan contents.
(A)  All site plans shall be prepared under the direction of a Florida Registered Engineer and sealed by same. 
(B)  All site plans shall conform to the following minimum provisions, unless determined by the Director that certain provisions are unnecessary to comply with the terms of this Code: 
(1)  All required information shall be presented on sheets no larger than twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. 
(2)  Drawings may be presented on one (1) or more sheets to clearly show the information required. If a drawing is prepared on more than one (1) sheet, match lines shall clearly show where the sheets join. All sheets shall be consecutively numbered, and must show the particular number of that sheet and the total number of sheets included. 
(3)  All lettering shall be neat and legible, and a minimum of 3/32 " in height. 
(4)  All dimensions shall be feet and decimals of a foot. 
(5)  All drawings shall have a north arrow. 
(6)  Final Site Plans shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals sixty feet (1" = 60') or larger, provided that the Director may approve a smaller scale for large projects. All drawings shall show the scale at which they are drawn. 
(7)  All drawings shall show the date they were drawn, and the date of any revisions. 
(8)  Any legal description of the property, and the citation and general description of any existing covenants, easements and rights-of-way affecting the use and development of the property shall be provided. 
(9)  An accurate vicinity map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one mile (1" = 1 mile) shall be provided. 
(10)  An accurate boundary survey sealed by a Registered Surveyor shall be provided. 
(11)  The name, location and width of existing or platted streets and street rights-of-way within or contiguous to the site shall be provided. 
(12)  The location size and depth of underground power and phone lines, sewers, water mains, storm drains, and other underground facilities and utility easements within or contiguous to the site shall be provided. 
(13)  The location and size of easements for all above ground utilities, such as electric power lines, within and adjoining the site shall be provided. 
(14)  The location and nature of existing land uses, historic sites and structures, buildings, and existing zoning shall be provided. 
(15)  Open Space, recreation, and public areas, including the locations, type, and area of all open spaces, parks, recreational areas, school sites and similar areas of facilities on the property, including the percent of open space provided shall be shown. 
(16)  Plans for signs, if any, including the location, type, height, area, and proposed lighting shall be shown. 
(17)  The method and required improvements for sanitary sewer service and potable water supply shall be provided. 
(18)  The location of proposed fire hydrants and systems shall be provided. 
(19)  The location and type of all proposed electric and communication lines shall be provided. 
(20)  The location, size, and type of all stormwater management facilities shall be provided. 
(21)  Drainage flow and calculations signed and sealed by an engineer shall be provided. 
(22)  Type and location of any erosion and sedimentation controls shall be provided. 
(23)  The location, description, and terms of any proposed easements, reservations, or dedications, together with any necessary legal instruments shall be provided. 
(24)  Date, scale, north arrow, and legend shall be shown. 
(25)  Total site area including upland area and submerged area shall be provided. 
(26)  A topographic survey signed and sealed by a registered engineer, architect, or surveyor. 
(27)  A tree survey reviewed and approved by a certified Arborist with an overlay of the proposed development and showing the following: 
(a)  Location of all Protected Trees, tree number that corresponds with the number on the aluminum tag placed on the tree, botanical and common names of all trees, and DBH of each tree on the site and within 25 feet of the property line; 
(b)  The location of all proposed structures, driveways, parking areas, and other improvements; 
(c)  The designation of all trees to remain, and all trees to be removed; 
(d)  Proposed grade changes which might adversely affect or endanger any Protected Tree(s), with specification on how to maintain Protected Trees; 
(e)  The size of all tree canopies; 
(f)  The location of the drip line and critical root zone for all trees; and 
(h)  Tree Condition Rating for Protected Trees assigned by the City Arborist in accordance with Section 153.05(3). 
(28)  A statement as to why the Protected Tree(s) is (are) proposed to be removed. 
(29)  A statement showing how trees not proposed for removal are to be protected during land clearing and construction. 
(30)  A statement of intent to physically replace trees that are required to be replaced pursuant to Section 153.07 on the site or submit a written request for optional participation to the City Tree Bank, as further outlined in Section 153.06 of this Code. 
(31)  Existing contours and proposed grades at one foot intervals shall be shown. 
(32)  Flood zone and required first floor elevation (if more than one flood zone provide contours on survey) shall be provided. 
(33)  Complete screening details, including fences or walls shall be provided. 
(34)  Landscaping provided by size, type, spacing, and location shall be shown. 
(35)  The method of irrigation shall be provided. 
(36)  Percentage of interior landscaping shall be provided. 
(37)  Percentage of open space (impermeable surface) shall be provided. 
(38)  Surrounding land use shall be shown. 
(39)  Surrounding zoning shall be shown. 
(40)  Site zoning shall be shown. 
(41)  All existing and proposed water/sewer lines shall be shown. 
(42)  Existing fire hydrant locations within 500 feet shall be provided. 
(43)  Lot dimensions shall be shown. 
(44)  Required and proposed setback dimensions shall be shown. 
(45)  Gross floor area by type for nonresidential uses shall be provided. 
(46)  Gross density for residential uses and number of units shall be provided. 
(47)  The proposed building height shall be provided. 
(48)  Proposed streets and street rights-of-way (give easement width for private streets) shall be provided. 
(49)  Required right-of-way needs under the Comprehensive Plan and Section 150.00 of this Code shall be provided. 
(50)  Street names or numbers shall be shown. 
(51)  Proposed phasing plan by anticipated commencement and completion date (on plans or by letter) shall be provided for all projects with more than one phase. 
(52)  Dumpster location and screening shall be shown. 
(53)  Required parking calculations (parking provided and required) shall be provided. 
(54)  Size and location of required loading shall be shown. 
(55)  Required (proposed) sidewalks shall be shown. 
(56)  Driveways and access improvements shall be shown. 
(57)  Location and type of lighting shall be shown. 
(58)  Description of the maintenance of common facilities for residential projects shall be provided. 
(59)  Construction drawings shall be submitted to the Engineering Department after site plan approval. 
(60)  Any other information deemed necessary to comply with the provisions of this Code as determined by the Director. 
(C)  Proof of ownership shall be provided at the time of site plan application. 
(D)  An affidavit of ownership and designation of an authorized agent shall be provided at the time of site plan application. 
(E)  Compliance with the concurrency management requirements of Article IX shall be demonstrated by the applicant for site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 3, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2019-02, § 2, 3-18-2019) 
229.03   Site plan procedure.
(A)  The expansion of an activity or use which exceeds the thresholds of the following schedule shall be approved by the City Commission: 
Expansion in Square Feet Percentage of Existing Structure 0 to 10,000 30% 10,001 to 20,000 25% 20,001 to 30,000 20% In excess of 30,000 15%  
(B)  The expansion of an activity or use which does not exceed the thresholds of the above schedule or otherwise requires the approval of a site plan may be approved by the Technical Review Committee (TRC). 
(C)  Applications for Site Plan approval shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Department on forms provided by the Planning and Zoning Director, shall include the required fee established by this Code, and shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  The Director shall forward all applications to the City's Technical Review Committee (TRC) for an administrative and completeness review to determine compliance with the provisions of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable building codes. Approval may be granted by the TRC where authorized by this Code. In no case shall the TRC convene more than three times on a single application. If the applicant fails to respond to TRC comments within 90 days from the date a TRC letter is issued, the Planning and Zoning Director may close the file based on insufficient progress. The applicant may appeal the Planning and Zoning Director's decision to the City Commission by filing a letter to the City Clerk within thirty days of being informed that the application is no longer being considered. A new application may be filed at any time after a file is closed. 
(2)  Where approval by the TRC is not authorized by this Code, the Director shall, upon receiving a determination from the TRC that the application is complete and ready for processing, forward the application to the Planning and Zoning Board. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall review the application for compliance with the provisions of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan, and the City's building codes and shall make a written recommendation to the City Commission. 
(4)  The City Commission shall review the application and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board. The City Commission shall approve, approve with stipulations, or deny the application. 
(5)  All Board actions shall carry by a majority vote of those members voting on the application. 
229.04   Standards for site plan review.
(A)  No site plan shall be recommended for approval or receive a final action of approval unless said application has been found to comply with all of the following: 
(1)  All the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(2)  The Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  The City's concurrency management system. 
(4)  All other applicable City building codes. 
229.05   Site plan expirations, extensions, and revisions.
(A)  Approval of site plans and phasing plans shall expire if: (1) one (1) year after the date of site plan approval, a building permit has not been granted; or (2) one (1) year after the date of site plan approval a building permit has been granted but construction has not commenced; or (3) if construction begins but more than one (1) year has elapsed without any construction activity, unless an alternate phasing plan with alternate commencement and completion dates has been approved by the City Commission or an extension of time pursuant to Section 229.05(B) has been granted. 
(B)  One (1) extension for up to one (1) additional year may be granted by the original approving authority for good cause. The review of extension requests shall include an evaluation of the effect of new or current regulations on the project. Requests for a time extension shall be submitted a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date in writing. 
(C)  Minor revisions to an approved site plan may be authorized by the Technical Review Committee (TRC) upon the review of a revised site plan submitted by the original applicant. Major revisions shall only be authorized in the same manner as originally approved. The TRC shall determine if the proposed revisions are minor or major based upon the criteria provided in this subsection. The following criteria shall identify a major modification: 
(1)  Any increase in density; 
(2)  Any increase in floor area exceeding 500 square feet or the threshold of City Commission approval under Section 229.03; 
(3)  Any change in an approved land use for an undeveloped property or building; 
(4)  Any change in an approved land use for an existing building requiring exterior structural modifications and/or additional parking; 
(5)  Any change in project phasing; 
(6)  Any change which would require an amendment to approval conditions; 
(7)  Structural alterations significantly affecting the basic size and form of the building(s); 
(8)  Any reduction in the amount of open space of more than five (5) percent or any substantial change in the location or characteristics of open space; 
(9)  Any increase in traffic generation by more than ten (10) percent; 
(10)  Any change in structure height; 
(11)  Any change in the number of vehicular access points. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11, § 3, 6-18-2018) 
230.00 - Construction drawings. 
(A)  Where construction drawings are required by this Code or any applicable building code the drawings shall be submitted to, reviewed by, and approved by the Engineering Department in a form and procedure required by the City Engineer. 
(B)  Construction drawings shall comply with the provisions of this Code, the applicable building code and the conditions of any previous approvals granted by the City. 
231.00 - Building permits. 
(A)  Valid building and public works construction permits are required prior to the commencement of any development activity. 
(B)  Applications for building and public works construction permit shall be made through the Building Official or Engineering Department. Construction permits shall only be issued after authorization by the City Engineer. 
(C)  No application for building or public works construction permit shall be approved unless it is accompanied by the minimum permit fee established by resolution of the City Commission, and includes the following minimum information: 
(1)  An approved site plan or subdivision where such are required. 
(2)  The application for building permit complies with all previous stipulations of approval. 
(3)  The proposed development complies with the provisions of this Code, the City's concurrency management system, the Official Zoning Atlas designation, and the Future Land Use Map Series designations. 
(4)  A valid tree removal permit or notarized affidavit of no tree removal or no tree removal verification where required, and the conditions of said permit. 
(5)  The City's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, the requirements of FEMA, and the latest FIRM maps. 
(6)  A copy of approved SWFWMD permits. 
(7)  A copy of all applicable approvals from the Pinellas County Health Department. 
(8)  All necessary variances have been obtained and a copy of the approval letter is submitted. 
(9)  A copy of a nonconforming lot of record opinion where one is required. 
(10)  A copy of approved driveway or right-of-way utilization permits from Pinellas County or the Florida Department of Transportation where applicable. 
(11)  Compliance with all other applicable federal, state, and local building codes is demonstrated. 
(12)  Sufficient information for the City to determine what fees, if any, may be required prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(13)  Building permit applications for new nonresidential or multifamily developments are required to include an outdoor lighting plan demonstrating compliance with Article X, Section 171.00 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 14, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 2018-04, § 2, 4-2-2018; Ord. No. 2018-08, § 3, 5-23-2018) 
232.00 - Certificates of occupancy. 
(A)  A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official prior to the occupancy and use of any site which has undergone development, renovation, or redevelopment. 
(B)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official until the following has been submitted to the City's satisfaction: 
(1)  As-built drawings where required by this Code or the City Engineer. 
(2)  A certificate of completion in substantial compliance with all approved plans and specifications for required improvements by the Engineer of Record where one is required. 
(3)  A sign-off from the Pinellas County Health Department where applicable. 
(4)  A sign-off from the Fire Marshal. 
(5)  A sign-off by the Building Official regarding satisfaction of the final inspection. 
(6)  A sign-off from the Public Works Director where applicable. 
(7)  A sign-off from the Planning and Zoning Director where site plan approval has been required. 
(8)  Compliance with the provisions of this Code and all applicable building codes has been demonstrated. 
(9)  All required inspections have been made and satisfied. 
233.00 - Occupational licenses. 
(A)  All applications for occupational license approval shall comply with the provisions of this Code, all other applicable building codes, and federal, state, or local laws. 
234.00 - Variances and appeals. 
(A)  The Board of Appeals is authorized to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals of administrative decisions where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the interpretation or enforcement of this Code. 
(2)  Grant variances to the zoning dimensional regulations and development regulations of this Code where specifically authorized, when special conditions exist. The purpose is to provide for a procedure to modify the terms of this Code where literal enforcement of the requirements would result in an unnecessary hardship. It is intended that all modifications, or variances, granted shall not be contrary to the public interest. 
(3)  Grant Special Exceptions for home occupations in accordance with the requirements of Section 51.03 of this Code. 
234.01   Appeals.
(A)  In exercising its powers to hear and decide appeals, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative official. 
(B)  A request for an appeal must be initiated by the aggrieved person within 30 days of the decision rendered by an administrative official that is being appealed. If the aggrieved person fails to file an appeal within such period, the Board has no authority to hear the appeal. 
(C)  The Board, in determining whether the administrative official's decision was correct, can only consider the specific code provision considered by the administrative official, and the papers, documents and maps provided to the administrative official before making his decision. The Board shall not consider the fairness of the application of the specific Code provisions in deciding the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, § 3, 12-17-2018) 
234.02   Variances.
(A)  The Board has no authority to consider or grant the following variances: 
(1)  Variances which permit the establishment of a use in a zone or district in which such use is not permitted by the regulations of the zoning district involved; 
(2)  Variances which permit the establishment of a lot or parcel which must be combined under the terms of this Code or which is part of a larger parcel which when established does not meet the area or width requirements of the applicable zoning district; 
(3)  Variances which permit an increase in density above that allowed by the applicable zoning district or Comprehensive Plan designation; 
(4)  Variances which would purport or modify any definitions set forth by the Code; 
(5)  Variance which relate in any way to a nonconforming use. 
(B)  No variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals unless a positive finding, based upon substantial competent evidence, either presented at a public hearing held by the Board or reviewed personally by the Board members, is made on each of the following standards: 
(1)  The need for the proposed variance arises out of the physical surroundings, shape, topographical condition, or other physical or environmental conditions that are unique to the specific property involved. 
(2)  Strict applications of the provisions of the Code involved will deprive the applicant of reasonable use of the property meaning that the Code's intent will not be furthered and the application of the Code to the applicant is unfair. 
(3)  Granting the variance will not confer any special privilege that is not allowed for other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district. 
(4)  The variance granted is the minimum necessary that will afford relief. 
(5)  The conditions or special circumstances peculiar to the property have not been self created. 
(6)  Is not based upon the presence of nonconformities or other variances granted in the district or adjoining neighborhood. 
(7)  Is not based upon conditions, including financial, personal to the applicant. 
(8)  Will not substantially diminish property value, nor alter the essential character of the neighborhood. 
(9)  Will not have a detrimental effect upon the public interest, health, safety, and welfare. 
(10)  Will not create a negative impact upon the provisions of an adequate level of service for public facilities by the community. 
(11)  Conforms to the general intent of this Code, requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and requirements of the Rules Concerning the Administration of the Countywide Future Land Use Plan pertaining to the adjustment of intensity standards. 
(C)  In granting any variance the Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the provisions of this Code as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the standards for approval, or to minimize any potentially injurious effect of granting such variance. 
(D)  The variance granted under the provision of this Section shall expire within one (1) year from the date the Board heard the application and granted the variance unless a building permit for construction has been obtained. If the building permit ever expires for lack of work and one year has passed since the Board heard the application and granted the variance, the variance shall expire. 
(E)  Upon receiving a request in writing at least 30 days prior to the scheduled expiration date, the Board of Appeals may grant one 6-month extension provided proper public notification has been given. 
(F)  The Board may reconsider a decision or a variance application only if a request for rehearing is made within 45 days of the date of the original action taken by the Board, and shall be advertised for the next available Board of Adjustment meeting. Before reconsidering one of its decisions, the Board of Adjustment, after hearing testimony, must make a finding that evidence not previously considered by the Board exists and will be presented. The action to rehear shall be authorized only upon a motion of a Board member who voted on the prevailing side in the original Board action, and upon an affirmative vote by a majority of the Board members present and voting upon the original Board action. Upon an affirmative vote to rehear the decision or variance application the Board must reconsider the request in accordance with the terms of this Section. 
(G)  An application seeking action identical to a prior application that was denied cannot be filed for a period of one (1) year from the date the denial became final. 
234.03   Public notification.
(A)  Notice of public hearing shall be given at least 7 days in advance of the hearing date of any Board of Appeals hearing. Notification shall be complete upon the written notice by first class mail to the applicant or agent and to each property owner within 500 feet of the subject property. 
234.04   Authorization of variance or appeal.
(A)  No action shall be valid unless authorized by a majority of the Board members voting on the request. 
234.05   Judicial review of decisions.
(A)  Any person or persons, firm or corporation, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of a governing body aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals, may seek judicial review in the Circuit Court for Pinellas County, Florida of a Board decision by filing a petition for certiorari within thirty (30) days after the decision of the Board, or as otherwise provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, § 3, 12-17-2018) 
235.00 - Vacation of streets, plats or other property. 
(A)  An application to vacate any street rights-of-way, plats or other property shall be filed with the City Engineer and shall include the required fee established by this Code. 
(B)  The City Engineer shall forward all applications to the City's Technical Review Committee (TRC) for an administrative and completeness review to determine compliance with the provisions of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable building codes. 
(C)  Upon receiving review comments from the Technical Review Committee and all reports from outside agencies listed under Section 235.01(A), to be obtained and submitted by the applicant, the City Engineer shall forward the application and all relevant data and analysis to the City Clerk for the scheduling, advertising and notification of a public hearing before the City Commission. Any easement document(s) necessary for the satisfactory completion of a vacation shall be executed and provided to the City Clerk and approved by the City Engineer and City Attorney prior to scheduling the public hearing. 
(D)  Notice for public hearing shall constitute written legal notice to abutting or adjacent property owners in accordance with the requirements of this Article. Abutting shall include owners of any lot or parcel of land which shares all or part of a common lot line with or that is immediately adjacent to or contiguous with the easement or public right-of-way to be vacated. 
(E)  The City Commission shall review the application and render a decision regarding same. Approval shall be in the form of a Resolution. 
235.01   Standards for review of vacations.
(A)  No vacation shall be approved unless a positive finding, based upon substantial competent evidence, either presented at a public hearing held by the Board or reviewed personally by the Board members is made on each of the following standards: 
(1)  A written report from required agencies as listed on the application form is provided stating the subject property is not needed for the distribution, expansion, or maintenance of existing or future utility services. 
(2)  The property does not provide the sole means of access to an adjoining property. 
(3)  The property is not needed to implement the future circulation plans of the Traffic Circulation Element of the Comprehensive Pan. 
(4)  The property does not provide the adjoining neighborhood with a viable usable access or vista to the Cities shoreline. 
236.00 - Enforcement of code provisions. 
(A)  The provisions of this Code shall be enforced by the City Manager or his/her designee(s). 
(B)  Personnel of the City, in the performance of its duties or functions to enforce this Code, may enter upon any property during normal work hours of the City and make examinations to determine Code compliance that do not occasion damage or injury to private property. 
(C)  The violation of any stipulations attached to any permit, variance, conditional use or other approval granted by the City shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(D)  The procedure for enforcement of this Code shall be in accordance with the requirements established by Chapter 2, Article III, Division 3 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Safety Harbor, or any other applicable legal means. 
237.00 - Procedure for rehearings. 
(A)  The City Commission may reconsider an application required under this Code only if a request for rehearing is made within 45 days of the date of the original action taken by the Commission. 
(B)  Before reconsidering one of its decisions, the City Commission, after considering additional evidence or argument presented by the person making the request, must make a finding that evidence not previously considered, or a factual mistake related to the evidence considered exists. 
(C)  The request to rehear shall be authorized only upon a motion of a member of the City Commission who voted on the prevailing side in the original City Commission action, and upon an affirmative vote of a majority of those present and voting. 
(D)  Upon an affirmative vote granting the request to rehear, the application shall be scheduled upon due public notice in accordance with the requirements for said application. 
238.00 - Procedure for denial of development orders. 
(A)  When the City denies a development order the City shall provide written notice to the applicant, citing the applicable portions of the Land Development Code, Comprehensive Plan, or other ordinance or legal authority for the denial. 
239.00 - Replats. 
(A)  If a building permit is submitted to develop one structure over two or more adjacent lots of record under common ownership, and which would not otherwise require resubdivision of an approved recorded subdivision plat under Section 182.00(A)(3), as may be amended or re-codified from time to time, the lots shall either be combined and replatted pursuant to this section or a variance must be granted to all applicable development standards, including, but not limited to, setbacks from lot line(s) of record and any other development standard, which cannot otherwise be met unless the lots are combined. 
(B)  A replat under this section may be approved by the Technical Review Committee upon a finding of consistency with all applicable standards of this Code. 
(C)  Upon approval of the replat by the Technical Review Committee, the applicant shall submit the replat along with all other related legal documents to the Pinellas County Clerk of the Circuit Court for recording and provide proof of submittal to the City. 
(D)  All property with legally existing structure(s) over two or more lot lines of record under common ownership or with pending development applications to develop one structure over two or more adjacent lots of record under common ownership as of the effective date of this section shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. However, if such existing structure(s) is/are ever voluntarily demolished and redeveloped as separate buildable lots, the exemption in this section 239.00(D) shall no longer apply. 
(Ord. No. 2018-17, § 4, 12-17-2018) 
240.00-244.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV - BOARDS AND AGENCIES 

245.00 - Board of appeals. 
(A)  The City of Safety Harbor Board of Appeals is hereby established. 
(B)  The membership, terms of office and procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  The members of the Board of Appeals shall consist of the same persons appointed to the Planning and Zoning Board. 
(2)  The term of office for Board of Appeals members shall be for a period of two (2) years, four (4) regular members being appointed in each even year, and three (3) regular members and one (1) alternate member being appointed in each odd year for a term beginning in March of each year, consistent with each members' term of appointment to the Planning and Zoning Board. 
(3)  The Board of Appeals shall, by a majority vote of the full membership, adopt rules of procedure. 
(C)  Members of the Board of Appeals shall receive no salaries or fees for their services, but may receive reasonable expenses while on official business as approved by the City Commission. 
(D)  No member of the Board of Appeals shall appear before the Board while acting as agent for any person upon matters the Board of Appeals has the authority to act. 
(E)  The Planning and Zoning Director shall be responsible for coordinating the duties of the Board of Appeals. All City employees shall furnish to the Board such available information as may be required to carry out its duties. 
(F)  The powers and duties of the Board of Appeals are established by Article XIII, Section 234.00 of this Code. 
246.00 - Planning and zoning board. 
(A)  The City of Safety Harbor Planning and Zoning Board is hereby established. 
(B)  The membership, terms of office and procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the City Commission. The members shall either be residents of the City or meet the qualifications of subsection (B)(3) below. 
(2)  Two (2) members of the Planning and Zoning Board should have a background in historic preservation, building or landscape architecture, urban planning, real estate, building/construction trades, environmental sciences, civil or transportation engineering, or a related field. 
(3)  One (1) member of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be either a property or business owner within the Community Redevelopment District (CRD), as shown on the Future Land Use Map. 
(4)  The term of office for the Planning and Zoning Board members shall be for a period of two (2) years, four (4) members being appointed in each even year, three (3) regular members and one (1) alternate member being appointed in each odd year for a term beginning in March of each year. 
(5)  When all of the regular board members are present at a board meeting, the alternate will sit as a nonvoting member of the board, but will be able to participate in the board's discussion. If one of the regular board members is absent from a board meeting, the alternate will sit as a voting member of the board. 
(6)  Any member may be removed from office by a majority vote of the full membership of the City Commission without cause. 
(7)  Vacancies shall be filled by the City Commission for the unexpired term of any membership which becomes vacant. Any Board member who resigns or moves out of the City limits shall notify the City Clerk in writing of the vacancy. 
(8)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall, by a majority vote of the full membership, adopt rules of procedure. 
(C)  Members of the Planning and Zoning Board shall receive no salaries or fees for their services, but may receive reasonable expenses while on official business as approved by the City Commission. 
(D)  No member of the Planning and Zoning Board shall appear before the Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission while acting as agent for any person upon matters the Planning and Zoning Board has the authority to act. 
(E)  The Planning and Zoning Board shall be the Local Planning Agency (LPA) for the City of Safety Harbor. 
(F)  The Planning and Zoning Director shall be responsible for coordinating the duties of the Planning and Zoning Board. All City employees shall furnish to the Board such available records for information as may be required to carry out its duties. 
(G)  The powers and duties of the Planning and Zoning Board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To conduct public hearings for the purpose of reviewing, commenting, and recommending to the City Commission matters or amendments related to the Comprehensive Plan in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 163, Florida Statutes. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the City Commission regarding amendments to this Code. 
(3)  To make recommendations to the City Commission regarding amendments to the Official Zoning Atlas, Conditional Uses, and Site Plans. 
(4)  To conduct special planning studies as directed by the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2015-12, § 1, 5-18-2015) 
246.01   Historic incentives.
(A)  The City of Safety Harbor Planning and Zoning Board shall also act in the capacity of a Historic Incentives Board in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII of this Code. 
(B)  The powers and duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  To conduct special studies as directed by the City Commission to identify historically, architecturally, and archaeologically significant properties, structures, and areas that exemplify the cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of the nation, state, or city. 
(2)  To recommend to the City Commission the designation of individual sites, districts, and archaeological sites that are historically or archaeologically significant. 
(3)  To develop and recommend to the City Commission additional design guidelines for alterations to landmarks or buildings within historic districts. 
(4)  To recommend to the City Commission Certificates of Approval in accordance with the terms of this Code and thereby regulate alterations, new construction, relocation, and demolitions affecting designated properties. 
(5)  To recommend to the City Commission amendments to this Code, the building codes and to the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Safety Harbor. 
(6)  To establish and recommend to the City Commission additional guidelines, criteria and standards of approval for the issuance of Certificates of Approval. 
(7)  To promote public awareness of historic and archaeological preservation. 
(8)  To recommend to the City Commission the nomination of landmark buildings, archaeological sites, and historic districts to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(9)  To establish and recommend to the City Commission an awards program and marker program in order to foster continuing education. 
246.02   Downtown redevelopment duties.
(A)  The City of Safety Harbor Planning and Zoning Board shall also act in the capacity of a Downtown Redevelopment Board in accordance with the duties established by this Section. 
(B)  The powers and duties shall be as follows: 
(1)  To make recommendations to the City Commission as to the Safety Harbor Downtown Redevelopment Plan, as may be interpreted or amended from time to time. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the City Commission on the boundaries of the Central Business District (CBD). 
(3)  To make recommendations to the City Commission on the implementation of zoning and land use regulations that will encourage the development and redevelopment of the area encompassed by the Downtown Redevelopment Plan. 
(4)  To advise on, and to review plans for compliance with downtown design guidelines which may be established by the City Commission. 
(5)  To make recommendations on special projects related to the downtown redevelopment program, which may be requested from time to time by the City Commission or City Manager. 
246.03   School district representation.
(A)  A representative of the local school district shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the Planning and Zoning Board. The representative will be appointed by the Local School Board. 
(B)  The purpose of the representation is to allow the Pinellas County School District to participate in those meetings at which a Comprehensive Plan amendment, or rezoning, is considered by the Planning and Zoning Board that would, if approved, increase residential density. 
(C)  The City will notify the school district representative of the date, time, place and agenda of all meetings of the Planning and Zoning Board. 
247.00 - Technical review committee (TRC). 
(A)  The Technical Review Committee (TRC) is hereby established for the purpose of providing for the professional and technical review of development applications. 
(B)  The membership shall include the Director or his designee from the following City Departments: 
(1)  Planning and Zoning. 
(2)  Public Works. 
(3)  Fire. 
(4)  Building. 
(C)  If the TRC is required to vote on an item and cannot obtain a majority, the City Manager shall cast the deciding vote. 
(D)  The TRC shall review the following development applications for compliance with the provisions of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan, and all applicable building codes: 
(1)  Site Plans. 
(2)  Subdivisions. 
(3)  Conditional Uses. 
(4)  Amendments to the Official Zoning Atlas. 
(5)  Amendments to the Future Land Use Map Series. 
(6)  Variances. 
(7)  Vacations of Streets, Plats or other property. 
(8)  Temporary Uses. 
(9)  All other applications assigned by the City Manager. 
(E)  The TRC shall have the authority to approve temporary uses and site plans in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(F)  Regular meetings of the TRC staff shall beheld at least once per month, at an established time and place. 
(G)  The TRC agenda shall be distributed to the members at least seven (7) working days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting. 
(H)  The meetings shall be open to the public. Attendance of the applicant is not required. 
(I)  The Planning and Zoning Department shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Agenda preparation and distribution. 
(2)  Chairing the meeting. 
(3)  Recording minutes. 
(4)  Notification to applicants of the regularly scheduled date, time and place for consideration of the applications. 
(5)  Written notification to applicants of the outcome of the TRC review. 
248.00 - Planning and zoning department. 
(A)  The City of Safety Harbor Planning and Zoning Department is hereby created. 
(B)  The Planning and Zoning Department shall report to the City Manager. 
(C)  The Planning and Zoning Department shall perform functions relative to the administration of the Code, the Comprehensive Plan, and other applicable building codes as determined by the City Manager. 
249.00-258.00 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV - PARK IMPACT FEES 

259.00 - Purpose and intent. 
(A)  It is the purpose and intent of this Article that the requirements set forth herein shall be applied to all residential development or redevelopment within the City and that new residential development or redevelopment provide for park facilities and park land needs generated by such developments. 
(B)  It is further the purpose and intent of these regulations to help implement the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Plan and, but not limited to, the goals, objectives, policies and minimum level of service standards of the Recreation and Open Space Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
260.00 - Definitions. 
(A)  For the purpose of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates otherwise. 
(1)  Residential development: All single-family, mobile homes, duplex, and multifamily dwellings shall be considered as residential development. 
(2)  Dwelling unit: One or more rooms, designed occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
(3)  Park facilities: Buildings, equipment, landscaping and other appurtenant structures necessary to provide for recreation activities; including, but not limited to, tennis courts, basketball courts, baseball fields, boat ramps, football and soccer fields, swimming pool, bicycle and hiking/nature trails, playgrounds, picnic tables and benches, recreation center as well as parking, restroom and other improvements necessary to the functioning of the primary facility. 
(4)  Park lands: Parcels of land on which are sited park facilities or contain passive park areas; as well as required parking areas, restrooms and other improvements. 
261.00 - Applicability. 
(A)  A Park Facilities and Park Lands impact fee shall be assessed in the following manner: 
(1)  Residential development or redevelopment which results in an increase in the number of dwelling units shall be assessed a Park Facilities impact fee of $315 per dwelling unit at the time of Building Permit. This fee shall apply to new dwelling units whether individual or multiple building permits are applied for relative to construction on lots in existing subdivisions, parcels or tracts of property; as part of an existing approved Site Plan or new approved Subdivision or Site Plan. 
(2)  In addition to the Park Facilities impact fee, developments containing five (5) or more dwelling units shall be subject to a Park Lands impact fee in accordance with the standards as set forth in this Article. The method of compliance with the Park Lands impact fee shall be at the option of the City and shall be through the dedication of park lands, a cash contribution in lieu of land dedication, or a combination of both. 
(B)  Compliance with the Park Lands requirement shall be applied as a condition of approval of a Final Subdivision Plat, Final Site Plan, Subdivision Replat, amendment of an approved Subdivision Plat or Site Plan resulting in an increase in the number of approved dwelling units, or as a condition for the issuance of a building permit, in cases where five (5) or more residential dwelling units are to be constructed on one lot, parcel or tract of property under a common ownership or common beneficial interest whether one or multiple building permits are applied for. 
(C)  In cases of dispute as to the liability of the developer under this Article or as to the extent of the development pattern, or at the option of the City, the developer shall be required to file a declaration under oath in affidavit form as to the ultimate development plan and the ownership or beneficial interest in the property in question. 
262.00 - General standards for determining park lands requirements. 
(A)  The ultimate density of the proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of the Park Lands impact fee. The total requirements of park lands shall be six (6) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population. 
(B)  The factor of 2.5 persons per unit shall be used in calculating the required Park Lands impact fee. This factor is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for new construction. However, it is recognized that persons per unit, age distribution and local conditions change over time, and the application formula, as stated herein, may be subject to periodic review and amendment as necessary. 
(C)  Employing the persons per unit standard set forth in Section 262.00(B) the resident population of the development shall be determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units by the standard of persons per unit. The result will be the anticipated population for the development and this figure will be multiplied by the constant of .006 to determine the amount of acreage to be dedicated or deeded to the City or to be used to determine the fee to be paid in lieu thereof. This formula is expressed as follows: 
Number of dwelling units X Persons per unit 
X.006 = Required Acreage 
(D)  Whether the City accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined at the time of project approval by consideration of, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Suitability for recreation usage given consideration of the topography, environmental features, access, size and location of the property. 
(2)  Presence or absence and location of other recreation resources in the area. 
(3)  Availability of previously acquired property or potential to acquire nearby properties in order to combine properties for adequately sized recreational lands. 
(4)  Compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the policies, site guidelines, Level of Service standards, Park Lands needs and Park Facility needs as set forth in the Recreation and Open Space Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(E)  The determination of the City at the time of project approval as to whether land shall be dedicated or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. 
(F)  Upon determination by the City at the time of project approval that a fee shall be charged in lieu of dedication, in whole or in part, the fee shall be based on the fair market value of the amount of acreage that otherwise would have been dedicated as park lands. The City shall determine the present fair market value of the land that would have been required to be dedicated, and such figure shall be used in making any calculation herein unless the applicant files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection, the applicant shall submit an MAI appraisal showing the fair market value of the land required to be donated; and final determination of said fair market value per acre of such land shall be made by the City based upon such information submitted by the applicant and from such other sources which may be available. 
262.01   Credit for private recreation areas.
(A)  A credit for private recreation areas may be given where private open space for park and recreational purposes and park facilities are provided in a proposed development and such space and facilities are to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the residential development. This credit shall apply only to the Park Lands impact fee and may range up to a maximum of thirty seven and one-half percent (37.5%) against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof. 
(B)  Request for credit for the provision of private recreational areas and facilities shall be submitted in writing by the applicant and shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Detailed plans of the proposed areas and facilities and the location of such within the proposed residential development; 
(2)  Identification of the types of, specifications of and costs of facilities to be installed; 
(3)  A statement guaranteeing that the private recreation area will be permanently maintained for such use and the type of legal document to be used for such guarantee; 
(4)  A statement identifying the ultimate ownership and maintenance of such areas and the type of legal document to be used to insure such; 
(5)  A guarantee that the use of the private recreational area shall be restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, or such other document as approved by the City Attorney; which shall run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City or its successor; 
(6)  The time frame in which development of the private recreational area and facilities will be commenced and when such shall be completed. 
(C)  Consideration by the City of approval of the credit for private recreational areas and facilities shall be contingent upon acceptance of the statements, proposals and schedules set forth in the required applicant's request for credit as detailed in the preceding subsection. Approval by the City of the subject request shall serve as an agreement between the City and the applicant and the failure of the applicant to comply with such shall constitute grounds for either the withholding of building permits or occupancy permits until compliance or until some guarantee of accomplishment is provided to the City or the revocation of the approved credit. 
(D)  In determining whether or not to grant credit for private recreational areas and the amount of such credit at the time of project approval, the City shall consider, but not be limited to, the following standards: 
(1)  That yards, court areas, setbacks, open spaces and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and applicable development regulations shall not be included in the computation of such recreational lands; 
(2)  That the proposed private recreational area is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as topography, environmental features, access, size and location; 
(3)  That the proposed private recreational area and facilities are reasonably appropriate for the proposed residential development, that the cost of such bears a reasonable relationship to the amount of the requested credit and that the proposed schedule for the development of the private recreational area and facilities is acceptable; 
(4)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the recreational lands and facilities is to be adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance or restrictions; 
(5)  That the use of the private recreational area is to be restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, or such other document as may be approved by the City Attorney; which shall run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City. 
263.00 - Procedures for payments and/or dedications. 
(A)  The Park Facilities fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(B)  Dedication of lands and/or payment of the required fees for Park Lands shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  At the time of filing and prior to the recording of a Final Subdivision Plat. 
(2)  After approval of a Final Site Plan (for developments not subject to the subdivision platting process) and prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit in cases where five (5) or more residential dwelling units are to be constructed on one lot, parcel or tract of property under a common ownership or common beneficial interest. 
(4)  In the case of phased developments, the obligation for the dedication of park lands or the payment of the fee in lieu thereof shall occur upon the issuance of the first building permit for any phase of the proposed construction activity unless otherwise approved by the City at the time of project approval. 
(C)  Conveyance of required land dedications shall be by general warranty deed or by such legal instrument as approved by the City Attorney. The lands to be dedicated or deeded shall not be subject to any reservations of record, encumbrances of any kind or easements which in the City's opinion would interfere with the use of the land for park or recreational purposes. Where any reservations, encumbrances or easements exist, the City shall require the payment in lieu of the dedication of the lands unless it chooses to accept the land subject to the encumbrances. The City may require the applicant to present to the City a title insurance policy on the property to be dedicated or deeded, reflecting the true state of the title, and a survey showing the legal boundaries of the property. 
(D)  In cases where credit for private recreational areas and facilities has been granted, legal documents, as approved by the City Attorney, shall be submitted guaranteeing that the private recreational areas will be permanently maintained for such use; setting forth the ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such areas; and guaranteeing that the use of the private recreational area will be restricted for park and recreational purposes and that such restrictions shall run with the land in favor of the owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City or its successor. The submission of these documents shall be within the time frames as set forth in subsection (B) of this section and the appropriate documents shall be recorded contemporaneously with the filing of the Final Subdivision Plat or the issuance of a building permit as applicable. 
264.00 - Use of fees. 
(A)  Funds received for Park Facilities and Park Lands, in lieu of land dedication; shall be held in trust funds by the City solely for the acquisition of park facilities and park lands. These trust funds may be invested by the City in accordance with law, and the interest derived from such investments shall be added to and become a part of the trust fund. 
265.00-270.00. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI - DEFINITIONS 

271.00 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Code shall be ascribed a meaning which they have in common usage and which gives this Code its most reasonable application: 
Accessory dwelling unit: An ancillary or secondary living unit that has a separate kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area, either within the same structure, or on the same lot, as the primary dwelling unit. 
Accessory structure: A structure which is customarily incidental to, or found in association with, the primary structure and is located on the same lot or parcel as the primary structure. 
Accessory use: A use that is incidental, related, and clearly subordinate to the primary use of the property, and which does not significantly affect or alter the primary use of the property. 
Address of convenience: The accessory use of a dwelling unit limited to telephone purposes related to the residence owner's business or occupation, provided no business activity excluding phone calls where no transactions occur on the premise. 
Adjacent: Nearby but not necessarily adjoining. 
Adjoining: A lot or parcel of land which shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. 
Agriculture: Use of the land for the growing of crops, plants, or trees for wholesale plant production, animal raising and grazing, aquaculture, animal breeding, game preserves, lands diverted to soil conservation or forestry, training or stabling of animals, horticulture, floriculture or any similar agricultural activity. Animal raising and grazing shall mean the keeping of one or more animals commonly associated with an agricultural use, including, but not limited to, cows, horses, pigs, goats, sheep, ducks, turkeys, chickens, geese, roosters, ponies, and other similar animals. Animal raising and grazing shall not include animals which are normally considered as household pets and which can be maintained and cared for within the living space of a residence. The keeping of 5 or more household pets shall be considered a kennel, as defined and regulated by this Code. 
Amendment (atlas and text): A change to the designations or boundaries of the Official Zoning Atlas or The Future Land Use Map Series, or a change to the text of this Code or the Comprehensive Plan. 
Ancillary nonresidential uses: Off-street parking, drainage retention areas and open space buffer areas for adjacent nonresidential uses. 
Approved plan: A plan which has been granted final approval by the appropriate approving authority established by this Code. 
Approving authority: The agency, board, group or other legally designated individual or authority which has been charged by this Code for review and approval of plans and other applications. 
Archaeological site: A location that has yielded or may yield information on history or prehistory. An archeological site contains physical remains of the past. 
As-built drawings: Engineered drawings showing the locations, elevations, dimensions, capacity, and operational capability of structures or facilities as they have been installed or constructed. 
Assessed value: The value at which property is appraised for tax purposes. 
Beer: All brewed beverages containing malt as defined in Chapter 561, Florida Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. 
Block: A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, water, or any other barrier. 
Boarding houses: A dwelling unit or establishment in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator to one (1) or more boarders on a nontransient basis, and in which common eating service may be provided. The term boarding house shall not include residential living facilities. A boarder shall mean an individual who, for consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations or other services as part of the consideration. 
Brewpub: An establishment where food, beer, and malt beverages are duly-licensed to be made on the premises where 50% or more of the beer produced on site is sold and/or consumed on site. 
Buffer: Land area used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield nuisances. 
Building: Any structure whether permanent or temporary having a roof supported by columns and walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure. 
Building codes: The building codes, fire codes, housing codes, plumbing codes, electrical codes and all other applicable federal, state and local codes regulating construction in the City of Safety Harbor. 
Building permit: Any building, construction or public works permit required by the City to develop property. 
Campground: Two (2) or more campsites established or maintained for occupancy by the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation. 
Capacity: A determination of the availability of a facility based upon estimated demand by a project, including the demand of other approved but not built developments to be served by the same facility in the same time period, as compared to the total capacity of the facility. 
Certificate of occupancy: A permit issued by the Building Official allowing occupancy of a structure in compliance with City building codes. 
Change of use: Any use of land or of a structure which substantially differs in character, intensity or impact upon public facilities from the previous use of land or structure. 
Church: A structure or group of structures where the primary use is for the conducting of organized religious services and religious education. A parsonage or custodial residence shall be considered accessory to a church. A church is not deemed to include a school of general education, a school of special education, or day care center. 
City manager: The administrative manager of the City or his/her designee. 
Commercial: An activity or use carried out for monetary gain and designated as a commercial use by this Code. 
Commercial (intensive): Commercial uses which typically involve major repair services, extensive outdoor storage, or the display of heavy equipment, vehicles, or materials. 
Commercial recreation facilities: A recreation facility operated as a business and open to the public for a fee or membership. For the purpose of this Code a commercial recreation facility does not include golf courses, country clubs or private recreation facilities accessory to a subdivision or residential project. 
Commercial vehicle: Any motor vehicle which is designed or used principally for business, governmental, or nonprofit organizational purposes; has a platform, cabinet, box, rack, compartment, or other facility for transportation of materials and equipment; or conspicuously displays the name or other advertising of a business, agency, or organization on the exterior of the vehicle. 
Common ownership: Private ownership by more than one individual in any form. 
Community garden: An area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals or nonprofit organization to grow and harvest food crops and/or nonfood, ornamental crops, such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption, donation, or nonprofit sale at a location off-site from where the community garden is located. 
Community residential home: A residential living facility as defined by Section 52.00 of this Code. 
Community service use: A building or structure owned and operated by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public. Such uses shall include, but not be limited to, post offices, emergency service stations, schools, and correctional institutions. 
Compliance: To meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the applicable building codes, this Code, or the Comprehensive Plan. 
Concurrency: The necessary public facilities and services to maintain the adopted level of service standards for utilities, recreation and open space, and drainage, as defined in Chapter 163.3180, Florida Statutes. 
Concurrent: Occurring at the same time. 
Conditional use: Uses which are not permitted by right in a specific zoning district but which when subjected to a review according to established standards may be approved subject to certain restrictions and safeguards. 
Congregate care facility: A residential living facility as defined by Section 52.00 of this Code. 
Consistency: In compliance with the goals, objectives and policies of all elements contained in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Construction material establishment: Where the primary use of the site is the retail selling of lumber, hardware or building material. 
Construction (public works) permit: A type of building permit required for the alteration of land or extension or installation of infrastructure. 
Construction service establishment: Any establishment where the primary use is the provision of services that result in the fabrication, construction, alteration, repair, or development of land or structures. 
Day care center: An establishment which receives for care and supervision five (5) or more children or adults for less than 24 hours per day and includes day nurseries, kindergartens, and nursery schools. 
Day care home: A private residence which receives for care and supervision not more than four (4) children or adults, including those individuals receiving care who reside therein, for less than 24 hours per day. Licensing by Pinellas County shall be required where it applies. 
Day pet boarding establishment: An establishment in which domesticated animals are housed or boarded for less than 24 hours per day with no overnight stays subject to the requirements and performance standards of Section 68.00 of the City of Safety Harbor Comprehensive Zoning and Land Development Code. 
Deficient facility: A road operating at a peak hour level of service E or F, and/or a volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratio of 0.9 or higher with no mitigating improvements scheduled within three years. The most current edition of the Pinellas County Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) Level of Service Report identifies roadways operating with deficient levels of service. 
Density: Number of dwelling units per acre of land excluding public road rights-of-way and submerged land. 
Developer: Any person undertaking the use or development of land and shall include the property owner, authorized agent, the holder of an option contract, lessee, or other person holding proprietary interests in the land. 
Development (new): A development activity which occurs after the effective date of this Code. 
Development (nonresidential): A development activity which is not residential or accessory to a residential use. 
Development (residential): A development activity which involves a dwelling unit or which is accessory to a dwelling unit. 
Development activity: The subdivision of land; construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; mining, excavation, dredging, or land disturbance; and any use or extension of use of land or change in intensity. 
Development agreement: An agreement between the City and a property owner or developer to develop a defined site in a specific manner and processed pursuant to the requirements of Article VII of this Code. 
Development order: Any building permit, rezoning, subdivision approval, variance, conditional use approval, or any other official action by the City having the effect of permitting a development activity. 
Development permit: Any approved final site plan, building permit, rezoning, variance, conditional use, or any other official action of the City having the effect of allowing the development of land. 
Development plan: A plan prepared and submitted pursuant to the requirement of Article V of this Code. 
Director: The Director of the Planning and Zoning Department of the City. 
Dredging: A method of removing solids from the bottom of wetlands and coastal waters which can result in the disturbance of natural ecological cycles. 
Driveway: A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking area, garage, dwelling, or other structure. 
Dwelling (mobile home): A structure intended as a one family dwelling, which is transportable in one or more sections, which is at least 8 feet in width and 32 feet in length, and which is built on an integral chassis, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
Dwelling (multifamily): One structure containing more than two (2) dwelling units on a single lot or parcel or a single lot or parcel containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
Dwelling (one-family): A structure containing one (1) dwelling unit. 
Dwelling (single-family attached): A one-family dwelling on a single lot attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling (single-family detached): A dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
Dwelling (single-family semidetached): A one-family dwelling attached to one other one family dwelling by a common vertical wall, and each dwelling located on a separate lot. 
Dwelling (two-family or duplex): One structure containing two (2) units on a single lot or parcel or a single lot or parcel containing two (2) dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for use as a complete, independent living facility for no more than one (1) family. 
Eating establishments, sit down: Any restaurant, coffee shop, or other establishment where food and drink is prepared, served, and consumed primarily on site. 
Eating establishments, fast food: Any restaurant or beverage shop where food and drink are prepared and served that includes a drive thru. Food and drink may be consumed on site or be retrieved by a motor vehicle driver at the drive thru window. 
Emergency service facilities: Public or quasi-public police, fire, rescue, ambulance or similar services. 
Emergency shelter: Any residence or other establishment providing room, board, protection, preplacement screening, or counseling, for a period not to exceed an average stay of 30 days per person, for abused children, abused adults, or similar persons not related to the owner of the premises by law, blood, marriage or adoption. 
Engineer of record: A professional registered with the State of Florida and licensed as a professional engineer who is designated by the developer to exercise all engineering involved in a project. 
Entertainment: The live performance or playing of music by an individual, group of individuals, band, or disc jockey. 
EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Establishment: An economic or nonprofit unit, generally at a single physical location, where business is conducted or services or industrial operations performed. 
Excavation: The removal or recovery of soil, rock, minerals or organic substances by any means whatsoever from land or water. See also Dredging. 
Family: One or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit. 
Family care home: A residential living facility as defined by Section 52.00 of this Code. 
FDER: Florida Department of Environmental Regulation. 
FDNR: Florida Department of Natural Resources. 
FDOT: Florida Department of Transportation. 
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Fence: An artificially erected barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
FGFWFC: Florida Game and Freshwater Fish Commission. 
Fill: Any material deposited for the purpose of raising the level of the natural land surface. 
Final subdivision plat: The final format of a subdivision prepared in accordance with the requirements of Article XI of this Code and Chapter 177, Florida Statutes and prepared for recording. 
FIRM: Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
Floor area ratio: The gross floor area of all structures on a site divided by the site area, excluding public road rights-of-way and submerged land. 
Frontage: That side of a lot adjoining a street. 
Funeral home: An establishment used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
Future right-of-way line: The right-of-way line necessary for future road widening as shown by the Future Right-of-Way Needs Map of this Code. 
Grade (finished): The elevation of the ground after alteration at the highest point adjoining the building or structure. For split level buildings, the finished grade is measured at the lowest horizontal floor of the structure. 
Grade (natural): The elevation of the ground in its natural state before alteration. 
Grading: The stripping, cutting, filling, or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its final cut or filled condition. 
Gross floor area: The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of the vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, ramps, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or interior courts. 
Gross residential acre: Number of acres put toward one or more than one residential use, excluding public road rights-of-way and submerged land. 
Groundwater: The supply of freshwater under the surface in an aquifer or soil that forms the natural reservoir for potable water. 
Group homes: A premises which houses three (3) or more unrelated individuals not living as a family. The term includes dormitories, boarding homes, and similar uses. 
Guest cottage: An accessory structure on a residentially used lot or parcel that is used to exclusively house members of the family occupying the primary dwelling or their nonpaying guests, is not served by utility hookups separate from the primary dwelling, and does not contain cooking facilities. 
Half street: One-half (1/2) of the required street right-of-way measured from the centerline of the right-of-way. 
Height (building): The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for a flat roof; to the deckline of a mansard roof; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs measured from the finished grade. This height shall be measured from the base flood elevation required by the National Flood Insurance Program when a structure is located in an area of special flood hazard or from the minimum grade necessary to provide positive drainage as approved by the City Engineer. 
Home occupation: The conditional use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment provided the occupational use is incidental to the primary purpose of the dwelling unit as a residence. 
Hospital: A facility licensed under Chapter 395, Florida Statutes as a hospital. 
Hotel: A structure containing sleeping accommodations in which transient guests are lodged for short stays consistent with F.S. § 509.013(4)(a) and in accordance with all requirements thereof. These shall not be used for permanent housing and shall be licensed as hotels by the state department of business regulation or its successor agency. 
HRS: The Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. 
Impact: The effect of a development activity on circulation, required Levels of Service, surrounding land uses, the environment and other factors either directly or indirectly. 
Impermeable: Not permitting the passage of water. 
Impervious surface: Any material which reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater. 
Impervious surface ratio (ISR): The area of all impervious surfaces on a site divided by the gross site area, excluding public road rights-of-way and submerged land. 
Implementation: Carrying out or fulfilling plans or proposals. 
Infrastructure: Facilities and services needed to support and sustain development activities, including, but not limited to, streets, drainage, communication lines, electric lines, parks, landfills, water and sewer. 
Institutional use: An establishment operated by a public or nonprofit organization and performing related services of a nonprofit nature. 
Intensity: The measure of a permitted development expressed in terms of impervious surface ratio (ISR) and floor area ratio (FAR). 
Junkyard: An establishment or parcel used for the storage, collection, recycling, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded goods, materials, machinery, building materials, household appliances, wrecked or inoperative vehicles and similar material. 
Kennel: An establishment in which 5 or more domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, sold or traded. 
Kitchen: A room or area intended or designed for the cooking or preparation of food by having a sink and either a natural gas opening or provision for an electric range, stove, or oven. 
Land: Ground, soil or earth including structures or improvements on, above or below the surface. 
Landscaping service establishments: An establishment where the primary use involves the maintenance of landscaping and open areas as a service usually performed by contract. 
Level of service: An indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by, or proposed to be provided by a facility based upon and related to the operational characteristics of the facility. The required levels of service and related facilities are established by the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
Light printing establishment: An establishment where the primary use is printing, reproduction, or publishing not involving linotype or large scale type-setting operations on the premises. 
Local planning agency (LPA): The agency designated by the City to review the Comprehensive Plan pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 163, Florida Statutes. 
Lodging facility (bed and breakfast): An owner-occupied residence which provides lodging on a transient basis in a structure which is listed on the City, state or national historic site inventory but which does not change the residential or historical character of the structure. The term does not include a hotel, motel, boarding house or tourist home. 
Lot: A designated tract of land established by subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed, or built upon as a single unit. 
Lot (corner): A lot or parcel located at the junction of and adjoining two or more intersecting streets. 
Lot (double frontage or through): A lot which fronts on two (2) parallel streets. 
Lot (flag): A lot which does not meet the minimum lot width and is not classified as a nonconforming lot of record. 
Lot (reverse frontage): A through or corner lot intentionally designed so that the front lot line faces a local rather than an adjoining thoroughfare street. 
Lot area: The total area within the boundaries of a lot excluding any street rights-of-way. 
Lot Coverage: the area of a property that is covered with the principal structure, including patios (unenclosed or enclosed with roof) and garages. 
Lot depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot line: The legal boundary of a lot or parcel of land. 
Lot line (front): The lot line separating the lot from the adjoining street right-of-way line. See Yard, front. 
Lot line (rear): The lot line opposite the front. See Yard, rear. 
Lot line (side): The lot line or lines other than the front or rear. See Yard, side. 
Lot of record: A lot or parcel which is shown on a subdivision plat of record or which is legally described on a deed recorded on or before the effective date of this Code, and was not created in violation of the requirements of this or a previous Code. 
Lot width: The distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front yard setback. 
Manufacturing (heavy): An establishment engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, and which may involve significant air, water, noise, radiation, visual, odorous, or other pollution, and which would have a significant impact upon surrounding properties. The term heavy manufacturing shall include junk or salvage yards. 
Manufacturing (light): An establishment which primarily involves the assembly, packaging, cleaning, servicing, testing and repairing of materials, products, or equipment inside the principal structure, without the need for large accessory structures. 
Marina: An establishment used for the storing, fueling, berthing and securing of pleasure boats. Minor repair not including the removal of mechanical or structural parts from the boat may be permitted as an accessory use under this Code. 
Medical marijuana treatment center: Any entity that holds an active, unrestricted license to cultivate, process, transport, and dispense low-THC cannabis, medical cannabis, and cannabis delivery devices pursuant to section 381.986, Florida Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. 
Medical marijuana treatment center cultivating facility: A medical marijuana treatment center with a primary use of growing and cultivating medical marijuana pursuant to section 381.986, Florida Statutes. 
Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facility: A medical marijuana treatment center with a primary use of dispensing medical marijuana pursuant to section 381.986, Florida Statutes. 
Medical marijuana treatment center processing facility: A medical marijuana treatment center with a primary use of processing medical marijuana pursuant to section 381.986, Florida Statutes. 
Microbrewery: An establishment where beer and malt beverages are duly-licensed to be made on the premises and then sold or distributed, and which produces less than 15,000 barrels (465,000 U.S. gallons) of beer per year. 
Micro-distillery: A duly-licensed establishment primarily engaged in on-site distillation of spirits in quantities not to exceed 75,000 gallons per year. The distillery operation processes the ingredients to make spirits by mashing, cooking, and fermenting. The micro-distillery operation does not include the production of any other alcoholic beverage. 
Miniwarehouse: An establishment providing separate storage spaces at varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis primarily for the storage of personal or household goods. 
Mobility plan: The framework providing for a countywide approach to managing the traffic impacts of development projects and to increasing mobility for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users and motor vehicles through the implementation of the Countywide Multimodal Impact Fee Ordinance (Pinellas County Land Development Code Section 150) and the transportation provisions of this section through the site plan review process. 
Motor freight terminal: An establishment where the primary use is the storage, routing and reshipment of freight by truck. 
Motor pool facility: An establishment where the primary uses the outdoor or indoor storage, service, maintenance or repair of motor vehicle fleets. 
Multimodal impact fee district: Areas from which impact fee monies are collected and expended. These districts are defined in Pinellas County Land Development Code Section 150. 
Net floor area: The floor area of a structure excluding stairwells, elevator shafts, basements, attics, equipment rooms, screen rooms, interior parking and other areas not intended for human habitation or public services. 
Nonconforming lot: A lot which does not meet the requirements of this Code in terms of area, width, or other dimensions but which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Code. 
Nonconforming structure: A structure which does not meet the dimensional or intensity requirements of this Code but which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Code. 
Nonconforming use: The use of land or of a structure which does not meet the use regulations of this Code but which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Code. 
Nonconformity: A lot, structure, use or characteristic of use such as density, parking, signage, drainage or some other characteristic of the property which does not comply with the regulations of this Code, but which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Code. 
Nursery: Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs or plants for sale. 
Nursing home: Any facility so licensed under Chapter 500, Part I, Florida Statutes. 
Office (business): The use of any office for the conduct of administrative, managerial, governmental, informational, or business-related activities such as laboratories, apothecaries, travel agencies, telephone answering services, salesmen or sales representatives, credit reporting services, and stock brokering. Business offices shall include offices for nonprofit organizations and musicians or artist's studios. 
Office (professional): The use of any office or clinic where the primary use is the conduct of business by licensed professionals such as engineers, architects, dentists, lawyers, accountants and physicians. 
Official zoning atlas: The map which shows the official zoning designations and their boundaries as adopted by this Code and as amended by official action of the City. 
Open space: Any land or water area essentially unimproved and set aside for the use and enjoyment of the owners and occupants of such land or the general public if so designated. Open space shall include required and decorative landscaping. 
Ordinance: Any City law adopted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 166, Florida Statutes. 
Outdoor storage: The storing or displaying in any open area of any goods, equipment, material or vehicles. 
Overhang: The part of a roof or wall which extends beyond the facade of the lower wall. Also the portion of a vehicle which extends beyond the wheel stops or curb. 
Owner: The owner of fee title to the property in question. An authorized agent may be designated by the owner to carry out the intended business. 
Parcel: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its locations and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used, or developed as, a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
Parking lot: An off-street, ground level area, usually improved with paving, landscaping and drainage for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
Peak hour: In describing traffic conditions, is the 100th highest volume hour of the year in the predominant traffic flow direction. 
Percolation: The infiltration of water through the ground. 
Performance security: A security accepted by the City that the improvements required by this Code will be satisfactorily completed in accordance with the applicable building codes of the City's specifications. 
Permitted use: The use of land or of a structure which is permitted by right under the provisions of this Code. 
Personal/business service establishment: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or their apparel, and engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis. Personal services include laundry, cleaning and garment services, linen supply, coin operated laundromats, tailors, carpet and upholstery cleaning, photographic studios, beauty shops, barber shops, shoe repair, hat cleaning, diaper services, and similar uses. Business services include mailing and packaging services, photo finishing, janitorial services, copying and similar uses. 
Pet day boarding: The boarding of pets for less than a 24-hour period, with no overnight stays, as an accessory use to a veterinary clinic or pet grooming business. 
Pinellas Planning Council (PPC): The countywide planning body for Pinellas County established by Chapter 88-464, Laws of Florida. 
Plan: The City's Comprehensive Plan. 
Potable water: Water suitable for consumption. 
Primary use: The predominant use of the land or of a structure. 
Private club: An association organized and operated on a nonprofit basis for persons who are bona fide dues paying members established for the fraternal, social, educational, recreational or cultural enrichment of its members. Food, meals and beverages may be served on premises. This definition is not intended to include bottle clubs as defined by Section 62.00(C) of this Code. 
Project: A development activity along with the site improvements required by this Code. 
Public education facilities: These uses are defined as elementary schools, special education facilities, alternative education facilities, middle schools, high schools, and area vocational-technical schools of the Pinellas County School District. 
Public facilities and services: Those necessary public facilities and services covered by a Comprehensive Plan Element for which level of service standards have been adopted by the City. These include sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water, and recreation. 
Public hearing: A meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public, with the public given the opportunity to participate. 
Public/semipublic: The uses appropriate under the preservation, recreation/open space, institutional and transportation/utility categories or the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map Series. 
Quality restaurant: A sit-down restaurant with table turnover rates of one hour or more. 
Quasi-public: A public service rendered by a nonprofit organization. 
Recording: Filed and recorded with the Clerk of the Court for Pinellas County. 
Recovery home: A group residential facility with one or more supervisors residing on the premises, with professional staff services needed, providing board, lodging, supervision, medication and other treatment and counseling, for personal progressing from relatively intensive treatment for crime, delinquency, mental or emotional illness, alcoholism, drug addiction, or similar conditions to full normal participation in community life and persons otherwise in need of a structured environment to deal with such conditions. 
Recreational vehicle: A portable vehicle which can be towed, hauled or driven and is mainly intended for recreational use. Recreational vehicles shall include, but not be limited to, any motorized home, travel trailer, small cargo trailer, boat, boat trailer, house boat, horse van, slide in or pop up camper, collapsible trailer and similar vehicles. 
Recreational vehicle park: A facility designed for temporary or transient living accommodations for recreational, camping, and travel related purposes. A recreational vehicle park shall not include hotel, motel, or lodging facility. 
Regional brewery: A duly-licensed brewery with an annual beer production of between 15,000 and 6,000,000 barrels. A regional brewery may include a taproom as an accessory use. 
Rental service establishment: Any establishment where the primary use is the rental to the general public of household items and tools, gardening tools and equipment, small appliances, sporting goods or similar items. A rental service establishment shall not include the rental of vehicles. 
Repair service: Any establishment where the primary use is the repair and general service of common home appliances such as radio and T.V., sewing machines, lawn mowers, upholstering and draperies, musical instruments, power tools and similar services. 
Reserve strip: A strip of land specifically created or designed to have the effect of denying access from adjacent property to a public street. 
Residential equivalent use: A residential-like accommodation other than a dwelling unit, including, group home, congregate care, nursing home and comparable assisted living facilities. No such use shall be required or eligible to employ the residential equivalent standards for density/intensity for any household that qualifies as a dwelling unit. This use shall not include any type of use authorized by Chapter 419, F.S., Community Residential Homes, which is entitled to be treated as a dwelling unit. 
Residential living facility: A dwelling unit licensed to serve clients of the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services as defined by Section 52.00 of this Code. 
Residential treatment facility: Any residential establishment other than a hospital or nursing home providing relatively intensive diagnostic or therapeutic services for its residents for alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, emotional problems, developmental disabilities or similar conditions. 
Retail food establishment: An establishment where the primary use is the sale of takeout food or delivery with limited accessory seating. Such establishments include ice cream shops, delicatessens, sandwich shops, caterers, and pizza delivery establishments. These types of establishments are often found in association with shopping centers. 
Retail sales: Any establishment where the primary use is the sale of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption. Limited processing may be permitted as accessory to the selling activity. 
Rezone: An amendment to the Official Zoning Atlas changing the zoning classification of a particular parcel of land. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by dedication, prescription, condemnation or purchase for use as a road, crosswalk, railroad line, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, other utility lines, or similar use. A right-of-way reservation is a strip of land intended for future purchase as a right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" does not include easement. 
Right-of-way line: The lines that form the outer boundaries of a right-of-way. 
Schools of general education: A public, parochial, private school, college, or university, or a school for the mentally or physically handicapped, giving regular instruction at least five (5) days per week except holidays for a normal school year. A school of general education does not include a school of special education or day care center unless conducted as a part of a school of general education. 
School of special education: A school of special education is a school devoted primarily to giving instruction in special subjects such as vocational, technical, music, arts, dancing, drama, linguistic, religious, business, secretarial and similar subjects. 
Screening: A method of visually shielding or obscuring an adjoining structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
Self-service gasoline station: An establishment where the retail sale of gasoline is pumped by the customer and usually occurs in conjunction with the retail sale of convenience items such as milk, bread, soda, soap and similar household or personal items. 
Service station: An establishment where the primary use is the retail sale of gasoline, tires, oil, batteries and other automobile accessories but which also includes not more than four (4) service stalls for the performance of regular automotive maintenance services and minor vehicle repair. 
Setback (line): A line that is required by this Code as the minimum distance from a lot line. 
Shopping center: A group of three (3) or more commercial establishments planned, constructed, or managed as a total entity, with parking provided on site. 
Shoreline: A line which follows the mean high water line for tidal waterbodies and the ordinary high water line for fresh water. 
Site: Any lot, parcel of land or combination of adjoining lots or parcels of land where development is to be performed as a single project. 
Site plan: A development proposal prepared and submitted pursuant to Section 229.02 of this Code. 
Soil map: A map prepared by the Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture indicating soil characteristics including slope, seasonal high water, permeability and natural drainage class. 
Special event: Any temporary meeting, activity, parade or gathering having a common purpose on any private or public property which preempts the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular travel or which deviates from the established use of said area. 
Special exception: A conditional use for which the Board of Appeals has the authority for review and approval as specifically established by the terms of the Code. 
Story: That portion of a structure between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Street: A strip of land intended for vehicular and pedestrian travel and providing the primary access to property. 
Street (local): Any street not functionally classified as a thoroughfare by the Traffic Circulation Element of the Comprehensive Pan. 
Street (private): Any street which is not owned and maintained by the City, County or State. 
Street (thoroughfare): Any street functionally classified as a collector, arterial, or expressway by the Traffic Circulation Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
Street intersection: Where two or more streets cross at grade. 
Street line: The dividing line between a street and a lot. For private streets the street line shall be the edge of the pavement or the edge of the legally described access easement, whichever is greater. 
Structure: A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. 
Studio: A structure or portion of a structure used as a place to work by an artist, photographer, musician or similar artisan. 
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel as defined, prepared and submitted in accordance with the standards, requirements and procedures of Article XI of this Code. 
Submerged land: Those lands situated below the mean low waterline or all those lands covered by the mean high water line. 
Surveyor: A professional who is registered with and licensed by the State of Florida as a land surveyor. 
SWFWMD: Southwest Florida Water Management District. 
Taproom: A room that is ancillary to the production of beer at a brewery, microbrewery, and brewpub where the public can purchase and/or consume alcoholic beverages as licensed and regulated by the State of Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco. 
Tasting Room: A room that is ancillary to the production of spirits where the public can purchase and/or consume the spirits produced by the micro-distillery on site as licensed and regulated by the State of Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco. 
Tavern: An establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises, sometimes also serving food. 
Temporary structure: A structure without any permanent foundation or footings and which is removed after a designated time period. 
Temporary use: Any use of property or of a structure which is not designed nor intended to be permanent in nature. 
Thoroughfare intersection: Where a thoroughfare street crosses another street at grade. 
Tide: A periodic rise and fall of salty or brackish waters caused by gravitational pull. 
Tier: A series of rows of lots arranged one above or behind the other. 
Tourist home: A single-family detached dwelling used to provide temporary lodging accommodations for compensation to transient residents, especially tourists. A transient resident shall mean a visitor to the community who does not use the dwelling as a principal residence, who is neither gainfully employed in the community nor a student currently enrolled in a school located in the community or who resides in the dwelling for 6 weeks or less. The term tourist home shall not include a hotel/motel, lodging facilities or boarding homes. Tourist homes shall not be located within 1,200 feet of a pre-existing tourist home. The locational standard shall be measured from the nearest property line of the existing home to the nearest property line of the proposed home. 
Toxic, hazardous, or industrial wastes: A solid waste or combination of solid wastes which because of its or their quality, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported, disposed of, stored, treated or otherwise managed and further classified by the Florida Substance List, Chapter 442,103, Florida statutes. 
TRC: The Technical Review Committee of the City Staff designated by this Code to review development activities for compliance with the applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
Traffic generation: The vehicular traffic likely to be attracted to a particular use. The traffic rate is defined by the current edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers Trip Generation Rate Manual. 
Transfer of development rights: The transfer of a right to develop, expressed in terms of residential density or floor area ratio, from land in one area or designation to land in another area or designation where the transfer is permitted in accordance with Sections 166.00 through 166.03 of this Code. 
Transient accommodation use: A use offering transient lodging accommodations for a term of less than one month, more than three times in any consecutive 12-month period for tourists; such as hotels, motels, inns, resorts, and recreational vehicle parks. Accessory services shall be limited to gift shops which offer convenience items, coffee shops, and recreational facilities. All accessory services shall be oriented toward the convenience of the guest and not for the general public. 
Transitional use: A use of land or a structure of an intermediate intensity between a more intensive and less intensive use. 
Transportation management plan: As developed by an applicant representing a proposed development, is submitted in conjunction with individual site plans seeking to utilize transportation management strategies to address their development impacts, protect roadway capacity and to increase mobility (See Section 141.11 for further information). 
Transportation management system: The management of development impacts on transportation facilities and implementation of mobility improvements pursuant to the Mobility Plan. 
Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed primarily for overnight or extended occupancy on a transient basis. 
Tree: As defined in Section 153.01 of this Code. 
Trip: A single one-way vehicle movement either to or from a subject use or parcel of land. 
USACOE: U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Use: The purpose of activity for which land or structures are designed, arranged or intended, or for which they are actually occupied or maintained. 
USFWS: U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 
Utility service (light): Means any of the following uses: 
a.  Electric substations and distribution centers; 
b.  Natural gas, oil and petroleum product distribution centers; 
c.  Radio, television, and microwave facilities; 
d.  Stand-alone sewage pumping stations not accessory to a project or use of land; 
e.  Telecommunication facilities; 
f.  Stand-alone potable water storage and pumping stations not accessory to a project or use of land; 
g.  Service and supply yards less than one-half (1/2) acre in size. 
Utility service (heavy): Establishments engaged in the generation, transmission and/or distribution of utilities including electricity, gas or steam, potable water and sanitary sewer systems, and the collection or disposal of solid waste including sanitary landfills. The term heavy utility service shall include related service and supply yards in excess of one-half (1/2) acre in size. 
Vehicle: A self-propelled device used for the transportation of people or goods, and may include vehicles used for recreation and vehicle trailers. 
Vehicle rental establishment: Any establishment where the primary use is the rental of vehicles such as automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, boats, travel trailers, farm equipment and construction equipment. 
Vehicle repair (major): An establishment where the primary use is the major repair, custom rebuilding and reconditioning of vehicles or related vehicle parts including collision service, welding, machine work, vehicle painting and where services not otherwise classified as minor vehicle repair are provided. 
Vehicle repair (minor): An establishment where vehicle accessories may be supplied and/or dispensed for retail sale, and where the following vehicle repair services are performed entirely within an enclosed structure: 
a.  Tire servicing and repair, provided no recapping and regrooving occurs; 
b.  Replacement of mufflers, tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, wipers and blades, wheel bearings, mirrors and similar service; 
c.  Replacement of batteries, water pumps, fuel pumps and alternators; 
d.  Radiator cleaning and flushing; 
e.  Washing, polishing and detailing; 
f.  Oil change, greasing and lubrication; 
g.  Minor servicing, repair and rebuilding of carburetors; 
h.  Adjusting and repairing brakes; 
i.  Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the engine, head or crank case; 
j.  Warranty maintenance, safety inspections, and regular maintenance activities. 
Vehicle sales establishment: Any establishment where the primary use is the retail sale of vehicles such as automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, boats, travel trailers, farm equipment and construction equipment. Accessory vehicle repair (major or minor) and vehicle preparation may be provided. 
Warehouse: An establishment where the primary use is the storage of merchandise, products, or materials in bulk for a fee or change or for distribution to other establishments operated by the same business enterprise. 
Water-dependent uses: Establishments which provide activities which can only be carried out on, in or adjacent to the water because the use requires access to the water for transportation, recreation, power generation, or water supply. 
Water-related uses: Establishments which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body but which provide amenities, goods, or services directly related to a water body or water dependent uses. 
Waterline (mean high): The line formed by the intersection of the tidal plane of mean high water with the shore as established by the procedures of Chapter 177, Florida Statutes under the Florida Coastal Mapping Act. 
Waterline (ordinary high): The line formed by the intersection of the plane of mean high water with the shore for fresh waterbodies and watercourses with reference to current USGS or other official government sources. 
Wholesale trade: An establishment primarily engaged in the selling of merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers for the purpose of buying merchandise for, or selling to, such companies. 
Yard: Any area on the same lot or parcel with a structure lying between the structure and the nearest lot line, unobstructed from the ground upward and unoccupied except encroachments permitted in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
Yard (front): A yard extending across the full width of a lot or parcel between any structure and the front lot line measured perpendicular to the structure. On a corner lot the front yard shall be defined in accordance with Section 23.05 of this Code. 
Yard (rear): A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear of the structure, and measured perpendicular to the structure to the closest point of the rear lot line. 
Yard (side): A yard between the side lot line and the sides of the structure, measured from the front yard to the rear yard perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the structure. On a corner lot the side yard shall be defined in accordance with Section 23.05 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 5-5-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 15, 3-16-2015; Memo of 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 4, 8-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-18, §§ 1, 2, 6-6-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 2, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 6-19-2017; Ord. No. 2017-37, § 2, 12-18-2017; Ord. No. 2018-17, § 5, 12-17-2018) 
272.00-275.00. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII - FEES AND CHARGES 

276.00 - Fees. 
(A)  The following fees are hereby established for this Code: 
TYPE OF SERVICE REVIEW FEE PUBLIC NOTICE FEE LAND USE: Land Use Change Only (PPC or City) $750.00 plus TBRPC fee paid prior to adopting if applicable (a) $600.00 (small-scale) 
$1,000.00 (large-scale) ZONING: Conditional Use $350.00 $50.00 Appeal (BOA) $200.00 $50.00 Variance $250.00 plus $25.00 per additional request on same property $50.00 Rezoning Only $500.00 $600.00 ZONING FOLLOWING ANNEXATION: Specific Request $500.00 $600.00 Assigned by City $0.00 $0.00 Zoning Determination Letter $25.00 $0.00 SUBDIVISION PLAT: Replat $1,000.00 (b) $50.00 Final $1,000.00 (b) $50.00 Minor $500.00 (b) $50.00 Amendment $500.00 (b) $50.00 SITE PLAN: Residential $500.00 (two acres or less) 
$750.00 (more than two acres) $50.00 Nonresidential $500.00 (two acres or less 
$750.00 (more than two acres) $50.00 Site Plan Extension Request $100.00 $0.00 Minor Amendment $150.00 $0.00 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: Conceptual Development Plan $500.00 plus TBRPC paid prior to adoption if applicable (a) $300.00 Final Development Plan $250.00 $300.00 Minor Modifications $125.00 $0.00 Time Extensions $75.00 $0.00 Major Modifications or Development Plan Amendment - Same as Preliminary Development Plan Fees (a) The Tampa Bay Regional Planning Council (TBRPC) Review Fee is established by the TBRP and is payable upon receipt of bill from TBRPC and prior to adoption if applicable. (b) Plus Surveyor's Certification Fee, payable upon receipt of bill from Surveyor and prior to City approval. (c) Plus additional costs for expert review and testimony solicited by the City to prepare and/or evaluate necessary submissions required under section 130(c). The City shall make a not-to-exceed total fee estimate known to the applicant prior to same services being rendered. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS: Request to Negotiate $50.00 $0.00 Development Proposal $500.00 $300.00 Agreement Modification $200.00 $300.00 Agreement Extension $200.00 $0.00 Concurrency Determination Appeal $150.00 Application Fee 
plus $350.00 deposit, balance of actual cost of hearing paid on a 50/50 basis between Applicant and the City $0.00 HISTORIC PRESERVATION: Application for Designation $100.00 $0.00 Certificate of Approval $250.00 $300.00 Economic Hardship Exceptions (c) $500.00 $300.00 Appeals $150.00 $300.00 OTHER: Vacation of Property (Rights-of-Way, Easements and Alleyways) $150.00 $25.00 Temporary Use $50.00 $0.00 A-Frame/Sandwich Board Sign $25.00 $0.00 Time Extensions $50.00 $0.00 Alcoholic Beverage Waiver $50.00 $0.00  
277.00 - Charges. 
(A)  The following fees are hereby established for this Code: 
TYPE OF SERVICE FEE Land Development Code $45.00 Individual Articles $0.15 per page Zoning District Schedule $3.50 Overall Zoning Map $7.50 Comprehensive Plan: Future Land Use Map $7.50 Individual Element (unbound) $0.15 per page Entire Plan Package $45.00 Policy Plan $15.00 Copying $0.15 per page Zoning and Land Use Atlas $10.00 Redevelopment Plan $20.00  
278.00 - Fee waivers. 
(A)  No waiver of the review fees established herein shall be authorized, except that the City Manager shall be authorized to waive the required fee where the review involves an application or submittal by another governmental entity. 
279.00-285.00 - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code as updated through June 20, 2011, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted since June 20, 2011, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 2011-09  8-15-2011 1 62.00 2011-10  8-15-2011 1 36.03(B) 2012-07  5- 7-2012 1 98.02, table VI-1 2       Dltd 98.03, figure 3 3       Dltd 98.04, figure 4 4 98.05, table VI-3       Dltd 98.05(D)       Rltd 98.05(E), (F)       as 98.05(D), (E) 5 98.06(B)(1), (2) 2012-09  5-21-2012 1 23.07 2 23.10 3 36.00(D) 4 36.03(B)(2) 5       Rpld 51.02(E)       Rltd 51.02(F), (G)       as 51.02(E), (F) 6 152.01(B)(6) 7 209.02(A) 2012-11  8- 6-2012 1 200.00(A)(10) 2012-13  8- 6-2012 1       Added 25.09(C)(15) 2 62.00(A) 2012-16 10- 1-2012 1 24.04(A), (B) 2012-19 12-17-2012 1, 2 52.00(A), (G) 3 52.02 2013-22  8-19-2013 1 98.05(A) 2013-31  3-17-2014 1       Rpld 141.14 2013-32 12-16-2013 1       Added 20.00(D)       Rltd 20.00(D)-(G)       as 20.00(E)-(H) 2 25.00 3 25.02(F)(5) 4       Added 25.11 5       Rnbd 25.11-25.13       as 25.12-25.14 2014-01  1-21-2014 1 209.02(B) 2 211.03 2014-03  3-17-2014 1 271.00 2       Added 25.09(B)(18), (C)(16) 3       Added 25.12(B)(23), (24), (C)(9) 4       Added 69.00 5 98.02 6       Added 147.04(G)(5)(p), (q) 2014-04  5- 5-2014 1 271.00 2       Added 25.09(B)(19) 25.09(D) 3       Added 70.00 4 147.04(G)(5)(m) 2014-09  5-19-2014 1 207.00 2 209.02 2014-16 10- 6-2014 1 36.00(F)(4), (5) 2 36.03(E) 2015-02  3-16-2015 1 53.00, 53.01 2 53.01 2015-03  3-16-2015 1 153.00-153.11 2015-04  3-16-2015 1 154.00(C) 2       Dltd 154.01 3 154.02 4       Added 154.03       Rnbd 154.03-154.07       as 154.04-154.08 154.04(B) 5 154.05, 154.07 2015-05  3-16-2015 1 23.10 2 24.03(A)(4) 3 25.06(E)(2) 4 25.14(D)(1)(b) 5 41.00(G) 6 59.00(E) 7 65.00(B) 8 80.00(B)(1) 9 81.00(B)(10), (11) 10 98.05 11 117.00(C)(12) 12 147.05(B)(1) 13 166.00(E) 14 231.00(C)(4) 15 271.00(231) 2015-06  3-16-2015 1       Added 83.00(B)(8) 2015-07  3-16-2015 1       Added 229.02(B)(26)-(30)       Rnbd 229.02(B)(26)-(56)       as 229.02(B)(31)-(61) 2015-09  5- 4-2015 1 153.07(D)(1) 2015-12  5-18-2015 1 246.00(B)(2) Memo  1-19-2016 271.00 2016-07  6- 6-2016 1 20.00(F)(1) 2 224.00(C)(9) 2016-09  6- 6-2016 1       Added 63.01(H)-(J) 2       Added 63.03(A)(8) 3       Added 63.09(E) 2016-10  6- 6-2016 1 153.01-153.11 2 154.03 3 229.02 2016-14  6- 6-2016 1 23.07 2 36.00(F) 3 149.00 2016-15  6- 6-2016 1 36.03(B)(1)       Added 36.03(B)(5) 2016-16  6- 6-2016 1 54.00 2016-18  6- 6-2016 1, 2 271.00 2016-19  8- 1-2016 1 196.00 2 198.00 3 200.00 4 201.00 5 206.03 6 208.00 7 209.02 8 210.00 9 211.04 10       Rnbd 211.06       as 211.05 11       Rnbd 212.01       as 212.03 12       Rpld 212.02 13       Added 212.01 14       Added 212.02 15       Rnbd 212.03       as 212.04 16       Rnbd 212.04       as 212.05 17       Rnbd 212.05       as 212.06 18 213.00 19       Added 214.00 20       Rpld 211.05 2016-25  1-17-2017 1 23.09 2 25.02(F)(5)(a) 3 98.05 2017-03  3- 6-2017 1       Added 72.00 2 271.00 2017-05  2- 6-2017 1 25.14(15) 2017-15  6-19-2017 1 271.00 2 25.09(B)(18), (C)(16) 3 25.12(B)(23), (24), (C)(9) 4 69.00 5 98.02 6 147.04(G)(5)(p), (q) 2017-17  6-19-2017 1 147.04(G)(5)(p), (q) 2017-37 12-18-2017 2 271.00 3       Added 73.00 4       Added 25.12(B)(25), (26) 2018-04  4- 2-2018 2 231.00(C) 2018-05  5- 7-2018 2 36.03(B)(2), (5), (E)       Added 36.03(I) 2018-06  5- 7-2018 2 158.00(A) 3       Added 38.00(A)(7)       Rnbd 38.00(A)(7)       as 38.00(A)(8) 2018-07  5-23-2018 2 23.07 3 23.09 4 36.02(C) 5 36.04 6       Added 36.06 2018-08  5-23-2018 2       Added 171.00 3       Added 231.00(C)(13) 2018-11  6-18-2018 2 229.01(A)(4) 3 229.05(C)(1), (3)       Added 229.05(C)(4)       Rnbd 229.05(C)(4)-(10)       as 229.05(C)(5)-(11) 4 147.05(F)(1) 5       Added 143.03(O) 6       Added 147.04(I) 7 149.00(D) 8 183.06(B) 2018-12  8-20-2018 2       Added 172.00 2018-13  8-20-2018 2 153.01(U)       Added 153.01(CC)       Rltd 153.01(CC)-(EE)       as 153.01(DD)-(FF) 3 153.05(C) 4 153.07(D)(2), (5), (6)       Dltd 153.07(G) 5 229.02(B)(27) 2018-14 10- 1-2018 2 166.02 3 167.00 2018-15  8-20-2018 1 155.01 2018-17 12-17-2018 2 226.02 3 234.01(A), (B), 234.05 4       Added 239.00 5 271.00 2018-18 11-19-2018 2       Added 42.00 2019-01  1-22-2019 2 36-05 2019-02  3-18-2019 2       Added 58.00(D) 3       Added 211.01(C)  
