THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SPRINGFIELD, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
Adopted: June 4, 2001 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SPRINGFIELD, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert E. Walker 
Mayor-Commissioner 
____________ 
Carl Curti 
Earnest Jordan 
Beth McLean 
John Gipson 
City Commissioners 
____________ 
Donald J. Banks 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Joyce Maynor 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City 
of Springfield, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972 Code, as supplemented through 
August 3, 1981, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each 
section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a 
note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By 
use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 
1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various 
sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of 
the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law 
citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many 
state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The 
figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of 
the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first 
section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same 
time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For 
example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-
2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions 
may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter 
embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the 
subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may 
be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical 
arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the 
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter 
immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of 
codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding 
prefixes: 
CHARTER 
CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 
RL:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
RLCT:1 
CODE 
CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 
CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 
CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
SLT:1 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX 
CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 
CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed 
under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and 
still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the 
particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will 
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new 
pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Vice-President, of the Municipal 
Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's 
staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to former Charles A. Yautz, City Clerk, and Donald J. Banks, City 
Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is 
hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make 
the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-
day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City 
of Springfield, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of 
contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law 
references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such 
material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Springfield, Florida. 
©? Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Springfield, Florida. 2001. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 410 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Springfield, Florida; Providing for 
the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation 
Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and 
This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Now, Therefore, Be it Enacted by the People of Springfield, in Bay County, Florida: 
    Section 1: The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Florida," published by 
Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 82, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2: All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 4, 
2000, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are 
repealed. 
    Section 3: The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance 
or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4: Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any 
provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be 
punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or by both 
such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur 
shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is 
expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is 
reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue 
remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5: Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the 
intention of the City Commission to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be 
incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6: Ordinances adopted after December 4, 2000, that amend or refer to ordinances that have 
been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Commissioners, in Regular Session, in Springfield, Bay 
County, Florida, this 4th day of June, 2001. 
CITY COMMISSION OF SPRINGFIELD, FLORIDA 
By 

/s/ ?  
      ROBERT E. WALKER, MAYOR 
 
 
ATTEST: 
/s/ ?  
      JOYCE H. MAYNOR, CITY CLERK 

 
 
First Reading: May 7, 2001 
Second Reading: June 4, 2001 
Dates Published: May 17, 2001 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have 
been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent 
nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general 
and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be 
able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. 
Date  
Adopted 
Include/  
Omit 
Supp. No. 
471 
?4-?7-2008 
Omit 
9 
474 
?9-?2-2008 
Omit 
9 
477 
12-?1-2008 
Omit 
9 
478 
12-?1-2008 
Omit 
9 
479 
12-?1-2008 
Include 
9 
480 
11-24-2008 
Omit 
9 
481 
?7-?6-2009 
Include 
9 
482 
?9-29-2009 
Omit 
9 
483 
12-?7-2009 
Omit 
9 
484 
?8-?2-2010 
Omit 
9 
485 
10-?1-2010 
Omit 
9 
486 
?6-?6-2011 
Omit 
9 
487 
?6-?6-2011 
Omit 
9 
488 
?6-?6-2011 
Omit 
9 
489 
?6-?6-2011 
Omit 
9 
490 
?6-?6-2011 
Omit 
9 
491 
?8-?1-2011 
Omit 
10 
492 
?8-?1-2011 
Omit 
10 
493 
?8-?1-2011 
Omit 
10 
494 
?8-?1-2011 
Omit 
10 
495 
?8-?1-2011 
Omit 
10 
496 
?8-?1-2011 
Omit 
10 
497 
?9-?6-2011 
Include 
10 
498 
10-?3-2011 
Omit 
10 
499 
10-?3-2011 
Omit 
10 
500 
10-?3-2011 
Omit 
10 
501 
?9-30-2011 
Omit 
10 
502 
?1-?3-2012 
Include 
10 
503 
?2-20-2012 
Omit 
10 
504 
?6-?4-2012 
Omit 
10 
505 
?2-?6-2012 
Omit 
10 
506 
?2-20-2012 
Omit 
10 
507 
?5-?7-2012 
Omit 
10 
508 
?7-?2-2012 
Include 
10 
509 
?7-?2-2012 
Omit 
10 
510 
?9-28-2012 
Omit 
10 
511 
?3-?4-2013 
Include 
10 
512 
?5-20-2013 
Omit 
10 
513 
?9-30-2013 
Omit 
10 
514 
?9-30-2013 
Omit 
10 
515 
?1-?6-2014 
Omit 
10 
516 
?1-21-2014 
Include 
10 
517 
?4-?1-2014 
Include 
10 
518 
?4-?7-2014 
Omit 
10 
519 
?6-?2-2014 
Omit 
10 
520 
?6-?2-2014 
Omit 
10 
521 
?6-?2-2014 
Omit 
10 
522 
11-?3-2014 
Include 
10 
523 
11-?3-2014 
Include 
10 
524 
?1-?5-2015 
Omit 
10 
525 
12-?2-2015 
Include 
10 
526 
?7-20-2015 
Include 
10 
527 
?1-?4-2016 
Omit 
10 
16-02(Res.) 
?4-26-2016 
Omit 
10 
528 
?7-?5-2016 
Include 
10 
529 
?7-?5-2016 
Omit 
10 
530 
?7-?5-2016 
Omit 
10 
531 
?7-?5-2016 
Omit 
10 
532 
?7-?5-2016 
Omit 
10 
533 
?7-?5-2016 
Omit 
10 
535 
11-?7-2016 
Include 
10 
536 
?1-?3-2017 
Omit 
10 
537 
?5-?1-2017 
Include 
10 
538 
?5-?1-2017 
Omit 
10 
540 
?7-?3-2017 
Omit 
10 
541 
?8-?7-2017 
Include 
10 
 


PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 


Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 


ARTICLE I. - CIVIL SERVICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the civil service act of the City of Springfield, Florida, as adopted by 
Laws of Fla., ch. 57-1871. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following 
amended provisions. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a 
uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for 
clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— For authority to create a civil service system, Fla. Const. art. III, § 14. 


Sec. 1. - Membership number of board. 
    The civil service board shall be composed of five members. 
(Ord. No. 333, § 1, 8-17-1995) 


Sec. 2. - Appointment of board members. 
    The city commission shall appoint two members and the employees of the city shall appoint two 
members and the four members shall appoint the fifth member. The seats shall be designated and named 
by consecutive number. The current three commissioners shall be numbered one, three and five. The city 
commission appointee shall be designated as seat one, the employee appointee shall be designated as 
seat three and the civil service board appointee shall be designated as seat five. Hereafter, the city 
commission appointees shall be seats one and two, the employee appointees shall be seats three and 
four and the civil service board appointee shall remain seat five. 
(Ord. No. 333, § 2, 8-17-1995) 


Sec. 3. - Initial terms of board members. 
    The initial terms of the new appointees may be for a period that is longer or shorter than two years 
because of the timing of the referendum. Their appointed terms shall be staggered with the other 
appointee from the same appointing body. Thereafter, all members shall serve for two years. 
(Ord. No. 333, § 3, 8-17-1995) 


Sec. 4. - Filling vacancies on board. 
    Whenever any vacancy shall occur in the office of civil service commissioner by death, resignation or 
otherwise, his successor shall be elected in the same manner as the position was originally filled wherein 
the vacancy occurred, which successor shall be elected to serve for the unexpired term of his 
predecessor in office. Such vacancy shall be filled within fifteen (15) days after the same occurs. 


Sec. 5. - Board membership qualifications. 
    Any qualified voter residing in the city over the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be eligible to hold 
office of commissioner of civil service, provided that no person who has been convicted of a felony or who 
is an officer or employee of the city shall be eligible to hold said office. 


Sec. 6. - Board staff. 
    The civil service board is authorized to secure such clerks, stenographers and assistants as may be 
necessary to perform the clerical work of the board; provided however, that such clerks, stenographers or 
assistants shall not be employees or officials of the City of Springfield either regular or part-time. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 63-1946, § 1) 


Sec. 7. - Board organization. 
    Immediately after the appointment of the commissioners and their taking office, the board shall 
organize by electing one of its members chairman, to act as such until the newly elected board shall 
assume the duties of the office. A chairman shall be elected from and by the board of civil service 
commissioners to serve for two (2) years. 


Sec. 8. - Meetings of board. 
    The board of civil service commissioners shall meet on the second Tuesday in August, and quarterly 
thereafter, and shall be subject to call at the request of the chairman or the other two (2) members of the 
board of civil service commissioners. 


Sec. 9. - Reports to commission of accomplishments of board. 
    A report of the accomplishments and actions of the board shall be made known to the city 
commission as soon as practicable after such accomplishment or action. 


Sec. 10. - Participants in system—Departments and officers included and excluded. 
    All persons or officers regularly employed on a full-time basis in the fire department, police 
department, administration department, water department, street department, or sanitary department of 
the city, and who have been in continuous employment on a regular and full-time basis for sixty (60) days 
prior to January first, 1957, and who are still employed by the city at the time this act takes effect (May 30, 
1957) shall be members of the civil service. Members of the fire department known as volunteer firemen 
shall not be members of civil service. No head or heads or chief or chiefs of any department, except the 
chiefs of the fire department and the police department shall be members of civil service. No employee of 
the engineering department shall be a member of civil service. The city manager, city auditor and clerk, 
city attorney, and municipal judge shall not be members of the civil service, but any person who is a 
member of civil service at such time such person is hired and appointed as city auditor and clerk, ceases 
to serve as city auditor and clerk for any reason other than discharge based on immorality, drunkenness, 
dishonesty or the commission of a crime, shall be entitled to reinstatement in civil service with the same 
rank and seniority held by such person at the time such person was hired as city auditor and clerk. 
(Laws of Fla., ch. 75-508, § 1) 


Sec. 11. - Same—Registration; confirmation of existing members. 
    The board of civil service commissioners are hereby required to register the names of all officers, 
employees, and persons set forth in section 10 hereof, and to set opposite the name the respective office, 
rank or employment of said person upon January first, 1957, and all of said persons are hereby confirmed 
in said office, rank or employment as members of the civil service, and shall not be demoted, suspended, 
or discharged except in accordance with sections 21, 22, 23 and 24. 


Sec. 12. - Seniority commencement. 
    All employees affected by this act shall hold their rank and seniority commencing as of January first, 
1957, and all prior service shall not affect the rank or seniority of any employee. 


Sec. 13. - Recommendation required for full-time employment. 
    No person shall hereafter, except as provided in the previous section (section 12) of this act, be 
eligible for employment on a full-time basis in the departments affected by this act unless the said person 
is so recommended by the board of civil service commissioners of the city. 


Sec. 14. - Promulgation and enforcement of appointment and employment rules and regulations. 
    The board of civil service commissioners shall adopt, amend and enforce a code of rules and 
regulations providing for the appointment and employment in all positions on a full-time basis in the 
departments affected by this act for the city, based on merit, efficiency, character and industry which shall 
have the force and effect of law; shall make investigations concerning the enforcement and effect of this 
chapter and of the rules adopted. 


Sec. 15. - Prescribing examinations; maintaining eligibles list. 
    The board of civil service commissioners shall prescribe examination in accordance with the rules 
and regulations adopted, and shall maintain a preferred and regular list of eligibles of each class of those 
meeting the requirements of such regulations. 


Sec. 16. - Employment from eligibles' names furnished city commission. 
    No person shall be employed in the departments affected by this act other than those provided for in 
sections 10, 11 and 12, except upon recommendation of the board of civil service commissioners; when 
necessity for employment exists in the departments affected by this act, a list of three (3) eligible persons 
for each position to be filled shall be furnished to the city commission of the city, and the position or 
positions shall be filled by the person or persons being selected from those recommended by the board of 
civil service commissioners. 


Sec. 17. - Promotion basis; filling vacancies by promotion. 
    The board of civil service commissioners shall, by its rules, provide for the promotion in the 
departments affected by this act on the basis of ascertained merit and seniority in service, and shall 
provide in all cases when practical, that vacancies shall be filled by promotion. 


Sec. 18. - Probation period. 
    An appointment, employment, or promotion shall not be deemed complete except as to officers and 
employees provided for in sections 10, 11 and 12 hereof, until a period of probation of six (6) months has 
elapsed, and probationer may be discharged or reduced at any time within the said period of six (6) 
months by the city commission or the head of the department in which the probationer is employed, but if 
no discharge be made within a period of six (6) months, then said appointment, employment or promotion 
shall be deemed complete, and shall entitle the employee or appointee, unless sooner removed pursuant 
to law, to hold said position until the expiration of the term of office for which said person has been 
appointed and said employee shall be deemed a member of the civil service. 


Sec. 19. - Employment during good behavior. 
    All persons who are members of the civil service by reason of the provisions of sections 10, 11 and 
12, or who may hereafter become members of the civil service shall hold their office or appointment 
during good behavior unless reduced, discharged, or suspended in accordance with section 20, 21, 22, 
23 or 24. 


Sec. 20. - Reduction in force. 
    When it appears to the mayor or to the head of any department affected by this act that an excessive 
number of persons are employed in their respective department, they shall investigate the things so 
certified, and after the city commissioners are of the opinion that an excessive number of persons are 
employed in any or all of the respective departments of the city, then the city commissioners shall have 
the right to discharge the excessive employees; provided, however, that the person who stands lowest in 
rank or grade and lower in point of seniority in that rank or grade shall be the first discharged, and said 
system of discharge shall continue until the excessive number of employees shall have been reduced in 
accordance with the certification of the mayor or the head of the departments affected; provided further, 
that such person or persons discharged shall be placed on the preferred list of the board of civil service 
commissioners, and shall be given priority for employment. In the event a vacancy occurs, in any 
department, persons discharged in that department under the provisions of this section and who have 
been placed on the preferred list, shall be employed in their respective order as to rank and seniority, and 
the board of civil service commissioners shall not recommend for employment any person or persons 
upon the regular list, until all persons upon the preferred list shall be employed. Upon the preferred list, 
the candidates for employment shall be classified first by rank and next by seniority. The person who was 
of the highest rank and had served the longest period of time in such rank shall be first on said list, and 
shall be entitled to fill the next vacancy in employment, and such system shall be continued until all 
persons on the preferred list shall be employed. 


Sec. 21. - Procedure for suspending, removing, fining or discharging. 
    No officer or employee in the civil service appointed, employed, promoted or confirmed under the 
terms and provisions of sections 10, 11 and 12 of this act, and no officer or employee in the civil service 
who, after examination, has been appointed, employed or promoted under rules of said civil service, shall 
be removed, suspended, fined or discharged except for cause shown upon written charges of misconduct 
or violation of law, or rules of civil service, and after opportunity to be heard in his own defense. Such 
charges shall be investigated by and before said board. The findings and decision of the board of civil 
service commissioners shall be certified by the mayor of the city and shall be enforced by the mayor, but 
the head of any department may suspend a subordinate for a reasonable period, not to exceed thirty (30) 
days, and his action in said suspension shall be reported to the board of civil service commissioners. On 
application in writing of the person so suspended, the board of civil service commissioners shall 
investigate said suspension and in the event they find that same was unwarranted and without cause, 
they shall certify their findings to the mayor of the city, and the said person suspended shall receive 
compensation for the time for which he was suspended. Charges for suspension, removal or demotion 
shall be in letter form, and shall concisely and briefly state the charges against the employee sought to be 
removed, suspended or demoted. This section shall not apply in the event of an excessive employment, 
as above provided. 


Sec. 22. - Causes for reduction, suspension, discharge, fine or dismissal—Members generally. 
    Any member of the civil service who shall be incompetent, neglect his duty, be guilty of 
insubordination, immorality or drunkenness, shall be subject to reduction, suspension, discharge, fine or 
dismissal. Any employee affected by this act who shall engage in political activities, either federal, state, 
county or city, shall be subject to fine, suspension or dismissal; provided however, that nothing herein 
contained shall prevent any employee from voting in such primary or election, or of becoming a candidate 
and acting in his own behalf. 


Sec. 23. - Same—Suspension of department chief. 
    A department chief affected by this act may be, for misconduct, suspended for a reasonable period, 
not to exceed thirty (30) days, by the mayor, and such suspension shall be reported to the board of civil 
service commissioners and upon application in writing by the person so suspended, an investigation shall 
be made, as provided by section 21 of this act. 


Sec. 24. - Same—Demotion, fine or discharge of department chief. 
    A department chief affected by this act shall not be demoted, fined or discharged except by the 
board of civil service commissioners upon charges preferred by the mayor. Such charges shall be 
investigated before the board and in accordance with section 21 of this act. 


Sec. 25. - Investigation of charges. 
    In investigation of charges, each member of the board of civil service commissioners shall have the 
power to administer oaths and said board is hereby authorized to compel, by subpoena, the attendance 
and testimony of witnesses and production of books and papers relevant to such investigation. Provided 
however, that the cost for issuance of service of subpoenas, and all witness fees, shall be borne and paid 
by the losing party. If such losing party be an employee, then such amounts may be deducted from all 
sums due him or thereafter due him by the city. Such costs shall be the same as those in the several 
circuit courts of the State of Florida. 


Sec. 26. - Applicant recommendation based on political service prohibited. 
    No applicant for appointment or promotion in the civil service shall ask or receive recommendation or 
assistance from any member of the board of civil service commissioners on consideration of any political 
service rendered to or for such person; provided however, that the commissioners of civil service shall be 
authorized to give all information and assistance to candidates necessary for said candidates to prepare 
themselves for examination. 


Sec. 27. - Suspension when under indictment or on appeal from conviction. 
    Any member of the civil service who is under indictment or information by a court of competent 
jurisdiction may be suspended until a trial is had and judgment rendered, and such suspension shall be 
without pay, regardless of whether or not he is subsequently acquitted. Should any member of the civil 
service appeal from a conviction, he may also be suspended without pay during an appeal to a court of 
higher authority. 


Sec. 28. - Violation by board member. 
    Any civil service commissioner guilty of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office shall be 
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be ineligible to hold said office and a successor shall 
immediately be elected or selected by the same group causing his election to the office of the civil service 
commissioner. 


CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS, ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto as 
well as any related laws. 


??Disposition 
Ordinance  
Number 
Date 
Section 
Subpart 
Section 
333 
?8-17-1995 
1—3 
B 
1—3 
 


??Disposition 
Laws of Florida  
Chapter 
Section
Subpart 
Section 
63-1946 
1 
B 
6 
75-508 
1 
B 
10 
 


PART II - THE CODE OF ORDINANCES 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated 
"The Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1972, § 1-1) 


Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such 
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the latest Charter, as amended, of the City of Springfield, 
Florida. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Springfield in Bay 
County, Florida," followed them. 
    Code. The word "Code" shall mean The Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Florida, as 
designated in section 1-1. 
    Commission. Whenever the words "commission" or "city commission" are used, they shall be 
construed to mean the city commission of the City of Springfield in Bay County, Florida. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length 
of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, 
shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be 
counted. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.090(a). 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Bay. 
State Law reference— Boundary description, F.S. § 7.03. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some 
other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the 
head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to 
perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify 
otherwise. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall refer to the official Florida Statutes and most recent supplement. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to 
firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be 
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, 
associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, 
agent or employee. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend to and be applied to several 
persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an 
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be 
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, boards, commissions, departments, employees, etc. Whenever reference is made to 
officers, boards, commissions, departments, employees, etc., by title only, the terms shall be deemed to 
refer to officers, boards, commissions, departments, employees, etc., of the City of Springfield in Bay 
County, Florida. 
    Or, and. The words "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, 
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of 
such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" is meant to include individual natural persons, partnerships, joint 
adventurers, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations; and any officers, agents, 
employees, factors, or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either 
for himself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property except real 
property. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space 
adjacent thereto and any body of water or stream. 
    Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the 
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, 
lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any 
person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such buildings or land, 
either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present. 
(Code 1972, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq. 


Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere 
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such 
sections, nor as any part of the section, nor shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including 
the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1972, § 1-3) 


Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and 
sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 


Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any 
legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 


Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal 
effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 


Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances and resolutions not affected by Code. 
(a) ?Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise 
affect the validity of any of the following, when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1) ?Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or 
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or 
any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2) ?The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city commission; 
(3) ?Any right or franchise or easement granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city 
commission or any preceding governing body to any person, firm or corporation; 
(4) ?Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening 
or vacating any street or public way in the city; 
(5) ?The annual budget or appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(6) ?Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(7) ?Any ordinance levying taxes; 
(8) ?Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9) ?Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10) ?Any land use or land development regulation; 
(11) ?Any ordinance of the city granting to railroad companies the right to construct railroad tracks 
in the city; 
(12) ?Any ordinance authorizing any encroachment on any city or public property; 
(13) ?Any ordinance or code or parts thereof adopted by reference by any section of such Code and 
not included herein; 
(14) ?Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, not inconsistent with such 
Code; or 
(15) ?Any city boundary or annexation or deannexation ordinance. 
(b) ?All such ordinances or resolutions enumerated in subsection (a) of this section are recognized as 
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All 
ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 176, § 3, 1-3-1972) 


Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a) ?All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way 
affect the Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this 
Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or 
subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by 
omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in 
the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that 
this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new 
Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
(b) ?Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by 
specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That 
section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Florida, is hereby amended to 
read as follows:…." The new provisions should then be set out in full as desired. 
(c) ?If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language is 
suggested: "That The Code of Ordinances, City of Springfield, Florida, is hereby amended by adding 
a section, to be numbered…, which section reads as follows:…." The new section should then be set 
out in full as desired. 
(d) ?All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by 
section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1972, § 1-4) 


Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal or amendment of ordinances. 
(a) ?The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the 
time the ordinance repealed or amended took effect, nor the obligation of any contract entered into 
under the prior ordinance. 
(b) ?The repeal or amendment of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred 
before the repeal or amendment took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the 
time of the repeal or amendment, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the 
repealed or amended ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 1-5) 


Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) ?By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever 
authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive 
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative 
and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the 
Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a 
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, 
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so 
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption 
of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b) ?In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be 
excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c) ?When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare 
the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances 
included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. 
For example, the codifier may: 
(1) ?Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2) ?Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the 
Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3) ?Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, 
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision 
numbers; 
(4) ?Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this 
article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through 
____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which 
embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5) ?Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance 
sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the 
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the 
Code. 


Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any provision of this Code is for any reason found to be invalid or inoperative or shall be declared 
unconstitutional by a court, such ruling or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this 
Code. 
(Code 1972, § 1-6) 


Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violation. 
(a) ?Whenever in the Charter, this Code or in any ordinances of the city, any act is prohibited or is made 
or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Charter, Code or ordinance the doing 
of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty 
is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of the Charter, this Code or any ordinance 
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue shall 
constitute a separate offense. 
(b) ?In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in 
violation of any of the provisions of the Charter, this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public 
nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day that such condition 
continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Maximum penalty authorized, F.S. § 162.22. 


Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city commission saved from repeal, § 
1-7(2); enforcement of animal control standards, § 14-101 et seq.; elections, ch. 22; administration of 
flood damage prevention standards, § 30-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 42; personnel, ch. 54; 
planning, ch. 58; taxation, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; public meetings and records, 
F.S. ch. 119, F.S. § 286.011. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 2-1—2-29. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 


Sec. 2-30. - Appeals from decisions of officers and boards. 
    Any person aggrieved by any order of any administrative officer or inspector or by any municipal 
board, whether created by the city commission or by the laws of the state, shall have a right to appeal de 
novo to the city commission. 
(Code 1972, § 2-1) 


Sec. 2-31. - Meeting days. 
    On the first Monday in each month, the city commission shall meet at the usual place and hold the 
meeting of the legislative body of the city, unless such meeting day falls on a legal holiday, and, in that 
event, such meeting shall be held on the Tuesday immediately following such Monday. 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 3-16-1992; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 12-7-1992) 


Sec. 2-32. - Compensation of commissioners and mayor. 
(a) ?Each commissioner serving as a member of the city commission shall be entitled to receive 
compensation in the amount of $500.00 per month for each month he serves as a commissioner, 
payable on or before the 15th day of each and every month for the preceding month of service. 
(b) ?The mayor/commissioner shall be entitled to receive compensation in the amount of $700.00 per 
month for each month he serves as mayor/commissioner, payable on or before the 15th day of each 
month and every month for the preceding month of service. 
(Code 1972, § 2-3; Ord. No. 297, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 359, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-1997) 


Sec. 2-33. - Compensation and bond of officers and employees. 
(a) ?The city commission shall fix, by ordinance, the salary or compensation of the city attorney, the 
heads of the departments, members of the police and fire forces, and members of boards; and it may 
fix the number and compensation of all other officers and employees. 
(b) ?The city commission in fixing the salary of any officer, clerk or employee shall determine whether or 
not such officer, clerk or employee shall give bond, and the amount thereof, which bond shall be 
procured from a regularly accredited surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the 
state, the premiums on such bonds to be paid by the city. All such bonds shall be filed in the office of 
the city clerk, provided that all police officers including the chief shall be required to furnish bond. 
(Laws of Fla. 1951, ch. 27900, § 11; Laws of Fla. ch. 57-1870, § 2; Laws of Fla. ch. 67-2092, § 
1; Laws of Fla. ch. 69-1622, § 1) 
Cross reference— Personnel, ch. 54. 


Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Liquors and beverages, F.S. ch. 561 et seq. 


Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings as these terms have under the 
provisions of F.S. § 561.01. 
(Code 1972, § 3-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 6-2. - Sale of alcoholic beverages and issuance of vendors' licenses. 
(a) ?Within 1,500 feet of church or school. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or offered for sale and 
no vendor's licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued for any premises located 
within less than 1,500 feet from an established church or school. The method of measuring the 
distance from the church to the place of business where alcoholic beverages are to be offered for 
sale shall be from the main door of the main church building to the front door of the building where 
alcoholic beverages are to be offered for sale and shall be measured by following the shortest route 
of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main entrance of said place of 
business to the main entrance of the church building. In the case of a school, the distance shall be 
measured by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare 
from the main entrance of said place of business to the nearest point of the school grounds in use as 
part of the school facilities. 
(b) ?Premises located within 500 feet of previously licensed establishment. No alcoholic beverages shall 
be sold or offered for sale and no vendor's license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued 
for any premises located within 500 feet of a previously licensed establishment. The method of 
measuring the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are to be offered 
for sale shall be from the main door of the previously licensed building to the front door of the 
applicant's building where alcoholic beverages are to be offered for sale and shall be measured by 
following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main 
entrance of the previously licensed place of business to the main entrance of the applicant's 
business. 
(c) ?Application of section to retail sales of beer or wine where no on-premises consumption permitted. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to retail sales of beer or wine by retail establishments 
where no consumption on premises is permitted, nor the business licensed for such purpose. 
Notwithstanding this subsection, all establishments must obtain an occupational license as directed 
by the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(d) ?Effect of section on existing establishments. This section shall not affect existing establishments 
which are currently licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages as long as they remain licensed upon 
or within the present premises and continue in business operation continuously hereafter, provided 
that the revocation of the applicable license or the cessation of business operations for a period of 
more than 30 days shall be deemed not to be continuous. 
(Code 1972, § 3-3; Ord. No. 315, §§ 1, 3, 4, 3-7-1994; Ord. No. 320, §§ 1—4, 6-6-1994; Ord. 
No. 327, §§ 1—4, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 417, § 1, 4-15-2002) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate location of alcoholic beverage business, F.S. § 
562.45(2)(a). 


Sec. 6-3. - Hours of sale. 
    The lawful hours of sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be the same as the hours of lawful 
sale established for unincorporated areas of this county, either by statute or by the county 
commissioners, and it shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, serve, consume, or allow to be served, sold 
or consumed any alcoholic beverages upon any premises holding a beverage license from the state, at 
any time except during lawful hours of sale. 
(Code 1972, § 3-2) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2)(a). 


Sec. 6-4. - Nudity and sexual conduct in establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages means any business or commercial establishment, 
whether open to the public at large or where entrance is limited to cover charge or membership 
requirement, including those licensed by the state for sale and/or service of alcoholic beverages; and any 
bottle club, hotel, motel, restaurant, nightclub, country club, cabaret, meeting facility utilized by any 
religious, social, fraternal or similar organization; or business or commercial establishment where a 
product or article is sold, dispensed, served or provided with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the 
product or article will be or is intended to be mixed, combined with or drunk in connection or combination 
with an alcoholic beverage on the premises of such business or commercial establishment. 
(b) ?No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or 
cleavage or buttocks or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(c) ?No female shall expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola or any 
simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(d) ?No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall 
suffer or permit any person to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal 
cleft or cleavage or buttocks or simulation thereof within the establishment dealing in alcoholic 
beverages. 
(e) ?No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall 
suffer or permit any female person to expose to public view any portion of her breasts below the top 
of the areola or any simulation thereof within the establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(f) ?No person may engage in and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing 
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, 
oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act which is prohibited by law, touching, caressing or fondling 
of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals or the simulation thereof within an establishment dealing in 
alcoholic beverages. 
(g) ?No person shall cause and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing in 
alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit the exposition of any graphic representation, including 
pictures or the projection of films, which depicts human genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or 
cleavage, buttocks, female breasts below the top of the areola, sexual intercourse, masturbation, 
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, any sexual act prohibited by law, touching, caressing 
or fondling of the breasts, buttock, anus or genitals, or any simulation thereof within any 
establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 328, § 1, 5-1-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate entertainment and conduct in alcoholic beverage 
establishments, F.S. § 562.45(2)(b). 


Sec. 6-5. - Consumption in public. 
(a) ?No person shall drink or otherwise consume any alcoholic beverage or substance or have 
possession of an open alcoholic beverage container on any street or within the rights-of-way of any 
streets, highways, avenues or other similar ways, including any public parking lot located within the 
city. The term "public parking lot" shall mean a parking lot owned or leased, and maintained by a 
public body or governmental agency. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or otherwise consume any alcoholic beverage or 
substance or have possession of an open alcoholic beverage container within the confines of any 
public park located within the city. This subsection shall not apply to an enclosed building where 
special approval is received by the city's designated agent. 
(Code 1972, § 13-33; Ord. No. 316, §§ 1, 2, 3-7-1994) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 


Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - LICENSE FOR AMUSEMENT PARKS AND CARNIVALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Local occupational license taxes, § 74-31 et seq. 


Sec. 10-31. - Amusement rides and free attractions. 
(a) ?Scope of section. No activities or attractions shall be included in the license required by this section 
except that form of amusement known as rides and free attractions. 
(b) ?License required. No person shall engage in carrying on, operating or conducting an amusement 
park or carnival and the like, in the city, unless a city license shall have been procured from the city 
clerk, which license shall be issued under the seal of the city. Such license may not be issued until 
the location of such amusement park or carnival or the like has been approved by the city 
commission. 
(c) ?License application; approval by city commission. No license shall be issued, as provided in this 
section, until the applicant therefor shall file a written application to the city commission, which 
application shall show the name and address of the applicant, and the legal description of the 
location where the amusement park or carnival and the like is expected to be located. The license 
shall not be issued by the city clerk until such written application has been approved in writing by the 
city commission and endorsed thereon. 
(d) ?Fee; term. Licenses under this section shall be $100.00 per year for the license year from the 30th 
day of the month and shall be only on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 14(I), 7-5-1983) 


Sec. 10-32. - Licenses required for concessions and shows. 
(a) ?Concessions. For attractions commonly known as concessions, there shall be paid a license fee of 
$300.00 per week. Such license shall be required for each concession separately. 
(b) ?Shows. For attractions commonly known as shows, there shall be paid a license fee of $300.00 per 
week. Such license shall be required for each show separately. 
(c) ?Application; approval by city commission. No license required by this section may be issued until the 
applicant has met the same requirements listed in section 10-31(c). 
(Ord. No. 255, § 14(II), 7-5-1983) 


Sec. 10-33. - Payment of license tax. 
    The annual license fee imposed shall be paid and the license secured before the amusement park or 
carnival and the like shall be opened for business. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 14(III), 7-5-1983) 


Sec. 10-34. - Collection by tax collector. 
    The city clerk shall have the authority to bring or cause to be brought all such suits and actions and 
take all such proceedings and steps as may be necessary for the recovery of the license fees imposed by 
this article. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 14(IV), 7-5-1983) 


Sec. 10-35. - Fees to go to general fund. 
    All monies collected from the license fees and concession licenses imposed in this article shall be 
deposited by the city clerk to the general fund account. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 14(V), 7-5-1983) 


Sec. 10-36. - Revocation of licenses. 
    The city, by and through its city commission, shall have the authority and right to revoke any such 
license granted under the provisions of this article should it develop that any such amusement park and 
the like is carrying on any lewdness or indecent exposure as prohibited by F.S. ch. 800, obscene shows 
as prohibited in F.S. ch. 847, gambling or is permitting such to be carried on, and shall have the right to 
revoke such license if such amusement park permits any unlawful enterprise or acts to be carried on in 
such park or carnival. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 14(VI), 7-5-1983) 


Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 449, § 1, adopted May 1, 2006, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein 
set out. Former Ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-133, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 
298, §§ 2—18, adopted Mar. 1, 1993; Ord. No. 341, §§ 2—18, adopted June 3, 1996; and Ord. No. 398, 
§§ 2—18, adopted Jan. 4, 2000. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult animal shall mean any animal over the age of four months. 
    Animal control officer (ACO) shall mean any person designated by the city or employed by the 
Animal Control Division of Bay County who is authorized to investigate, on public or private property, civil 
infractions relating to animal control or cruelty and to issue citations as provided in this chapter. An animal 
control officer is not authorized to bear arms or make arrests. In the animal control officer's absence, the 
code enforcement officer or his designee shall have the same rights and responsibilities as said animal 
control officer. 
    Animal shelter shall mean any facility operated by or on behalf of Bay County, or other governmental 
agency, for the impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
    Animals shall include every living dumb creature. 
    At large shall mean any animal not limited by fence, building, enclosure, or leash to any particular 
place within the limits of the owner's premises; or fence, unrestrained, and not under the direct control of 
any person in the immediate vicinity of the owner's premises. 
    Auction shall mean any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded. 
    Circus shall mean a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
    Commercial animal establishment shall mean any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or 
stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition or kennel. 
    Control shall mean the regulation of the possession, ownership, care and custody of animals. 
    Dangerous animal means and includes any mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame but is 
of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, ferocious nature or other characteristics 
would constitute a danger to human life or property if it is not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in 
secure quarters; or any domestic mammal, reptile or fowl which, because of its size or ferocious 
propensity or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or 
maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs F.S. § 767.10 et seq. 
    Direct control shall mean immediate, continuous physical control of a dog by means of a leash, cord 
or chain of such strength to restrain the dog; or in the case of hunting dogs or specifically trained dogs, 
which dogs immediately respond to aural or other commands, direct control shall include oral control, if 
the controlling person is at all times clearly and fully within unobstructed sight and hearing of the dog. 
    Grooming shop shall mean a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked 
or otherwise groomed. 
    Kennel shall mean any person engaged in the training, commercial business of breeding, buying, 
selling or boarding of animals, such as hunting dogs, other than a licensed veterinary hospital where a 
graduate-licensed veterinarian is in charge. 
    Livestock shall include and mean cattle, hogs, pigs, potbellied pigs, swine, goats, horses, mules, 
sheep and other domesticated barnyard animals. 
    Officer shall mean any law enforcement officer defined in F.S. § 943.10 or any other animal control 
officer. 
    Ordinance shall mean any ordinance enacted by the city commission relating to the control of or 
cruelty to animals, the violation of which is a civil infraction. 
    Owner shall mean any person owning, keeping or harboring any animals. An animal shall be 
deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for seven consecutive days or more. 
    Pets shall mean any animal owned, harbored or kept for pleasure. 
    Pet shop shall mean any person that buys, sells or boards any species of animal except kennels. 
    Restraint shall mean any animal secured by a leash or lead, or under control of a responsible person 
and obedient to that person's commands, or within the real property limits of its owners. 
    Riding school or stable shall mean any place which has available for hire or boarding any horse, 
pony, donkey, mule or burro or offers riding instructions. This also includes any private property owner 
who boards horses on their property. 
    Special magistrate shall be a resident(s) of the City of Springfield who possesses integrity, 
responsibility, and an interest in code enforcement. Appointments shall be made by the city commission. 
The city commission may appoint as many special magistrates as are deemed necessary. Appointments 
shall be for a term of one year. Special magistrates may be removed from office by the city commission 
with or without cause. Compensation for the special magistrate, if any, shall be at the discretion of the city 
commissioners. 
    Sterilized animal shall mean any neutered male or spayed female animal that has been operated on 
to prevent conception or reproduction. 
    Veterinary hospital shall mean any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed 
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
    Vicious animal shall mean any animal which has bitten or attempted to bite or attack a human or a 
domesticated animal without provocation, or which is known or should be known to have a propensity to 
bite or attack persons or another animal. In instances where a dog meets both the criteria for a vicious 
animal and a dangerous dog, the Florida statute for dangerous dog shall apply. 
    Wild animal shall mean any live monkey (non-human primate), raccoon, skunk, rabbit, fox, 
poisonous or non-poisonous snake, leopard, tiger, lion, lynx, rodent, arachnid, crustacean, or any other 
animal which can normally be found in the wild state or which cannot ordinarily be tamed. 
    Zoological park shall mean any facility other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying one or more 
species of animals. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 828.27(1) 


Sec. 14-2. - Penalties. 
(a) ?Civil infractions. 
(1) ?In addition to and not in lieu of impounding any animal found in violation of this article, any 
person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than 
$500.00, as determined by the special magistrate of the city. If any violation continues, each 
day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. If any person is found in violation of 
section 5-8 by the special magistrate his/her permit to own, keep, harbor or have custody of 
animals shall be deemed automatically revoked, and no new permit may be issued. 
(2) ?The following schedule of minimum fines shall be imposed for the violation of this chapter: 
a. ?Any person to whom a citation for violation of this article is issued shall pay a penalty as 
hereinafter provided and within the time specified by the citation or otherwise appear 
before the special magistrate at the time and place designated. 
b. ?Minimum civil penalties involving uncontested infractions paid within the time limitation 
specified in the citation shall be as follows: 
1. ?First offense: $50.00 plus impoundment fees, if any. 
2. ?Second offense: $75.00 plus impoundment fees, if any. 
3. ?Third offense: $100.00 plus impoundment fees, if any. 
c. ?Any person charged with an offense or infraction of this chapter who elects to contest such 
charge shall, upon conviction, pay such penalty as imposed by the special magistrate, not 
to exceed $500.00 per offense, and the schedule of penalties provided in subsection b. 
above shall be deemed minimum fines or penalties. 
(3) ?Any citation issued to a person by an officer shall constitute written notice that the officer has 
probable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly 
enacted ordinance and that the special magistrate will hear the charges. The citation shall 
contain: 
a. ?The date and time of issuance. 
b. ?The name and address of the person. 
c. ?The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
d. ?The facts constituting the probable cause. 
e. ?The ordinance violated. 
f. ?The name and authority of the officer. 
g. ?The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the 
citation. 
h. ?The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
i. ?The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
j. ?A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time 
allowed or fails to appear before the special magistrate to contest the citation, then he shall 
be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that in such case, judgment 
may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(4) ?If a person fails to pay the civil penalty or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, the 
court may issue an order to show cause upon the request of the council. This order shall require 
such persons to appear before the court to explain why action on the citation has not been 
taken. If any person who is issued such order fails to appear in response to the court's directive, 
that person may be held in contempt of court. 
(b) ?Criminal offenses. In addition to and not in lieu of impoundment or any civil proceeding to enforce 
the provisions of this chapter, all criminal violations and offenses shall be processed through the 
County Court of Bay County, State of Florida, pursuant to F.S. ch. 828. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-3. - Duty to surrender violating animals; right of entry. 
    On demand by any law enforcement officer or other person designated by law enforcement, no 
person shall refuse to give up or surrender any animal that may be the subject of lawful impoundment, 
and any such officer or other person may enter upon private property or premises to effect such capture 
and impoundment, or to enforce any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-4. - Nuisances. 
(a) ?Any animal which shall by barking, biting or howling or in any other way or manner disturb the quiet 
of any person as more fully described below; any animal with a communicable or contagious disease 
that is untreated or that does not respond to treatment; any animal which causes or emits 
unreasonable or offensive odor which can be detected off the premises of the owner or keeper; or 
the place where the animal is kept in such manner as to cause a breeding place for flies, lice, fleas, 
or other vermin, or a breeding place for any disease is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b) ?No person shall own, possess or harbor an animal or bird that howls, barks, meows, squawks or 
makes other sounds that: 
(1) ?Create a noise disturbance across a residential real property; 
(2) ?Are frequent or continued duration for ten or more consecutive minutes; or 
(3) ?Are intermittent for a period of 30 or more minutes, providing however, that an animal shall not 
be deemed to be acting in violation of this section if, at the time of the making of any noise, a 
person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the property in or upon which the animal 
is situated. 
(c) ?A public nuisance shall further mean any animal which: 
(1) ?Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2) ?Attacks other animals; 
(3) ?Trespasses on school grounds; 
(4) ?Is repeatedly at large; 
(5) ?Damages private or public property. 
(d) ?Within the municipal boundary it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep, possess or 
harbor more than four adult dogs or four adult cats in any one residential location or other location, 
and a violation thereof shall constitute prima facie evidence of creating and maintaining a nuisance. 
    However the provisions of this section shall not apply to kennels and pet shops as defined in section 
14-1, or to veterinary establishments or zoological parks duly and properly licensed for such purposes 
within properly designated land use/zoned areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-5. - Confinement of dangerous animals. 
    Every dangerous animal shall be confined by the owner within a building or a secure enclosure and 
shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. The owner shall post and 
keep posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the dangerous animal is kept a sign with the 
words "Dangerous Animal" written thereon in prominent letters and displayed on all boundaries of the 
property. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-6. - Cruelty to animals; injuring animals, etc. 
    No person shall willfully perform an act of cruelty to animals, which acts shall be deemed to include 
the following: 
(1) ?Injure, beat, torture, mutilate or cause torment to any animal, or otherwise cause unjustifiable 
pain or suffering to any animal. 
(2) ?Neglect or fail to provide food or other nourishment and water, shelter, exercise, ventilation or 
veterinary care to any animal within his possession. 
(3) ?Abandon any animal. 
(4) ?Run down with a vehicle any animal. Any person who kills or injures a domestic animal while 
driving a vehicle shall stop at the scene of the accident and render such assistance as is 
practical, shall make a reasonable effort to locate and identify himself to the owner or to any 
person having custody of the animal, and shall report the accident immediately to the animal 
control division or proper law enforcement agency. 
(5) ?Train for and/or promote, allow, encourage or oversee the participation in fighting dogs, fowl or 
other animals. 
    Acts of cruelty to animals shall be subject to the penalties provided in 14-2 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, F.S. § 828.12. 


Sec. 14-7. - Animal care; protection generally. 
(a) ?No owner shall fail to provide his animal with sufficient food, water and proper shelter. The owner 
shall provide his animal with exercise, proper ventilation and veterinary care, when needed to 
prevent suffering. 
(b) ?No person shall beat, ill treat, torment, overload or otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate or 
permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and 
humans. 
(c) ?No person shall abandon a dog or cat and permit it to permanently roam free. 
(d) ?No person except a licensed veterinarian shall crop a dog's ears or tail. 
(e) ?Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks of age shall not be sold in quantities of less than 
25 to a single purchaser. 
(f) ?No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to 
enter any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; 
or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement for the attraction of 
customers. 
(g) ?Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately 
stop and render such assistance as may be possible and report the injury or death to the animal's 
owner. If the owner cannot be ascertained or located, the vehicular operator shall at once report the 
accident to the animal control division or local law enforcement agency. 
(h) ?No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, including anti-freeze, whether mixed with 
food or not, in a manner which would permit consumption thereof by any animal, provided that it shall 
not be unlawful for a person to expose rat poison on his own property. 
(i) ?Viable turtle eggs and live turtles with a carapace length of less than four inches shall not be sold, 
held for sale or offered for any other type of commercial or public distribution. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, F.S. § 828.12; fighting or baiting animals, F.S. § 
828.122; exposing poison, F.S. § 828.08. 


Sec. 14-8. - Keeping livestock or fowl. 
    (a) The term "livestock" as used in this section shall mean cattle, hogs, goats, horses, mules, sheep 
and other domesticated barnyard animals. The term "fowl" as used in this section shall mean chickens, 
geese, ducks, turkeys, and other domesticated barnyard fowl. 
(b) ?No person shall keep any livestock within the city limits except that a permit may be issued for a 
zoological park, stable, kennel, circus or other performing animal exhibition with the approval of the 
city clerk or his designee. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful to keep any fowl within the city limits without first obtaining the written permission 
of the owners or occupants of all property abutting the premises on which such fowl are to be kept 
and without further obtaining the written permission of the city clerk or his designee. 
(d) ?Any livestock or fowl kept within the city limits without the permission or permit required by 
subsection (b) or (c) shall be subject to impoundment. 
(e) ?In the event that anyone shall procure permission to keep fowl within the city limits or shall 
otherwise obtain a permit for the keeping of other animals, such fowl or animals shall be kept in a 
pen, yard or place which shall comply with sanitary conditions required by the state department of 
health, or the county health unit. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-9. - Running at large. 
(a) ?Livestock or fowl. It shall be unlawful for any cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, hogs, pigs, potbellied 
pigs, swine, goats, sheep, chickens, guinea chickens, ducks or geese to run at large, and all such 
animals found running at large shall be subject to impoundment. 
(b) ?Dogs or cats. It shall be unlawful for any dogs or cats to run at large off the owner's premises, and 
all such animals found running at large shall be subject to impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-10. - Rabies outbreaks. 
(a) ?Whenever there is a rabies outbreak, the city commissioners may declare an immediate quarantine 
for such period as necessary. 
(b) ?Whenever quarantine has been declared, no person shall permit any animal capable of contracting 
or transmitting rabies that is under his control to be or run at large. Any animal at large during a 
quarantine shall be impounded by a law enforcement officer provided, however, if at such time the 
capture and impounding of such animal cannot be effected safely, the law enforcement officer may 
slay such animal. Whenever quarantine is in effect, no animal capable of contracting or transmitting 
rabies may be transported into or out of the county without the written permission of law 
enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-11. - Animal bites and quarantine. 
(a) ?It shall be the duty of any person bitten or scratched by an animal, or the owner of the animal if he 
has knowledge that his animal has bitten or scratched any person, to report the incident to the 
county health officer for supervised quarantine. The quarantine of stray animals shall be at the 
animal shelter. Quarantine of the owned animal may be at an approved facility other than the animal 
shelter and shall be at the owner's expense. 
(b) ?After the investigation of any animal bite case, and it is determined by the investigating officer that 
the bite was unprovoked, the owner of such animal shall be issued a citation levying a fine of not less 
than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-12. - Removal of dead animals. 
    No person shall allow any dead or disabled dog, horse or other animal belonging to him or in his 
charge, to lie upon any street, alley, road or other public grounds, or private property of others. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-13. - Dead animals suspected of having rabies. 
    Whenever any animal has been slain that is suffering from rabies, or is suspected of having rabies, 
or has been exposed to another animal known to have, or suspected of having rabies, the head of slain 
animal shall be immediately delivered to the health department for their inspection. If the occurrence is 
not during the normal operation of the health department, an animal control officer shall receive the 
animal or the head of the animal and preserve the same until such time as it may be delivered to the 
health department. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-14. - Presence in food establishments. 
    Except as otherwise authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal 
to permit such animal to enter the premises of any business engaged in the preparation, sale or storage 
of food for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
State Law reference— Animals assisting blind persons, disabled persons, etc. to be allowed in 
places of public accommodation, F.S. 413.08(1). 


Sec. 14-15. - Keeping of wild animals. 
(a) ?No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or 
for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not apply to zoological 
parks, performing animal exhibits or circuses. 
(b) ?If the requirements of article IV of this chapter are met and a permit from Florida Game and Fresh 
Water Fish Commission is obtained, animals other than those listed in subsection (c) below may be 
kept as pets. 
(c) ?Raccoons, foxes, bats, skunks and bobcats will not be allowed to be kept as pets within the city 
limits. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-16. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
(a) ?No performing animal exhibition, spectacle, display, act, event or circus shall be permitted in which 
animals are included or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, 
or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. 
(b) ?All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-17. - Animal waste. 
    The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his 
animals on public walks, roadways, rights-of-way, recreational areas or private property of others. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-18. - Conditions of commercial establishments; license. 
(a) ?All commercial animal establishments housing animals within the city for any purpose shall be 
subject to the provisions of this section and all applicable zoning and land use regulations. 
(b) ?The animal control division may revoke any license or permit for failure of the person having the 
permit or license to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any law governing the protection 
and keeping of animals. 
(c) ?Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose 
of all animals owned, kept or harbored. 
(d) ?Before any permit or license is issued to a commercial animal establishment, the city shall have the 
animal control officer inspect the premises where the animals are kept to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of this section. After the license or permit is granted to a commercial animal 
establishment, the animal control officer shall inspect the premises of the commercial establishment 
from time to time to ensure continuing compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Should the 
proprietor of the commercial animal establishment refuse permission to the animal control officer to 
inspect the premises, the city shall immediately revoke the license or permit of the commercial 
animal establishment. 
(e) ?No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit or license to 
operate a commercial animal establishment. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Secs. 14-19—14-40 - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT REDEMPTION, ETC. 


Sec. 14-41. - Generally. 
(a) ?All animal control officers shall have the authority to pick up, catch and confine any animal in 
violation of this chapter. 
(b) ?No person shall: refuse to surrender an animal upon lawful demand by the animal control officer or 
interfere with any animal control officer while lawfully apprehending an animal or anyone who may be 
assisting in such apprehension; or hold, hide, or conceal any animal which the animal control officer 
has deemed to be in violation of this chapter; take or attempt to take any animal from an animal 
control officer or from any vehicle used by him to transport animals in the performance of his duties; 
or take or attempt to take any animal from an animal control shelter without proper authority. No 
person shall tamper or damage traps nor remove animals from traps. 
(c) ?Pursuant to law, any animal control officer may enter public or unfenced private property within the 
county, except residential buildings, to carry out the duties imposed by this chapter. 
(d) ?A property owner or tenant may restrain in a humane manner any animal on his property in violation 
of this chapter. When such restraint is made, the property owner or tenant shall immediately notify 
the animal control division. Until the animal control officer arrives, the property owner or tenant shall 
use all reasonable effort to treat the animal humanely and shall exercise due care to ensure the 
animal's safety and wellbeing. The animal control officer may impound any animal restrained by a 
property owner or tenant, as described above, and shall dispose of the animal pursuant to this 
chapter. 
(e) ?All animals which are impounded and are not suffering from or suspect to have an infectious or 
contagious disease shall be held for the owner's redemption for not less than three consecutive 
days; however, the animal will be available for adoption by the general public on the fourth and fifth 
days. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, if after 24 hours of observation, animal control 
believes the animal to be feral or wild, then animal control has the option to euthanize the animal at 
that time. In instances when the owner of an impounded animal can be determined, the animal 
control facility shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the owner before disposition of the animal. 
(f) ?Any animal not claimed or adopted at the end of the fifth consecutive day, or after the quarantine 
period for animals impounded pursuant to section 14-11, or any animal finally determined to be a 
vicious animal as set forth herein, shall become property of the county and shall be disposed of in a 
humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-42. - Use of firearms. 
    Whenever an animal which may be subject of impoundment by law enforcement cannot be 
reasonably captured, or where such capture and impoundment cannot be effected safely, any law 
enforcement officer or any other person designated by a law enforcement officer may use firearms to stop 
or slay such animal; such use of firearms shall not subject such persons to prosecution for violation of any 
ordinance relating to the discharge of firearms within the city. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-43. - Animal shelter generally. 
    The city may contract with a duly authorized and licensed independent contractor or other public 
entity to keep and maintain a facility to be known as the animal shelter for the purpose of independently 
maintaining and keeping dogs, cats and other animals that may be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-44. - Removal from shelter. 
    No person shall remove any animal from the animal shelter unless all applicable requirements of this 
chapter are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-45. - Adoption of animals. 
(a) ?The following provisions shall govern the adoption of animals that have been placed in the animal 
shelter: 
(1) ?Only animals observed and believed by animal control to be adoptable shall be placed for 
adoption. 
(2) ?Adoption papers may be signed by only persons over 18 years of age. 
(3) ?Animals shall not be given in adoption for experimental purposes. 
(4) ?Any person adopting the animal shall sign an agreement to care for the animal in a manner 
acceptable by the county. 
(5) ?The owner or person adopting or reclaiming the animal shall pay the required fees indicated 
below before the release of the animal: 
a. ?Any required license fee. 
b. ?If the animal is required to be vaccinated against rabies and had not been so vaccinated, a 
reasonable fee for such vaccination. A numbered receipt and a duplicate shall be given 
upon payment of the fees, and any veterinarian may honor the duplicate or veterinarian's 
copy of the receipt for a rabies inoculation. 
c. ?Any required impound fees, boarding fees and/or adoption fees. 
(b) ?A dog or cat claimed by the owner shall not be required to be neutered or spayed before its release 
to the owner. However, such action shall be encouraged. 
(c) ?The county may demand and reclaim, for any good and reasonable cause and at any time, any 
animal that has been released for adoption from the shelter, and no person shall refuse to surrender 
any such animal on demand by any law enforcement officer. 
(d) ?The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to livestock or fowl. Authority to 
impound livestock is controlled by F.S. ch. 588. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-46. - Impoundment fees. 
    The owner or keeper of an impounded animal shall be responsible for and shall pay the following 
impoundment fees: 
(1) ?Impoundment fees: 
a. ?For the first impoundment: $25.00; 
b. ?For the second impoundment of the same animal or the second animal belonging to the 
same owner: $50.00; 
c. ?For the third or any subsequent impoundment of the same animal or the third or 
subsequent time an animal is impounded that belongs to the same owner: $75.00. 
(2) ?Animals in estrus: Impoundment fees charged to the owners or keepers of animals in estrus, 
not confined in a secure enclosure shall be as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-47. - Injured animals. 
    The animal control division shall have the responsibility for picking up injured dogs and cats for which 
there is no known owner or where an owner cannot be readily contacted. If required, the injured dog or 
cat will be taken to the nearest open veterinary hospital or to a facility which can provide immediate first 
aid. The veterinary care shall not exceed $75.00. If veterinary care would be futile, the dog or cat shall be 
immediately disposed of in a humane manner. In addition to the cost incurred for the first aid, veterinary 
care and boarding fees, the owner shall be assessed the appropriate impoundment, rabies, licensing and 
other approved fees of the dog or cat in question is found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-48. - Voluntary impoundment. 
(a) ?Any dog or cat delivered to the animal shelter by a resident of the city served by the animal control 
division shall be impounded if proper ownership of the animal cannot be determined. Such a dog or 
cat shall be impounded for five consecutive days at a boarding fee of $5.00 per day. Upon delivering 
a stray dog or cat to the animal shelter, a citizen must sign a statement that the dog or cat was found 
in the area serviced by the animal control division and that to the best of his knowledge there is no 
known owner. A person reclaiming such a dog or cat brought for impoundment by a private citizen 
shall be assessed the appropriate impoundment fee and boarding fee, and if the animal is not 
currently licensed (when required) and vaccinated, the claimant shall have 72 hours to produce proof 
of rabies vaccination. 
(b) ?Any resident of the city that is served by the animal control division desiring to give up ownership of 
a dog or cat shall transfer ownership of the dog or cat to the county. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-49. - Disposition of animals with infectious and contagious diseases. 
    Any animal impounded by an animal control officer shall be kept for five consecutive days at a 
boarding rate of $5.00 per day, including the first day of impoundment. However, impounded animals 
which are suffering from or suspected of having an infectious or contagious disease may be disposed of 
in a humane manner before the five-consecutive-day period expiries. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Secs. 14-50—14-66. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 14-67. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a) ?All dogs, cats and ferrets four months of age shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed 
veterinarian with the U.S. government approved rabies vaccine. A second vaccination shall be given 
one year after the initial vaccination. This vaccination will be recognized for its "duration of immunity" 
- either one or three years. Vaccination is excused only if a licensed veterinarian certifies in writing 
that the vaccination would be injurious to the dog or cat's health. In such case, the dog or cat shall 
be confined to an enclosed building or kennel until the dog or cat can be safely vaccinated. 
(b) ?Proof of vaccination shall consist of a rabies vaccination tag and certificate signed by the 
veterinarian administering the vaccination. The certificate and the rabies vaccination tag shall be 
displayed about the dog's neck at all times. The wearing of a rabies vaccination tag by a cat shall be 
left to the discretion of the animal's owner. No other tag shall be valid. A rabies vaccination tag and 
certificate issued for one dog or cat shall not be valid for any other dog or cat. 
(c) ?It is unlawful for any person to remove the rabies vaccination tag of any currently vaccinated dog 
unless: 
(1) ?The dog is participating in any organized exhibition or field trial, training for these events, or 
engaged in a legal sport under competent supervision. 
(2) ?A licensed veterinarian direct the removal of the tag in writing for health reasons. In such event, 
the dog shall be confined until the veterinarian permits the tag to be placed on the dog. 
(d) ?It is unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to refuse to show proof of current vaccination of such dog 
or cat within 72 hours of request for such information by an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-68. - Restraint. 
(a) ?No owner of any dog shall allow their animal to run or remain at large on any public street, road, 
alley, park or other public place, or beach (except that a dog may be on the foregoing so long as the 
dog is under the direct and immediate control of the owner); nor shall the owner permit their animal 
to run or remain at large upon any private property, whether under direct control or not, without the 
consent of the owner of such private property. This section shall not apply to any dog trained to aid 
disabled or handicapped persons when such dog is actually being used for this purpose, or to any 
parks in which animals are specifically authorized by the city. 
(b) ?The owner of any female dog or cat in estrus shall keep such dog or cat in a building or a secured 
kennel in a manner to prevent the female dog or cat coming into contact with a male dog or cat, 
except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(c) ?This section shall not apply to: 
(1) ?Any dog actually engaged in a legal sport. 
(2) ?Any dog or cat being showed or trained. 
(3) ?Dog guides or services dogs specially trained to assist deaf persons, totally or partially disabled 
persons. 
(4) ?Government police dogs. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-69. - Reserved. 


Sec. 14-70 - Liability of dog owner for damages. 
    The owner of any dog shall be responsible for all injuries to the person or property of another, 
regardless if the injury or damage occurs on his or her own property, committed by such dog within the 
city and shall be liable in damages to such other person for all such injuries. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS 


Sec. 14-71. - Classification. 
    The division shall be known as the "City of Springfield Dangerous Dog Ordinance." 
(a) ?Florida Statutes §§ 767.10 through 767.16, inclusive are hereby incorporated herein. 
    The following procedures are hereby established in accordance with F.S. § 767.12: 
(1) ?The animal control division shall promptly investigate incidents reported within 30 days of the 
occurrence involving any dog that may be dangerous and shall, if possible, interview the owner 
and require a sworn affidavit from any person, including any animal control officer or code 
enforcement officer, desiring to have a dog classified as dangerous. Any physician, hospital, 
emergency treatment center, or law enforcement officer encountering evidence of an animal 
attack shall promptly notify the animal control division of such attack. Any animal that is the 
subject of a dangerous dog investigation, that is not impounded with the animal control division, 
shall be humanely and safely confined by the owner in a securely fenced or enclosed area 
pending the outcome of the investigation and resolution of any hearings related to the 
dangerous dog classification. The address of where the animal resided shall be provided to the 
animal control division. No dog that is subject of a dangerous dog investigation may be 
relocated or ownership transferred pending the outcome of an investigation or any hearings 
related to the determination of a dangerous dog classification. In the event the dog is to be 
destroyed, the dog shall not be relocated or ownership transferred. 
(2) ?A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a 
person who, at the time, was unlawfully on the property or, while lawfully on the property, was 
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or its owner or a family member. No dog may be 
declared as dangerous if the dog was protecting or defending a human being within the 
immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack of assault. 
(3) ?After the investigation, the animal control division shall make an initial determination as to 
whether there is sufficient cause to classify the dog as dangerous and shall afford the owner an 
opportunity for a hearing prior to making a final determination. The animal control division shall 
provide written notification of the sufficient cause finding, to the owner, by registered mail, 
certified hand delivery, or service in conformance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 48 relating to 
service of process, with a copy to the special magistrate as agent for the city. The owner may 
file a written request with the special magistrate for a hearing within seven calendar days from 
the date of receipt of the notification of the sufficient cause finding, and if requested, the hearing 
shall be held as soon as possible, but not more than 21 calendar days and no sooner than five 
days after the request from the owner. The hearing shall be conducted before the special 
magistrate. 
(4) ?If the owner or keeper cannot appear at any hearing scheduled by the special magistrate, he or 
she shall contact the animal control division no later than 24 hours prior to the hearing, 
requesting a continuance to the next available date. If the owner or keeper fails to appear at the 
rescheduled classification hearing, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be deemed to have 
waived his or her right to appear at such hearing. In such case the special magistrate shall 
proceed with the hearing and shall notify the owner or keeper in writing of the findings of the 
special magistrate. 
(5) ?Once a dog is classified as dangerous dog, the special magistrate shall provide written 
notification to the owner by registered mail, certified hand delivery or service, and the owner 
may file a written request for a hearing in the proper court of competent jurisdiction to appeal 
the classification and must confine the dog in a securely fenced or enclosed area pending a 
resolution of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-72. - Registration. 
(a) ?Within 14 days after a dog has been classified as dangerous by the special magistrate or a 
dangerous dog classification is upheld by the review court on appeal, the owner of the dog must 
obtain a certificate of registration for the dog from the animal control division. The certificate shall be 
renewed annually. Certificates of registration and renewals thereof shall be issued only to persons 
who are at least 18 years of age and who present to the animal control division sufficient evidence 
of: 
(1) ?A current certificate of rabies vaccination for the dog. 
(2) ?A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog and the posting of the premises with a clearly 
visible warning sign at all entry points that informs both children and adults of the presence of a 
dangerous dog on the property. 
(3) ?Permanent identification of the dog, such as a tattoo on the inside thigh or electronic 
implantation. 
(4) ?Payment of all fees prior to the release of the animal from the shelter. 
(b) ?An annual fee for the issuance of certificates of registration required by the section may be 
established by resolution of the city commission. In the absence of resolution establishing another 
fee, the fee shall be $50.00. 
(c) ?The owner of a dangerous dog shall immediately notify the animal control division when a dog that 
has been classified as dangerous: 
(1) ?Is loose or unconfined; 
(2) ?Has bitten a human being or attacked another animal; 
(3) ?Is sold, given away, or dies; or is moved to another address. 
(d) ?Prior to a dangerous dog being sold or given away, the owner shall provide the name, address, and 
telephone number of the new owner to the animal control division. The new owner must comply with 
all of the requirements of Florida Statutes and this division, even if the animal is moved from one 
local jurisdiction to another within the state. The animal control officer must be notified by the owner 
of a dog classified as dangerous that the dog is in his jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-73. - Unlawful acts. 
    It is unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure 
unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under control of a 
competent person. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere 
with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person or animal. The owner may exercise 
the dog in a securely fenced or enclosed area that does not have a top, without a muzzle or leash, if the 
dog remains within his sight and only members of his immediate household or persons 18 years of age or 
older are allowed in the enclosure when the dog is present. When being transported, such dogs must be 
safely and securely restrained within a vehicle. Violations of the "Dangerous Dog" statute and ordinance 
shall include a fine of at least $200.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-74. - Exemptions. 
(a) ?Any dog that is owned, or the service of which is employed, by a law enforcement agency, or any 
dog that is used as a service dog for blind, hearing impaired, or disabled persons, and that bites 
another animal or human is exempt from any quarantine requirement following such bite if the dog 
has a current rabies vaccination that was administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(b) ?Hunting dogs are exempt from the provisions of this division when engaged in any legal hunt or 
training procedure. Dogs engaged in training or participating in legal sports such as obedience trials, 
conformation shows, field trials, hunting/fishing trials, and herding trials are exempt from the 
provisions of this act when engaged in such legal activities. However, such dogs at all other times 
shall be subject to other Florida Statutes and applicable ordinances. Dogs that have been classified 
as dangerous shall not be used for hunting purposes. 
(c) ?This division does not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials of law enforcement work. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-75. - Vicious animals. 
(a) ?A vicious animal is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person 
to own, keep, harbor or maintain any vicious animal. 
(b) ?Any animal control officer, law enforcement officer, or code enforcement officer may impound a 
vicious animal. 
(c) ?Once a vicious animal is impounded pursuant to this section, the owner may file a petition for the 
return of custody of the animal to the special magistrate within seven days of the date of 
impoundment or else the animal shall be retained by the animal control division and disposed of 
pursuant to section 14-41. In the event that owner requests a hearing for a determination that the 
animal is not a vicious animal and for a return of the animal, the animal control division shall retain 
custody of the animal and dispose of said animal pursuant to section 14-41 upon a final 
determination by the special magistrate that the animal is a vicious animal. Should the special 
magistrate find the animal not to be a vicious animal, the animal shall be returned to the owner with 
no boarding charges. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-76. - Interference prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the removal of an animal 
by any animal control officer, law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-77. - Immunity from prosecution. 
    Any animal control officer, law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer is immune from 
prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property or injury to animals 
while in the discharge of duties imposed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Secs. 14-78—14-85. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 


Sec. 14-86. - Definition. 
    Dangerous animal means and includes any mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame but is 
of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, ferocious nature or other characteristics 
would constitute a danger to human life or property if it is not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in 
secure quarters; or any domestic mammal, reptile or fowl which, because of its size or ferocious 
propensity or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or 
maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, F.S. § 767.10 et seq. 


Sec. 14-87. - Permits. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the city any dangerous animal unless a 
special dangerous animal permit is first obtained from animal control division. 
(b) ?The animal control division shall issue a special permit for the keeping or maintenance of a 
dangerous animal if it finds: 
(1) ?The animal is at all times kept or maintained in a safe manner and that it is at all times confined 
securely so that the keeping of the animal will not constitute a danger to human life or property 
of others. 
(2) ?Adequate safeguards are made to prevent unauthorized access to such animal by members of 
the public. 
(3) ?The health and wellbeing of the animal is not in any way endangered by the manner of keeping 
or confinement. 
(4) ?The keeping of the animal does not constitute a nuisance and will not harm the surrounding 
neighborhood or disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5) ?The keeping of such animal will not create or cause offensive odors or constitute a danger to 
public health. 
(6) ?The quarters in which such animal is kept or confined are adequately lighted and ventilated and 
are so constructed that they may be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(7) ?The applicant for such special permit has proven his ability to respond in damages to and 
including the amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury or death of any person or for damages to 
property owned by any other person, which may result from the ownership, keeping or 
maintenance of such animal. Proof of liability to respond in damages may be given by filing with 
the health officer a certificate of insurance at the time of the application, reflecting such 
coverage for the permit period prohibiting cancellation of the insurance without ten days' written 
notice being first given to the health officer. Proof of ability to respond in damages shall be 
required for any renewal of the permit. 
(8) ?The location for which the permit is requested or keeping of the dangerous animal conforms to 
the provisions of the City Code. 
(9) ?No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(c) ?The animal control division investigating any applicant for a permit, or in the enforcement of this 
section, is authorized to consult with and seek the advice of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Animals, the animal control department of the city or any other individual agency or organization 
which may be able to provide information and advice concerning the keeping of dangerous animals. 
(d) ?Prior to the annual renewal of any special permit issued pursuant to this section and at such 
intervals, as the officer may deem appropriate, the animal control division shall inspect the premises 
subject to such permit to determine whether the person to whom it has been issued is continuing to 
comply with all of the conditions set forth in this article. If the animal control division determines 
during any inspection that any of the conditions hereof are being violated, he shall refuse to renew 
any special permit or revoke the special permit if the violation is not corrected within a reasonable 
period of time as he might direct. A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for each inspection. 
(e) ?In no event shall a permit be issued for the keeping of more than two dangerous animals at a single 
location. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to licensed pet shops, menageries, 
zoological gardens, circus, bona fide licensed veterinary hospitals for treatment of such animals or 
medical institutions maintained for the purpose of instruction of study of such animals. 
(f) ?No permit shall be issued for the keeping of dangerous animals unless all provisions of this article 
are complied with and a fee of $25.00 paid to the animal control division. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-88. - Prohibited in residence areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dangerous animal in the city where 
residential uses are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-89. - Exhibition in specific locations prohibited. 
    Within the city limits it shall be unlawful to keep or exhibit a wild animal (other than birds or fowl) at a 
roadside stand or market located along a public street or highway of or in the city, a shopping plaza, a 
gasoline station, a shopping mall, or a part of the premises thereof. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 


Sec. 14-90 - Enforcement by interlocal agreement. 
    The city shall have the right to contract with Bay County, Florida, for the enforcement of this chapter 
by interlocal agreement, or alternatively, with any private entity for the like purposes. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-91. - Delegation of responsibility. 
    The City of Springfield does hereby delegate the responsibility of this chapter to Bay County, Florida, 
subject to the terms of the interlocal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-92. - Designation of special magistrates. 
    The city shall designate and appoint a special magistrate or continue to utilize its hearing 
officer/special magistrate for the enforcement of this chapter and pursuant to the provisions of F.S. ch. 
162. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-93. - Contest construction. 
    Should the services of this agreement revert to the City of Springfield, the term "Bay County" shall 
refer to the City of Springfield, where the context so requires, or if this agreement is enforced through the 
services of a private entity, the name of the private entity shall be substituted in the place of Bay County, 
if the context so requires. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-94. - Intent of chapter. 
    This chapter is substantially similar to an ordinance adopted by the Board of County Commissioners 
of Bay County, Florida, who will have the responsibility of enforcing this chapter, together with their own 
ordinance. It is the intent of this chapter and the county's ordinance to be consistent in format, context 
and construction, and both should be construed to achieve that result, except where the ordinance of the 
county could not permit such construction. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-95. - State statutes. 
    The provisions of F.S. ch. 828 and § 823.15, as may be amended or superseded, are by reference 
made a part hereof. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Florida 
Statutes adopted by reference, the Florida Statutes shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Sec. 14-96. - Chapter amendments. 
    This chapter may be amended from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 2, 5-1-2006) 


Chapter 22 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Electors and elections, F.S. ch. 97 et seq. 


Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of state election code. 
    All elections shall be conducted substantially on the principles adopted in the state election code 
(F.S. chs. 97—106), except as provided in the Charter and this Code. 
(Laws of Fla. 1951, ch. 27900, § 12; Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1889, § 2; Laws of Fla. ch. 63-1947, § 
1; Laws of Fla. ch. 67-2091, § 2; Laws of Fla. ch. 73-624, § 1) 


Sec. 22-2. - Arranging for elections. 
    For the purpose of carrying on and continuing each city election, it shall be the duty of the city 
commission to make all necessary arrangements for holding all municipal elections, and to declare the 
results thereof. Inspectors and clerks of election shall be appointed by the city commission, except that if 
the commission shall fail to appoint them at least two days before the date of any election, the mayor may 
appoint them. 
(Code 1972, § 8-3) 


Sec. 22-3. - Polling places. 
    It shall be the duty of the city commission to make arrangements for and provide a polling place 
presided over and managed by the board of inspectors and clerk of election which shall be the polling 
place for the election of the elective officers of the city. Proper enclosures shall be provided at each 
polling place. Polling booths similar in construction to those used in state and county elections shall be 
used at these polling places. 
(Code 1972, § 8-4) 


Sec. 22-4. - Filling vacancies in candidacy. 
(a) ?If the withdrawal, death or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate following the end of the 
qualifying period results in only one candidate remaining for that office, a special election shall be 
scheduled by the city commission not less than 60 days nor more than 90 days after the vacancy in 
the candidacy has occurred. 
(1) ?If a special election is called pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, a supplemental 
qualifying period shall be established beginning on the day the vacancy in the candidacy has 
occurred and ending at 12:00 noon on the 46th day prior to the date of the special election. Any 
candidate wishing to qualify during this supplemental qualifying period shall do so pursuant to 
section 22-6, prior to the end of the supplemental qualifying period. 
(2) ?The remaining candidate for that office shall not be required to requalify for election or pay a 
second qualifying fee. The remaining candidate shall not be declared an unopposed candidate 
under F.S. ch. 106 unless no additional candidate qualifies for election during the supplemental 
qualifying period. The remaining candidate may continue to accept contributions until he is 
declared unopposed. If he is declared unopposed pursuant to this section, he shall be declared 
elected and the special election shall be cancelled. 
(3) ?The filing of campaign expense statements, pursuant to F.S. ch. 106, by candidates in a 
special election called under subsection (a) of this section, including the remaining candidate, 
shall not be later than such dates as fixed by the city clerk. In fixing such dates, the city clerk 
shall take into consideration and be governed by the practical time limitations and the dates 
established for such statements in a regular city election. 
(4) ?If a special election is called pursuant to subsection (a) of this section and other candidates 
qualify for election during the supplemental qualifying period, supplemental absentee ballots for 
the special election shall be mailed by the city clerk to any absentee voter who was mailed an 
absentee ballot for the regular election. If an absentee voter returns the initial ballot he was 
mailed, his vote for that office for which the special election was called will be null and void, but 
his votes on all other offices and issues shall be counted. 
(b) ?If the death, withdrawal or removal from the ballot of a qualified candidate following the end of the 
qualifying period results in no candidates for an office, and more than 21 days remain prior to the 
date of the election, qualifying shall be reopened to allow candidates to qualify for the election to that 
office in accordance with the city Charter and this Code. Any candidate wishing to qualify shall do so 
pursuant to section 22-6, no later than 12:00 noon of the 21st day prior to the date of the election. 
(1) ?If less than 21 days remain to the election date after the death, withdrawal, or removal from the 
ballot of the lone qualified candidate for an office, and if a vacancy shall result on the city 
commission, the remaining mayor and commissioners shall appoint, by majority vote, a person 
otherwise qualified to be a mayor or commissioner, and the person so appointed shall serve as 
mayor or commissioner for the entire term. If the commission does not appoint a person to fill 
the vacancy within 30 days after the first regular commission meeting held after the vacancy 
has occurred, a special election shall be held in order to fill the vacancy for the unexpired 
portion of the entire term. The special election shall be held not less than 30 days nor more than 
90 days after the initial 30-day period has expired. 
(2) ?If the qualifying period is reopened pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, supplemental 
absentee ballots reflecting the new candidates who have qualified for that office only shall be 
mailed by the city clerk as soon as possible to any absentee voter who was mailed an absentee 
ballot. If an absentee voter returns the initial ballot he was mailed, his vote for the office for 
which qualification was reopened will be null and void, but his votes on all other offices and 
issues shall be counted. 
(c) ?The name of any qualified candidate who has withdrawn, died or been removed from the ballot shall 
not be printed on the ballot. If the ballot cannot be changed, any votes for that candidate shall be null 
and void. 
(d) ?A candidate withdrawing or being removed from the ballot after having qualified and paid the 
qualification fee shall not receive a refund of the qualifying fee. 


Sec. 22-5. - Vacancies in office. 
(a) ?The office of mayor or commissioner shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal from 
office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of his office, such forfeiture to be declared by the 
remaining members of the city commission. 
(b) ?The mayor or a commissioner shall forfeit his office if he lacks at any time during his term of office 
any qualification for the office prescribed by the Charter or by law. 
(c) ?A vacancy on the city commission shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members who 
shall choose a successor to serve until the newly elected person is qualified. If one year remains in 
the term of the vacated seat at the time of the next regular election, that seat shall be filled by 
election for the remaining year. Notwithstanding any quorum requirements, if at any time the 
membership of the city commission is reduced to less than a quorum, the remaining members may, 
by majority vote, appoint additional members. 
(d) ?If all members of the city commission are removed by death, disability, law or forfeiture of office, the 
governor shall appoint an interim commission that shall call a special election. 


Sec. 22-6. - Qualifying petitions. 
    Candidates for office of city commissioner shall file a qualifying petition signed by not less than 15 
qualified voters of the ward from which he or she is a candidate, and candidates for office of mayor shall 
file a qualifying petition signed by not less than 30 qualified voters of the city. Qualifying petitions must be 
filed with the Bay County Supervisor of Elections within the time set forth in accordance with the State 
Election Code. 
(Laws of Fla. 1951, ch. 27900, § 12; Laws of Fla. ch. 59-1889, § 2; Laws of Fla. ch. 63-1947, § 
1; Laws of Fla. ch. 67-2091, § 2; Laws of Fla. ch. 73-624, § 1; Ord. No. 516, § 1, 1-21-2014) 


Sec. 22-7. - Qualifying fees. 
    Candidates for the offices of city commissioner and mayor shall pay to the city a qualifying fee in an 
amount equal to five percent of the annual compensation provided for the office for which the candidate is 
seeking to qualify. The fee shall be paid at the time the candidate files the required qualifying petition. 
Should the candidate fail to qualify, then the fee shall be refunded to him or her in full. 
    As an alternative to the qualifying fee, a person who seeks to qualify as a candidate for city 
commissioner or mayor who meets the following additional petition requirements is not required to pay 
the qualifying fee required by this section: 
    In addition to the qualifying petition signatures required by section 22-6 of this Code, a candidate for 
office of city commissioner must obtain 35 additional signatures of voters of the city to avoid the fee. A 
candidate for mayor must obtain 20 additional signatures of voters of the city to avoid the fee. These 
signatures are in addition to the petition signatures required by section 22-6 of this Code. 
    The format of the petition shall be prescribed by the state division of elections and shall be used by 
candidates to reproduce petitions for circulation. 
    Each petition must be submitted to the Bay County Supervisor of Elections within the time set forth in 
accordance with the State Election Code. 
(Code 1972, § 8-39; Ord. No. 516, § 2, 1-21-2014) 


Sec. 22-8. - Use of voting machines required. 
    In all municipal elections, the city shall use voting machines of standard make and model, which may 
be either purchased or rented by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 8-6) 


Sec. 22-9. - Preserving nomination petitions. 
    The city commission shall cause to be preserved in its office or some other safe place all petitions of 
nominations filed therein under this chapter for six months after the election for which such nominations 
are made. 
(Code 1972, § 8-7) 


Sec. 22-10. - Printing candidates' names on ballots. 
(a) ?The city commission shall cause to be printed on the ballots on the machines to be used at such 
elections, the names of all candidates who have properly filed a qualifying petition and complied with 
all procedures and possess the qualifications as set forth in the Charter. 
(b) ?The ballots provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall contain the names of all 
candidates nominated as herein provided who have not declined. The names of all candidates for 
the same office shall be printed in the boxes provided for that office, irrespective of party in 
alphabetical order by last name. But the order in which the titles to the several offices to be filled 
shall be arranged upon the ballots, shall be left to the discretion of the city commission charged with 
printing of the ballots. 
(Code 1972, §§ 8-9, 8-10) 


Sec. 22-11. - Calling special elections. 
    The city commission is empowered, at any regular or special meeting, to call a special election for 
approving or disapproving the granting of a franchise with respect to any public utility, or for any other 
purpose for which a special election may be lawfully called. The calling of a special election may be read 
and passed at one meeting of the city commission by resolution, or by ordinance duly and regularly 
passed, which resolution or ordinance shall set forth clearly and definitely the proposition to be voted 
upon, and shall fix the time for the election and provide for appropriate notice thereof. All special elections 
shall be called, held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, so far as such 
provisions may be applicable thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 8-12) 
State Law reference— Notice to supervisor of elections prior to special election, F.S. § 
100.151; special election notice procedures, F.S. § 100.342. 


Sec. 22-12. - Counting ballots. 
(a) ?Procedure. At the close of the election at each polling place in each election district, the inspectors 
and clerks shall immediately proceed to count the ballots therein, and continue such count without 
adjournment or interruption until the counting is completed. The absentee ballots shall be counted 
the next day. 
(b) ?Certificate of results. The count being completed, the result shall be publicly proclaimed. Duplicate 
certificates of the result of such election shall be drawn up by the inspectors or clerks which shall 
contain in words written at full length the name of each person voted for each office, and the number 
of votes cast for each person for such office. If any question shall be submitted to an election, such 
certificate shall also contain the number of votes cast for and against such question, which 
certificates shall be signed by the inspectors and clerks. One of such certificates shall be delivered 
by one of the inspectors without delay, securely sealed, to the mayor and the other to the city clerk, 
and the poll list and oaths of the inspectors and clerks, together with all memoranda and papers of all 
kinds used by the inspectors and clerks in conducting such election, shall also be transmitted, sealed 
up by the inspectors, with certificates of the results of the election, to the mayor, to be filed in the 
office of the city commission. 
(Code 1972, §§ 8-29, 8-30) 


Sec. 22-13. - Canvassing and certifying vote. 
    On the day following any election, it shall be the duty of the city commission to meet at its office and 
publicly proceed to canvass the vote given for the several offices and persons as shown by the returns. 
Such canvass shall be made solely, exclusively and entirely from the returns of the certificates of the 
inspectors, as signed and filed by them, and in no case shall the city commission change or vary in any 
manner the number of votes cast for the candidates, respectively, at any polling place, as shown by the 
returns of the inspectors of such polling places. They shall compile the results of the election, as shown 
by the inspectors' returns, and then make up and sign duplicate certificates containing in words and 
figures, written at full length, the whole number of votes given for each office, the names of the persons 
for whom such votes were given for such office, and the number of votes given for each person for such 
office. One of such certificates shall be furnished to the city clerk, and the certificate shall be recorded by 
him in a book to be kept by him for that purpose, which book shall be furnished by the city commission 
and shall be labeled "Record of Election Returns." 
(Code 1972, § 8-31) 


Sec. 22-14. - Certificate of election; copies of returns. 
    In case any city officer shall be elected at any election, the mayor shall give to the person who shall 
be elected a certificate of his election, and the city clerk shall give to any person desiring a copy of such 
returns from the record a certified copy thereof, or of such part thereof as may be desired, upon the 
payment to him of the customary fees for copying and certifying papers in the office of the clerk of the 
circuit court. 
(Code 1972, § 8-32) 


Sec. 22-15. - Votes necessary to elect; runoff election. 
    The person who shall receive the highest number of votes cast for one office shall be elected to such 
office. In case two or more persons shall receive an equal and the highest number of votes for the same 
office, the city commission elected at such election shall require that a special runoff election be called 
within 20 days between the two tieing candidates. The person receiving the highest number of votes at 
this runoff election shall be elected to such office. 
(Code 1972, § 8-33) 


Sec. 22-16. - Forms and blanks; preparing and transmitting. 
    The city commission is required to cause to be prepared all proper blanks and forms to be used in 
the election and the returns and certificates conformable to the provisions of this chapter. The city 
commission shall also have printed a sufficient number of copies of the law regulating elections in the city 
to supply the several polling places in the city, and transmit such copies of the law with the forms to the 
inspectors of election at each polling place at each election district in the city, with a sufficient number of 
such forms and copies for use of such inspectors at the election. 
(Code 1972, § 8-34) 


Sec. 22-17. - Auditing and paying expenses. 
    All expenses necessarily incurred in connection with the holding of any election shall be audited by 
the city commission and then paid by the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35) 


Sec. 22-18. - Created; boundaries. 
    There are hereby created within the city four wards, which shall be described and have boundaries 
as provided by the city commission by ordinance. Each ward shall be formed of compact, contiguous 
territory, and its boundary lines shall follow the centerlines of streets or bodies of water. The wards shall 
be based upon the principle of equal and effective representation as required by the State of Florida 
Constitution and United States Constitution and as represented in the mathematical preciseness reached 
in the legislative apportionment of the state. 
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 1-3-2012) 


Sec. 22-19. - Established. 
    The city is hereby divided into four wards numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4, which four wards shall severally 
be composed of areas within the city as follows: 
(1) ?Ward 1. Ward 1 shall be the following described territory within the city, to wit: 
That area lying easterly of the centerline of U.S. Highway 231 and south of the centerline of 
East Baldwin Road; and that area lying northerly of the south line of the Gulf Power Company 
easement located south of Lane Road and east of Transmitter Road to the eastern boundary of 
the city limits; and that area westerly of the centerline of Transmitter Road lying northerly of the 
northern lot line of Lot 1, according to the St. Andrews Bay Development Company's plat of 
Section 35, Township 3 South, Range 14 West to the western boundary of the city limits. 
(2) ?Ward 2. Ward 2 shall be the following described territory within the city, to wit: 
That area lying southerly of the south line of the Gulf Power Company easement located south 
of Lane Road and east of Transmitter Road; and that area lying southerly of the northern lot line 
of Lot 1, according to the St. Andrews Bay Development Company's plat of Section 35, 
Township 3 South, Range 14 West, and all that area lying northerly of the centerline of East 
11th Street from the eastern boundary to the western boundary of the city limits. 
(3) ?Ward 3. Ward 3 shall be the following described territory within the city, to wit: 
That area lying southerly of the centerline of East 11th Street between Everitt Avenue and North 
Tyndall Parkway, and that area easterly of the centerline of Everitt Avenue and northeasterly of 
the centerline of Powell Avenue, and that area northerly of the centerline of East 5th Street and 
westerly of the centerline of Transmitter Road, and that area northerly of the centerline of East 
7th Street east of Transmitter Road, and that area westerly of Bob Little Road, and that area 
northerly of East 9th Street and westerly of North Tyndall Parkway. 
(4) ?Ward 4. Ward 4 shall be the following described territory within the city, to wit: 
That area lying southwesterly of the centerline of Powell Avenue and southerly of the centerline 
of East 5th Street between Everitt Avenue and Bob Little Road, along with that area easterly of 
the centerline of Transmitter Road and southerly of East 7th Street, and that area therefrom to 
the southern boundary of the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 502, § 2, 1-3-2012) 


Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; parking prohibited in marked fire and 
safety lanes, § 78-35. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 


Sec. 26-31. - Adoption of National Fire Codes. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions 
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the National Fire Codes, 
1994 edition, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, and the whole thereof, save and 
except such portions as are hereafter deleted or amended or are in conflict with this Code of Ordinances, 
of which code a copy is filed in the office of the city clerk, and such code is hereby adopted and 
incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section. From the date on which this section shall take 
effect, the provisions of this code shall be controlling within the area of jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 9-1) 


Sec. 26-32. - Enforcement. 
    The National Fire Codes shall be enforced by the fire chief. 
(Code 1972, § 9-2) 


Sec. 26-33. - Definitions. 
    Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the National Fire Codes, it shall be held to mean this 
city. 
(Code 1972, § 9-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 26-34. - Modifications. 
    The fire chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the National Fire Codes upon 
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical 
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes, provided the spirit of the code shall be 
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when 
granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the fire 
department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 9-4) 


Sec. 26-35. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or 
when it is claimed that the provisions of the National Fire Codes do not apply or that the true intent and 
meaning of the codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the 
decision of the fire chief to the city commission within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1972, § 9-5) 


Secs. 26-36—26-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Hazardous substances law, F.S. § 501.061 et seq.; explosives, F.S. ch. 552. 


Sec. 26-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous material means the same as hazardous material has under the provisions of the laws of 
the state, the laws of the United States, Rules and Regulations of the United States, Rules and 
Regulations of Florida and the ordinances and regulations of the county. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 269, § 1, 8-5-1985) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 26-62. - Storage on property within 1,000 feet of public buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful to store or leave any kind of hazardous material, whether attended or not, on 
public rights-of-way or other public or private property within 1,000 feet of any established church, school, 
residence, commercial building or public building. The distance shall be measured from the property line 
where the hazardous material is stored to the church, school residence, commercial building or public 
building property line. It shall be unlawful for the owner of private property to allow, permit or suffer 
hazardous material to be stored upon any privately owned property. 
(Ord. No. 269, § 2, 8-5-1985) 


Sec. 26-63. - Violation of article; notice; action. 
    If the police chief or his representative finds any hazardous material that is being stored in violation 
of this article, the police chief shall cause written notice of violation to be delivered, by any appropriate 
means, to the owner or person in possession of the hazardous material, and to the owner or occupant of 
the land upon which the hazardous material is located. If the hazardous material is not immediately 
removed, the chief shall take appropriate action to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 269, § 3, 8-5-1985) 


Chapter 30 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Water resources, F.S. ch. 373. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 481, adopted July 6, 2009 amended the title of said article to read as herein set 
out. Former Article II was entitled Flood Damage Prevention. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 30-31. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the State of Florida has in F.S. ch. 166 authorized and delegated the responsibility 
to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safely, and general 
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Commission of the City of Springfield, Bay County, Florida 
does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 1, § A, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a) ?The flood hazard areas of the City of Springfield are subject to periodic inundation, which results in 
loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental 
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the lax 
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b) ?These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing 
increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses 
vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which arc inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or 
otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 1, § B, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-33. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to 
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1) ?Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to life, health, safety and property due to water or 
erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights and 
velocities; 
(2) ?Require that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve such uses be protected 
against flood damage throughout their intended life span; 
(3) ?Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers 
which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4) ?Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood 
damage; and 
(5) ?Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or 
which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 1, § C, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-34. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1) ?To protect human life, health and to eliminate or minimize property damage; 
(2) ?To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3) ?To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally 
undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4) ?To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5) ?To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, 
telephone and sewer lines, roadways, and bridges and culverts located in floodplains; 
(6) ?To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood 
prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
(7) ?To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 1, § E, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 481, adopted July 6, 2009, repealed § 30-35, which pertained to 
methods of reducing flood losses, and derived from Ord. No. 435, art. 1, § E, 8-18-2004. 


Sec. 30-36. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to 
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable 
application. 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure that is located on the same parcel of 
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Accessory structures should constitute a minimal investment, may not be used for human habitation, and 
be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached 
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a 
building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any 
walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter 
load-bearing walls, is new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain management administrator's interpretation of 
any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the community's flood insurance 
rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not 
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be 
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent 
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given 
year (also called the "100-year flood" and the "regulatory flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout 
this article. 
    Base flood elevation means the highest water-surface elevation associated with the base flood. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all 
sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended 
through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing 
damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Building. See Structure . 
    Coastal high hazard area means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the 
inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave 
action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on the FIRM as Zone VI—V30, VE, or V. 
    Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical 
facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency 
response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
    Datum means a reference surface used to ensure that all elevation records are properly related. The 
current national datum is the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, which is expressed in 
relation to mean sea level, or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but 
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling 
operations, or storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the 
ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear 
walls, or breakaway walls. 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, 
permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a 
floodplain. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before 
the adoption of Springfield Flood Damage Ordinance 247, August 3, 1981. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for 
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site 
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain 
management regulations adopted by a community before the adoption of Springfield Flood Damage 
Ordinance 247, August 3, 1981. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional 
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and cither final site grading or the 
pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means: 
(1) ?A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas 
from: 
a. ?The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b. ?The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(2) ?The collapse or subsidence of land along a shore of a lake or other body of water as the result 
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical 
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, 
accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of natures, such as a flash flood or 
an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in 
flooding as defined in subsection (1)a. of this definition. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood 
hazards and regulatory floodway. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where 
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been identified as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has 
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the 
community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) is the official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The 
study contains an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding water 
surface elevations. The study may also contain flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FHBM (where 
applicable) and other related data and information. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive 
measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in 
the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain 
management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the city's floodplain 
management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this article and other zoning ordinances, subdivision 
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of 
police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local 
regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss 
and damage. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or 
adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real 
property, water and sanitary sewer facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must 
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface 
elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway fringe means that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where 
encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/or hydrologic analysis. 
    Freeboard means the additional height, usually expressed as a factor of safety in feet above a flood 
level for purposes of flood plain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for many unknown factors, 
such as wave action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and hydrological effect of urbanization of the 
watershed, which could contribute to flood heights greater than the heights calculated for a selected 
frequency flood and floodway conditions. 
    Free of obstruction means that any type of lower area enclosure or other construction element will 
not obstruct the flow of velocity water and wave action beneath the lowest horizontal structural member of 
the lowest floor of an elevated building during a base flood event. The requirement applies to the 
structures in V Zones. 
    Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless 
it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the 
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. 
The term docs not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Hardship (as related to variances of this article) means the exceptional hardship associated with the 
land that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City Commission of Springfield, 
Florida requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere 
economic or financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, 
physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a 
rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means 
without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to 
build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to the start 
of construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1) ?Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the 
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting 
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2) ?Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the 
historical significance of a registered historic or a district preliminarily determined by the 
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3) ?Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation 
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4) ?Individually listed on a local inventory historic places in communities with historic preservation 
programs that have been certified either: 
a. ?By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b. ?Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest elevation, after the completion of construction, of the 
ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished 
or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area 
other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not 
built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation design standards of this article. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a 
permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to 
the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable 
structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into 
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means the building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer and 
seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by 
independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or 
adjusted assessed values. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a 
reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is 
synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a 
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after 
the adoption of Springfield Flood Damage Ordinance 247, August 3, 1981. The term also includes any 
subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for 
which the construction of facilities for servicing die lots on which the manufactured homes are to be 
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site 
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the first floodplain 
management code, ordinance or standard. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means a vertical control used as a reference for 
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is 
above ground. 
    Public safety and nuisance means anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire 
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free 
passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage 
structures and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed 
buildings. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1) ?Built on a single chassis; 
(2) ?Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3) ?Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4) ?Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for 
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas 
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water 
surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions 
during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the 
cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value 
of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) (see area of special flood hazard ) means an area having special 
flood hazard and shown on a FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE, or V. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal 
Barrier Resources Act P. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building 
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was 
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction 
of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, 
installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of 
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such 
as clearing, grading and oiling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it 
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor 
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not 
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For substantial improvement, the actual start 
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, 
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means all walled and roofed buildings, including gas or liquid storage tanks and 
manufactured homes that are principally above ground. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of 
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market 
value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of 
a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the 
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term also includes structures that have incurred 
"substantial damage" or "repetitive loss," regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term does 
not, however, include any repair or improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or 
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have been identified by the local code 
enforcement official prior to the application for the permit for improvement and which are the minimum 
necessary to assure safe living conditions. This term does not include any alteration of a historic 
structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic 
structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, 
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 
percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement 
commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a 
manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in a hardship. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this article. 
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of 
compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is 
provided. 
    Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or 
over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which 
substantial flood damage may occur. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum 
(NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the 
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 2, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-37. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the Zoning and Building Code 
jurisdiction of the City Commission of the City of Springfield, Bay County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3, § A, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-38. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Springfield, Bay County, Florida, dated June 2, 2009 with the 
accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by 
reference and declared to be a part of this article. The FIS and FIRM are on file at the office of the city 
clerk at City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3, § B, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-39. - Designation of flood damage prevention ordinance administrator [floodplain ordinance 
administrator]. 
    The City Commission of the City of Springfield, Bay County, Florida hereby appoints the City Clerk of 
the City of Springfield or the city clerk's appointed agent to administer and implement the provisions of 
this article and is herein referred to as the floodplain ordinance administrator, the floodplain management 
administrator, or the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3, § C, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-40. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the 
commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. c, § D, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-41. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full 
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3 § E, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-42. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed 
restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more 
stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3, § F, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-43. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1) ?Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2) ?Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3) ?Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3, § G, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-44. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory 
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on 
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not 
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free 
from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of City Commission of the 
City of Springfield, Bay County, Florida or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that 
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3, § H, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-45. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including 
violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special 
exceptions, shall constitute a non-criminal violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply 
with any of its requirements shall, upon adjudication thereof, be fined not more than $300.00 and in 
addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall 
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the floodplain management 
administrator from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 3, § I, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Secs. 30-46—30-65. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 


Sec. 30-66. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the floodplain management administrator on 
forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, 
the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of 
the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, 
drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1) ?Application stage: 
a. ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of 
all buildings; 
b. ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be 
floodproofed; 
c. ?Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential 
floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection (2) of this section 
and section 30-92(2); 
d. ?Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as result of 
proposed development; and 
e. ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural 
member of the lowest floor and provide a certification from a registered engineer or 
architect indicating that they have developed or reviewed the structural designs, 
specifications and plans of the construction and certify that they are in accordance with 
accepted standards of practice in coastal high hazard areas. 
(2) ?Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or lowest horizontal structural member, 
or floodproofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to 
submit to the floodplain management administrator a certification of the NGVD or NAVD 
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, or bottom of the lowest horizontal 
structural member of the lowest floor as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification 
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or 
professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular 
building said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional 
engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the 
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. (The floodplain management administrator shall 
review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted.) The permit holder 
immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct 
deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said 
corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 4, § A, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-67. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain management administrator. 
    Duties of the administrator shall include, but are not be limited to: 
(1) ?Review permits to assure sites are reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2) ?Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been 
satisfied; 
(3) ?Advise permittee that additional federal, state, or local permits may be required, and if such 
additional permits are necessary, require that copies of such permits be provided and 
maintained on file with the development permit; 
(4) ?Notify adjacent communities, the state NFTP coordinator, and other federal and/or state 
agencies with statutory or regulatory authority prior to any alteration or relocation of a 
watercourse; 
(5) ?Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse 
so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(6) ?Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (A-
Zones) or bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (V-Zones) of all 
new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with section 30-92(1) and (2) and 
section 30-96(2), respectively; 
(7) ?Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or 
substantially improved buildings have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 30-92(2); 
(8) ?Review certified plans and specifications for compliance. When floodproofing is utilized for a 
particular building, certification shall be obtained from a registered engineer or architect 
certifying that all areas of the building, together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, 
below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage 
of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy in compliance with section 30-92(2) of this 
article. In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a registered 
professional engineer or architect that the building is designed and securely anchored to pilings 
or columns in order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash. Additionally in 
coastal high hazard areas, if the area below the lowest horizontal structural member of the 
lowest floor is enclosed, it may be done so with open wood lattice and insect screening or with 
non-supporting breakaway walls that meet the standards of section 30-92(6) of this article; 
(9) ?Interpret the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. When there 
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the floodplain 
management administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the 
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as 
provided in this article; 
(10) ?When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with 
section 30-38, the floodplain management administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably 
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or any other 
source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3; and 
(11) ?Coordinate all change requests to the FIS and FIRM or FBFM or both with the requester, 
state, and FEMA. 
(12) ?Where base flood elevation are utilized, obtain and maintain records of lowest floor and 
floodproofing elevations for new construction and substantial improvements. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 4, § B, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Secs. 30-68—30-90. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 


Sec. 30-91. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, all development sites including new construction and substantial 
improvements shall be reasonably safe from flooding, and meet the following provisions: 
(1) ?New construction and substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately 
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2) ?Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. 
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to 
ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state 
requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(3) ?New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility 
equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4) ?New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices 
that minimize flood damage; 
(5) ?Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, 
including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or 
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6) ?New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(7) ?New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(8) ?On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them 
or contamination from them during flooding; 
(9) ?Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with 
the provisions of this article shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in 
this article; and 
(10) ?Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance 
with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not 
furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § A, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-92. - Specific standards for A-Zones. 
    In all A-Zones where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in section 30-38, the 
following provisions, in addition to those set forth in section 30-91, shall apply: 
(1) ?Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential 
building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or 
above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a 
structure, there must be a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area 
sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of the 
exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (3) of this section. 
(2) ?Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, 
industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, 
including basement, elevated at or above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-
Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building 
components, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, below the base flood 
elevation plus one foot are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of 
water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect 
shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be 
provided to the floodplain administrator with the corresponding engineering data and operational 
and maintenance plans. 
(3) ?Enclosures below the lowest floor (elevated buildings). New construction or substantial 
improvements that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls 
below the lowest floor elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and 
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood 
forces on exterior walls. 
a. ?Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional 
engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1. ?Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one 
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2. ?The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above foundation interior 
grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation 
grade); and 
3. ?Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or 
devices provided they provide the required net area of the openings and permit the 
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
b. ?Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, 
storage and building access. Access to the enclosed area shall be minimum necessary to 
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment 
used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area 
(stairway or elevator); and 
c. ?The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate 
rooms. 
d. ?Where elevation requirements exceed six feet above the highest adjacent grade, a copy of 
the legally recorded deed restriction prohibiting the conversion of the area below the lowest 
floor to a use or dimension contrary to the building's originally approved design, shall be 
presented as a condition of issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. 
(4) ?Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
a. ?All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, 
outside of an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in expansions to existing 
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new manufactured home park or 
subdivision or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a 
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, the lowest 
floor shall be elevated on a permanent foundation to no lower than one foot above the 
base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation 
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. All manufactured homes placed 
or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be 
elevated so that: 
1. ?The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at or above the base flood 
elevation; or 
2. ?The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation 
elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above 
the grade. 
3. ?The manufactured home must be securely anchored to the adequately anchored 
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
b. ?All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1. ?Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2. ?Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for 
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by 
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached 
additions); or 
3. ?Meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation 
requirements of subsections (4)a. or (4)b. of this section. 
(5) ?Adequate drainage paths around structures shall be provided on slopes to guide water away 
from structures within Zone AH. 
(6) ?Standards for waterways with established base flood elevations, but without regulatory 
floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-38, where 
streams exist for which base flood elevation data has been provided by FEMA without the 
delineation of the regulatory floodway (Zones AE and A1—30), the following provisions, in 
addition to those set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this section, shall apply: 
a. ?Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement or 
other development included fill shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, 
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect and anticipated development will not 
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point in 
the community. 
b. ?Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by 
more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the developer or applicant first applies, 
with the city's endorsement, for a conditional FIRM revision, and receives the approval of 
FEMA. 
(7) ?Floodways . Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-38, are 
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the 
velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and have significant erosion 
potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a. ?Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and 
other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered 
professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses 
performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that encroachments shall not 
result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b. ?If subsection (7)a. is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall 
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 3. 
c. ?Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing 
manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured 
home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision 
provided the anchoring standards of section 30-91(2), and the elevation standards of 
subsection (1) of this section and the encroachment standards of subsection (7)a. of this 
section, are met. 
d. ?Development activities including new construction and substantial improvements that 
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot may be 
allowed, provided that the developer or applicant first applies, with the city's endorsement, 
for a conditional FIRM revision, and receives the approval of FEMA. 
e. ?When fill is proposed, in accordance with the permit issued by the Florida Department of 
Health, within the regulatory floodway, the development permit shall be issued only upon 
demonstration by appropriate engineering analyses that the proposed fill will not increase 
the water surface elevation of the base flood in accordance with subsection (7)a. of this 
section. 
(8) ?For all structures located seaward of the coastal construction control line (CCCL), the lowest 
floor of all new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated at least one foot 
above the base flood elevation established by FEMA, as adopted by section 30-38. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, but in addition thereto, for all habitable structures located 
seaward of the CCCL, the bottom of the lowest shore-parallel horizontal structural member of the 
lowest floor of all new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated to the 100-year 
flood elevation established by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP). For 
purposes of this subsection, habitable structure means structures which (i) are designed primarily for 
human occupancy and (ii) are potential locations for shelter from storms. Typically included are 
residences, hotels and restaurants. Typically excluded are bath houses, cabanas, swimming pools, 
garages and other structures which are either not designed primarily for human occupancy or, if 
designed for occupancy by humans, are not also potential locations for human shelter from storms. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § B, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-93. - Standards for A-Zones without established base flood elevation and floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-38, where streams exist 
for which no base flood elevation data or regulatory floodway has been provided designated by the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1) ?Require standards of section 30-91. 
(2) ?Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments greater than 50 
lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation 
data. The standards set forth in section 30-92 shall apply. 
(3) ?When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with 
section 30-92, the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood 
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or any other source, in order to 
administer the provisions of division 3. When such base flood elevation data is utilized: 
a. ?Obtain the elevation (in relation to the mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including the 
basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b. ?Obtain, if the structure has been floodproofed in accordance with the requirements of 
section 30-92(b) of this article, the elevation in relation to the mean sea level to which the 
structure has been floodproofed; and 
c. ?Maintain a record of all such information with the official designated in section 30-39. 
(4) ?Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating office prior to any 
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
(5) ?Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any 
watercourse is maintained. 
(6) ?Manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood 
damage. They must be elevated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral 
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or 
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local 
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7) ?When the data is not available from any source as in subsection (3) above, the lowest floor of 
the structure shall be elevated at or above the highest adjacent grade. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § C, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-94. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 481, adopted July 6, 2009, repealed § 30-94, which pertained to 
standards for streams with established base flood elevation without regulatory floodways, and 
derived from Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § D, 8-18-2004. 


Sec. 30-95. - Standards for AO Zones. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-38, are areas designated 
as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to 
three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the path of flooding is unpredictable and 
indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1) ?All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the 
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the highest adjacent grade at least as 
high as the flood depth specified on the flood insurance rate map. If no flood depth number is 
specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at or above the highest 
adjacent grade. 
(2) ?All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a. ?Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified 
on the flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth 
number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two 
feet above the highest adjacent grade; 
b. ?Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to the 
specified flood level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially 
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability 
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, certification is 
required as per section 30-92(2); or 
c. ?Require drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide water away from structures. 
(3) ?Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall meet the non-
elevation design requirements of section 30-92. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § F, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-96. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a) ?All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b) ?All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and 
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c) ?All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood 
hazards; and 
(d) ?Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed 
development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed 50 lots or 
five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § F, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-97. - Coastal high hazard areas. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard areas established in section 30-38 are coastal high 
hazard areas, designated as Zones VI—V30, VE, or V. These areas have special flood hazards 
associated with high velocity waters from surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions in 
this article, the following provisions shall also apply: 
(1) ?All new construction and substantial improvements in Zones VI—V30 and VE (V if base flood 
elevation is available) shall be elevated on pilings or columns so that: 
a. ?The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the 
pilings or columns) is elevated to one foot freeboard; and 
b. ?The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, 
collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting 
simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have 
a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one percent annual 
chance). 
c. ?For all structures located seaward of the coastal construction control line (CCCL), the 
bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor of all new construction 
and substantial improvements shall be elevated to at least one foot above the base flood 
elevation established by FEMA, as adopted by section 30-38. 
d. ?Notwithstanding the foregoing, but in addition thereto, for all habitable structures located 
seaward of the CCCL, the bottom of the lowest shore-parallel horizontal structural member 
of the lowest floor of all new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated 
to the 100-year flood elevation established by the Florida Department of Environmental 
Protection (FDEP). For purposes of this subsection, habitable structure means structures 
which (i) are designed primarily for human occupancy and (ii) are potential locations for 
shelter from storms. Typically included are residences, hotels and restaurants. Typically 
excluded are bath houses, cabanas, swimming pools, garages and other structures which 
are either not designed primarily for human occupancy or, if designed for occupancy by 
humans, are not also potential locations for human shelter from storms. 
(2) ?A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, 
specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of 
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the 
provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(3) ?Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal 
structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and 
substantially improved structures in Zones VI—V30 and VE. The floodplain management 
administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
(4) ?All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5) ?Provide that all new construction and substantial improvements have the space below the 
lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open 
wood-lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without 
causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the 
building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall 
shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds 
per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 
pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local codes) may be permitted 
only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet 
the following conditions: 
a. ?Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur 
during the base flood; and 
b. ?The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject 
to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water 
loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). 
Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a 
one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(6) ?The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be useable solely for parking of vehicles, 
building access, or storage. Such space shall not be partitioned into multiple rooms, 
temperature-controlled, or used for human habitation. 
(7) ?Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings. When fill is proposed in a coastal high 
hazard area, appropriate engineering analyses shall be conducted to evaluate the impacts of 
the fill prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(8) ?Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands that would increase 
potential flood damage. 
(9) ?All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones VI—V30, V, and 
VE on the City of Springfield's FIRM on sites meet the standards of section 30-97(1) though (8) 
and that manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on other sites in an existing 
manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones VI—V30, V, and VE on the FIRM meet the 
requirements of section 30-92(4)a. and b., if they are located: 
a. ?Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b. ?In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c. ?In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d. ?In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has 
incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood. 
e. ?Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile home), except in an existing 
manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured 
home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision 
provided the anchoring standards of this section, and the elevation standards of subsection 
(1) of this section and the encroachment standards of this section are met. 
(10) ?Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones VI—V30, V, and VE on the community's 
FIRM either: 
a. ?Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b. ?Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to 
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no 
permanently attached additions; or 
c. ?Meet the requirements of section 30-66 (permit procedures) and sections 30-92 and 30-97. 
d. ?Prohibit the placement of recreational vehicles, except in an existing recreational vehicle 
park. Must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is 
attached to the site by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no 
permanently attached additions. Be on site no more than 180 days and park must have a 
plan for removal in case of a flooding threat. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § G, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-98. - Critical facilities. 
    Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the 
special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 5, § H, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Secs. 30-99—30-120. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 


Sec. 30-121. - Designation of variance and appeals board. 
    The Springfield Planning Board as established by the City Commission of the City of Springfield, Bay 
County, Florida shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this 
article. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § A, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-122. - Duties of variance and appeals board. 
    The board shall hear and recommend to the city commission for a final decision appeals when it is 
alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain management 
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision of 
the board may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § B, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-123. - Variance procedures. 
    In acting upon such applications, the Springfield Planning Board shall consider all technical 
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
(1) ?The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2) ?The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3) ?The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of 
such damage on the individual owner; 
(4) ?The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5) ?The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6) ?The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or 
erosion damage; 
(7) ?The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8) ?The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management 
program for that area; 
(9) ?The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10) ?The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the flood 
waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11) ?The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including 
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water 
systems, and streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § C, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-124. - Conditions for variances. 
(a) ?Variances shall only be issued when there is: 
(1) ?A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2) ?A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3) ?A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, 
additional threats to public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the 
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b) ?Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary 
deviation from the requirements of this article. 
(c) ?Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference 
between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and staling 
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the 
reduced lowest floor elevation (see section 30-125). 
(d) ?Variances shall not be granted after-the-fact. 
(e) ?The floodplain management administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report 
any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request (see section 30-125). 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § D, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-125. - Variance notification. 
    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a 
community official that: 
(1) ?The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in 
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of 
insurance coverage; and 
(2) ?Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
    A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain management administrator in the Office of 
the Bay County Clerk of Courts Public Records and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in 
the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
    The floodplain management administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including 
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § E, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-126. - Historic structures. 
    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic" structures—meeting the 
definition in this article—upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude 
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § F, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-127. - Special conditions. 
    Upon consideration of the factors listed in division 4, and the purposes of this article, the Springfield 
Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to further 
the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § G, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Sec. 30-128. - Structures in regulatory floodway. 
    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any impact in flood conditions or 
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(Ord. No. 435, art. 6, § H, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 481, 7-6-2009) 


Chapter 34 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; abandoned or derelict property, § 50-2; 
outdoor junkyards or flea markets, § 62-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 66; abandoned, wrecked, junked or 
disabled vehicles, § 78-61 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Public health, F.S. ch. 381 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ACCUMULATION OF TIRES OR RIMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Waste tire requirements, F.S. § 403.717. 


Sec. 34-31. - Limit on number. 
    It is unlawful for any person to accumulate more than four new or used tires and rims on any 
residential or business property not licensed to do so by the city. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 1, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 34-32. - Display and storage by licensed property owner. 
    If the owner of the property has a valid business license, then he shall display and/or store such tires 
and rims in a manner to prevent the accumulation of water, trash, garbage or other debris in and around 
the tires, rims and storage area. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 2, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 34-33. - Responsibility for disposal. 
    It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to properly dispose of the tires and rims. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 3, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 34-34. - Failure to abide by article declared nuisance; abatement; lien; other remedies. 
    Failure to abide by this article is a public nuisance. If a violation of this article has not been abated 
after 30 days' written notice, the city will abate the nuisance and assess a lien for all costs related to the 
proper removal, transportation and disposal of such tires and rims. In addition to the abatement 
procedures, the city may impose all other remedies available under the law. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 4, 5-1-1995) 


Secs. 34-35—34-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 525, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2015, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein 
set out. Former Art. III, §§ 34-61—34-73, pertained to unfit and unsafe structures and derived from Ord. 
No. 317, §§ 1—13(a), 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 330, §§ 1—4, 5-1-1995. 


Sec. 34-61. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in 
this section: 
    Construction debris means any refuse generated by a contractor, subcontractor or other person or 
supplier during the course of repair, addition to, or construction of any building or structure whether such 
activity requires a building permit or not. 
    Demolition debris means any refuse generated through the cutting or trimming of trees, bushes or 
shrubbery for hire, or the destruction or demolition, in whole or in part, of any structure or building, or the 
clearing of land by any person, whether for hire or by the owner. 
    Enforcement officer shall mean any code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer of the city. 
    Garbage shall mean any putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, 
storage, preparation, cooking, sale or consumption of food. 
    Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design of any type that is marked, 
etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface of public or private property, including, but not limited 
to, building, structures or places. 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad tipped or felt tip marker, paint stick, 
graffiti stick, or etching tool or device capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood. 
    Inspector means that officer or employee of the city designated by the city commission. 
    Litter means any garbage; rubbish; trash; refuse; cans; bottles; boxes; containers; paper; tobacco 
products; tire; appliances; mechanical equipment or part; building or construction material; tool, 
machinery; wood; motor vehicle or motor vehicle part; vessel; aircraft; farm machinery or equipment; 
sludge from a waste treatment facility; water supply treatment plan or air pollution control facility; or 
substance in any form resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural, or 
governmental operations. 
    Nuisance means any of the following: 
(1) ?Any accumulation of litter, refuse, construction or demolition debris, garbage, trash, junk and 
other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things. 
(2) ?Any excessive accumulation of untended growth of weeds, underbrush or other dead or living 
plant life upon an improved lot, tract or parcel of land, in the manner that such lot, tract or parcel 
of land shall or may become infested or inhabited with rodents, vermin or snakes, or may 
become a breeding place for mosquitoes, or threaten or endanger the public health and welfare, 
or may reasonably cause disease, or adversely affect and impair the economic welfare of the 
adjacent property. 
(3) ?Any unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure. 
(4) ?Any weeds which exceed one foot in height upon an improved lot, tract or parcel of land, or on 
an undeveloped lot, tract or parcel of land within a subdivision which has had the natural 
vegetation cleared. 
(5) ?All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises. 
(6) ?All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or 
other causes that give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(7) ?The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(8) ?The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, 
dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(9) ?Any building, structure or other place of location where any activity which is in violation of local, 
state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(10) ?Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained or allowed to accumulate on any 
lot, piece of ground, or premises, including that water confined in a swimming pool, spa or hot 
tub. 
(11) ?Burning without a permit from the city fire department fire chief or burning during local or state 
ban. 
(12) ?Improper use of water during emergency water restrictions. 
(13) ?Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(14) ?Unsheltered storage for a period of 30 days or more within the corporate limits of this city 
(except in licensed junkyards) of old and unused stripped junk and other automobiles not in 
good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, or 
equipment or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for 
which it was manufactured, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to public health, 
safety and welfare. 
(15) ?Improper disposal of commercial garbage, hazardous, industrial, infectious or oil waste. 
(16) ?For the purpose of this chapter, the term nuisance shall also include any condition or use of 
premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes 
or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in 
which the premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or depositing on 
or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
a. ?Litter, junk, trash, or construction or demolition debris; and 
b. ?Abandoned, discarded, unused objects or equipment such as, but not limited to, 
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. 
(17) ?Any unauthorized obstructions to or interferences with the free public use of streets, rights-of-
way and public thoroughfares including, but not limited to: (1) an annoyance to the public as to 
render the use of the street hazardous; (2) a hindrance or prevention of free and unobstructed 
use for travel which renders passage through the street more difficult or which increases the 
danger of injury to persons or property; (3) skating, skateboarding, or cycling on structures in 
streets, rights-of-way and public thoroughfares. 
(18) ?Any building, structure or other property which contains graffiti visible from a public location. 
(19) ?Any public nuisance know at common law or in equity jurisprudence or as provided by the 
statutes of the State of Florida or ordinances of the City of Springfield. 
(20) ?Derelict, junk, discarded, unregistered vehicles: It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any 
vehicle of any type in an abandoned, wrecked, junked, untended, discarded, unregistered 
condition, whether attended or not, on public rights-of-way or other public or private property or 
for any person to cause, allow or permit such action. 
a. ?Any vehicle which is undergoing repairs must be immediately under repairs and such 
repairs must be completed within ten days. 
b. ?Any vehicles undergoing repairs over a duration of more than 72 hours must be stored and 
repaired out of sight of the general public and not in the front yard of the residence or 
property. 
c. ?It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct repairs of vehicle at their residence as a 
matter of occupation, either full time or part time, or for compensation of any kind without 
obtaining an occupational license, as per this Code. 
d. ?Anyone having or keeping more than one vehicle, registered to different owners and which 
are in a state of undergoing mechanical or body repairs shall be deemed a motor vehicle 
repair service in violation of this article. 
e. ?This section shall not apply to lawfully licensed vehicle repair businesses. 
(21) ?Mobile homes, recreational campers and trailers. 
a. ?It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to use or cause to be used 
any mobile home or recreational or travel trailer to be used for the purposes of storage of 
any property, materials or items within the city limits. 
b. ?It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to live in, stay in or abide in 
any manner within a recreational vehicle or trailer, or to cause or allow the same upon any 
property, commercial or private outside the confines of a recreational vehicle park or 
mobile home park with recreational vehicle accommodations. 
c. ?It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to connect any recreational 
vehicle, camper or trailer to city utilities, including water or sewage, or to connect such 
vehicles to electrical power or to dump the facilities of such vehicles into the city sewage. 
d. ?It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to park or place a mobile 
home, either permanently or temporarily, on any property within the city limits without a 
permit to do so, issued by the city. No mobile home shall be placed on any city right-of-way 
or city property under any circumstances. 
e. ?Abandoning a mobile home, RV, camper or trailer on commercial or private property. 
Abandonment shall mean leaving without providing or continuing reasonable maintenance 
and allowing deterioration to the point that the property can no longer be reasonably used 
for the purpose for which it was intended. 
(22) ?In regard to portable storage units: 
a. ?Any placement or the permitting of any placement of more than one portable storage unit in 
the front yard of a residential premises where there is a dwelling; 
b. ?Any placement of more than one portable storage unit on a vacant lot in a residential area; 
c. ?Any continuous keeping of a portable storage unit on residential premises which are vacant 
or in the front yard of a residential premises where there is a dwelling in excess of ten days 
in any 60-day period. In the event of damage to a premises caused by fire, storm, flood or 
declared government emergency, this period may be extended upon written approval of 
the city clerk; or 
d. ?Any placement or the permitting of any placement on a residential premises of a portable 
storage unit exceeding eight feet in width, 20 feet in length, and nine feet in height. 
    Portable storage unit means any container designed for the storage of personal property which is 
typically rented to owners or occupants of property for their temporary use and which is delivered and 
removed by truck. Examples of portable storage units include, but are not limited to, moving and storage 
containers, road and storage trailers and steel shipping containers. 
    Refuse means leavings, dregs, rubbish, trash or waste material. 
    Trash means all grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, old furniture, mattresses, bed springs, small 
debris, nonputrescible solid waste, cloth, paper, cardboard, glass and other similar materials. The term 
"trash" shall not include anything weighing over 1,000 pounds, items over ten feet long or any debris or 
items generated by a contractor or individual through construction or demolition. 
    Underbrush means any undergrowth or brush conducive to the collection of insects and rodents. 
    Unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure means any dwellings or structure or portions thereof and 
accessory buildings which are structurally unsafe, unstable, or unsanitary; inadequately provided with exit 
facilities; constitute a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put; 
constitute a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or 
abandonment; dangerous to life or property of the occupant thereof or of the surrounding area; unfit for 
human habitation if so intended or used; or otherwise in violation of the housing, building, electrical, 
plumbing, mechanical, sanitation and fire codes of the city and/or county. 
    Weeds means any plants which are useless to men or injurious to crops, grasses or flowers. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-62. - Prohibited acts; penalty. 
    Any owner or occupant of a premises knowingly creating or maintaining a nuisance within the city 
shall be guilty of an offense. Where the nuisance is maintained by a fictitious person owning or occupying 
the premises, a natural person serving as an officer, manager or other agent of the owner or occupant 
who knowingly permits the nuisance to be maintained shall be guilty of the same offense as the fictitious 
person. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-63. - Powers and duties of the enforcement officer; determination of interested parties. 
(a) ?Generally. The enforcement officer shall be charged with the duty of administering the applicable 
standards and securing compliance therewith and in furtherance of this responsibility, the 
enforcement officer shall: 
(1) ?Make such inspections as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this 
chapter. 
(2) ?Investigate any complaints of alleged violation of this chapter and maintain a log reflecting the 
resolution thereof; however, only matters or conditions pertinent to the existence of a nuisance, 
as defined herein shall be considered or reported by the enforcement officer. 
(b) ?Preparation of notice and order generally. When the enforcement officer verifies the existence of a 
nuisance, it shall be his duty to promptly prepare and submit to the city clerk a proposed form of the 
notice and order required by this chapter. The city clerk or his or her designee, shall review, approve 
or modify and execute the form of notice and order and, with assistance of the city attorney, shall 
determine the owner(s) of record of the real estate upon which the nuisance is located, and send the 
owner(s) a notice and order of abatement, referred to in this chapter as the notice and order. In 
addition, the notice and order shall be given to the record lessee(s), if any, and persons of record 
interest (including by way of example and not limitation mortgagee, contract purchaser, agent with 
power of attorney, and any person claiming an interest in the property) and, by the initial posting of 
notice upon the dwelling or structure in question, to any occupants of that dwelling or structure. All 
such persons are referred to as the "interested parties" in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-64. - Notice and order of abatement. 
(a) ?The notice and order may require the cutting of weeds or underbrush or the removal of rubbish or 
such other measures as are reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(b) ?The notice and order may require the vacation, repair, restoration or replacement of any unfit or 
unsafe dwelling or structure or of any part or parts thereof, including accessory building(s); provided, 
however, that if the inspector shall determine that the cost to repair, restore or replace any such 
dwelling or structure or part thereof, including accessory building(s) in compliance with all applicable 
building and life safety codes, would exceed 50 percent of the value of such dwelling or structure or 
part thereof, including accessory building(s) (as determined by reference to the most recent, final ad 
valorem tax roll prepared by the Bay County Property Appraiser) he may only order the vacation and 
demolition and removal of the dwelling or structure. 
(c) ?In addition, due to a variety of reasons, including, but not limited to, abandonment, neglect, 
inadequate property management, or obsolescence, the condition(s) constituting a danger or 
nuisance to the public cannot be made safe, the notice and order shall require the vacation of the 
dwelling or structure involved and order the demolition and removal of the dwelling or structure or 
any part or parts thereof, including accessory building(s), contributing to the nuisance. Factors 
evidencing a determination that a property cannot be made safe may include, but not be limited to: a 
history of unsecured or un-securable, dangerous conditions; a history demonstrating the property 
owner's failure to exercise reasonable control over the property to keep it secure or safe; a history 
showing that the property has become an attractive nuisance to children or transients; a history 
showing a proliferation of criminal activity due to dilapidated conditions and lack of management and 
control over the premises; a history showing that notwithstanding the reasonable efforts of law 
enforcement or code enforcement personnel, or both, the property remains in a condition which is 
imminently dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d) ?A notice and order requiring the repair, restoration or replacement of any dwelling, structure or part 
or parts thereof, including accessory building(s), shall require that the work meet the standards 
specified by all applicable building and life safety codes. 
(e) ?The notice and order shall be in writing, signed by the city clerk or his or her designee, with a 
description of the nuisance and a legal description of the realty where it is located, including the 
street address, and shall state what the city orders to be done about the condition and the date 
within which the work ordered to be done is to be completed. The notice and order shall state that it 
may be appealed within 30 days by written application to the city clerk. The notice and order shall 
describe the condition(s) found by the inspector to constitute a public nuisance pursuant to this 
chapter. If the notice and order requires demolition and removal of an unfit or unsafe dwelling or 
structure, or part or parts thereof, including an accessory building(s), it shall describe the condition(s) 
found by the inspector, upon consultation with the city attorney, to constitute such a public nuisance 
pursuant to this chapter as to make demolition reasonable. A notice and order requiring demolition 
and removal shall also state that interested parties may elect to abate the nuisance by repair, 
restoration or replacement of the subject unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure, or part or parts thereof, 
including accessory building(s). 
(f) ?In the case of an unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure or part or parts thereof, including accessory 
building(s), this notice and order shall require the owner or other interested parties within 30 days 
after service to obtain a permit and begin specified repairs or improvements, or begin to demolish 
and remove the dwelling or structure or portion thereof. This work shall be completed within 60 days 
from the date of the permit for repair or demolition. Any demolition permit necessary as a result of 
any notice and order herein shall not require a fee. 
(g) ?Except as otherwise provided in this chapter for unsafe or unfit dwellings or structures the city clerk 
shall order such work to be completed within such time as he determines to be reasonable 
considering the nature of the nuisance, the danger to the public and the amount of work involved to 
abate the nuisance. 
(h) ?When the county health officer or licensed pest control operator verifies the existence of a rodent 
infestation in any dwelling or structure that is to be demolished and removed, in order to preclude the 
migration of rodents, the notice and order shall require that effective rodent extermination methods 
be employed by a licensed structural pest control operator prior to demolition. Extermination 
techniques shall include ectoparasite control measures. 
(i) ?An order to vacate, demolish and remove an unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure or any part or parts 
thereof, including accessory building(s), shall not preclude the immediate repair, restoration or 
replacement thereof by an interested party entitled to effect such work (herein collectively an 
applicant). In order to make the election available in this subsection and avoid the demolition and 
removal, within 30 days after service of the notice and order of demolition, the applicant must submit 
a competent application for all or a material portion of the work needed to abate the nuisance and in 
good faith commence and diligently and continuously pursue all the work through completion. The 
work must meet the standards specified by all applicable building and life safety codes. In the event 
that the initial permit application does not cover all the work, the application must be accompanied by 
a description of the remainder of the work to be done and include a schedule of all the work with 
milestones reasonable and customary in the construction industry. The city clerk shall either accept 
or reject the application as covering a material portion of the work, the overall work described as 
sufficient to abate the nuisance and the schedule of work/milestones as reasonable. Should the city 
clerk find that the initial application does not cover a material portion of the work, that the overall 
work described is insufficient to abate the nuisance, or that the schedule of work/milestones is not 
reasonable, he or she shall advise the applicant who shall have ten days to correct the deficiency in 
writing or appeal in writing to the city commission which shall hear the matter at its next regular or 
special meeting. The only issues before the city commission shall be whether to accept or reject the 
matter(s) rejected by the city clerk. The city commission may not amend the application, description 
of work or schedule without the written consent of the applicant. The appeal shall be conducted as a 
quasi-judicial, de novo hearing pursuant the city's Land Development Code, except that only the 
applicant and the city clerk, or their respective designees, shall be entitled to present evidence. No 
other persons shall be considered adversely affected persons. Public comment, but only as 
commentary, shall be permitted. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof. If the applicant's 
position is accepted then the applicant shall be required to immediately commence and diligently and 
continuously pursue the work to abate the nuisance strictly in accord with the schedule upon penalty 
of demolition as provided in section 34-67(b). If the applicant's position is not affirmed, the applicant 
shall have 30 days after entry of the city commission's order to comply with the initial notice and 
order of demolition and removal, and no permit to repair, restore or replace shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-65. - Service of notice and order. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk or his or her designee to see to it that the required notice and 
order is delivered to the interested parties by personal delivery of copy thereof to the party to be notified, 
or by leaving such copy at his usual place of abode with some person of the family above 15 years of age 
and informing such person of the contents thereof, or by either registered or certified United States mail 
with return receipt requested. If the name of the party to be notified or his place of residence or his post 
office address cannot be ascertained after diligent search, or in the event a notice and order sent by 
either registered or certified mail shall be returned undelivered, notice shall be made by publishing a copy 
thereof once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. A 
copy of such notice and order shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon such dwelling or structure in 
question, in a conspicuous place at City Hall, and upon the city website. The subsequent removal or 
illegibility of the notice and order posted upon the dwelling or structure shall not render the posting invalid. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-66. - Extension of time to comply. 
(a) ?In the case of an unfit or unsafe building or structure if the interested parties shall have obtained a 
building or demolition permit within the 30-day period and in good faith and in due time begun work 
to comply with the order and diligently pursue the work, but it appears that they will not be able to 
complete the work by the date ordered, they may file a written request with the city commission 
stating the reasons they have been unable to complete compliance. If reasonable grounds are 
shown therefor, the city commission is authorized to issue an order authorizing an extension of time, 
not to exceed 60 days, in which to complete compliance with the original notice and order. The city 
commission shall consider the request at its next regular or a special meeting, give the requesting 
party an opportunity to be heard, and grant the request only for good cause shown. 
(b) ?In the case of a nuisance which is not an unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure the city clerk or his or 
her designee may grant extensions of up to 60 days to abate the nuisance as are reasonably 
necessary under the circumstances upon written request from the interested parties stating the 
reasons they have been unable to complete compliance and showing reasonable grounds for such 
failure to complete compliance. 
(c) ?Violations of this chapter which constitute a nuisance related to public streets, rights-of-way, and 
public thoroughfares shall be abated immediately. 
(d) ?Should the interested parties, through no fault of their own, be unable to complete compliance by 
the date ordered in the original notice and order nor by any extension date granted pursuant to this 
section, the city commission, in exceptional cases, upon written request, may extend the completion 
date as merited by special hardship, unusual difficulty, or uniqueness of the situation; however, in no 
event shall the completion date extend beyond a maximum period of 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-67. - City action on failure to comply. 
(a) ?If the interested party(s) shall fail to comply with an order made pursuant to the provisions of this 
chapter within the time therein fixed or extended, the city, acting through the city clerk, is authorized 
to abate the nuisance in accordance with the notice and order, either with city forces or by 
independent contractor(s) selected through the city's procurement process. 
(b) ?If the interested party(s) respecting an unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure or any part or parts 
thereof, including accessory building(s) which are the subject or an order to demolish and remove 
shall timely elect to repair, restoration or replacement as provided in this chapter but fail to timely 
obtain the required permits, or fail to timely commence and continuously and diligently pursue the 
work, the city, acting through the city clerk, is authorized to effect the ordered demolition and removal 
(including work in progress if work has been commenced) either with city forces or by independent 
contractor(s) selected through the city's procurement process. 
(c) ?In the event of any failure to comply specified in this section or under this chapter, the city clerk and 
the city attorney are authorized to commence on behalf of the city an action in circuit court against 
the interested party(s) to determine the validity of this chapter on its face and as applied, to require 
the interested party(s) to comply with the notice and order and, in the absence of compliance within a 
time specified by the court, to authorize the city to abate the nuisance as specified in the notice and 
order or as pleases the court, and to determine the amount and validity of the lien or assessment to 
be imposed or levied against the subject property to pay the cost of abatement. In the event the city 
commission shall by resolution determine to borrow the funds required to pay the cost of abatement 
and to pledge the proceeds of the lien or assessment to repay the loan, the city clerk and city 
attorney are authorized to seek on behalf of the city pursuant to F.S. ch. 75, validation of the city's 
authority to incur the debt, issue the certificates or bonds evidencing the debt and the legality of all 
the proceedings in connection therewith. In the event validation proceedings are commenced, the 
city clerk is directed to serve upon the interested parties notice of their right to intervene in those 
proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-68. - Assessment of cost; lien. 
(a) ?Upon expiration of the 30-day appeal period with no appeal having been taken, the city clerk, after 
proceeding under this chapter, shall as often as may be convenient report the action taken toward 
abatement of the nuisance by the city and the city commission shall assess the entire cost of such 
action against the real property, which assessment, when made shall constitute a lien upon said 
property in favor of the city. The lien of the city shall encompass costs of determining the nuisance, 
effecting the vacation, securing the property, removing or abating the nuisance, demolishing and 
removing the dwelling or structure and accessory building(s) when applicable, all administrative, 
legal, postal and publication expenses, as well as rodent extermination when employed, and the fees 
of independent experts offering opinions, reports or testimony concerning the nuisance or 
abatement, as well as all other direct or indirect costs associated therewith. All such costs and 
expenses are collectively referred to as the abatement cost. To the extent permitted by law, the lien 
upon the property for the abatement cost shall be superior to the interests of all others receiving 
notice and an opportunity to administratively appeal the notice and order, except taxes. 
(b) ?The city clerk shall record a notice and claim of lien in the county's official record book showing the 
nature of such lien, the amount thereof, and a legal description of the property, including the street 
address, and the names of all interested parties known to the city. Such municipal lien shall bear 
interest from said date at the rate of ten percent and shall be enforceable by foreclosure against the 
property if unsatisfied after the expiration of three months from the date of recording the notice and 
claim of lien, or enforceable as other liens may be enforced by the city. Upon notice of an impending 
county tax deed sale, the tax collector shall request the clerk of the circuit court to collect all monies 
due the city, including such municipal lien with interest. 
(c) ?In addition, the city may collect the abatement cost through the additional and alternative method of 
levying a special assessment, sometimes called a non-ad valorem assessment, upon the subject 
property benefitted by the abatement. Collection shall be through the methods authorized by 
Ordinance No. 524, or any amending or succeeding ordinance, and shall include without limitation 
the method of collection specified in F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any amending or 
succeeding statute. It is the legislative intent of this chapter to authorize the collection of abatement 
costs by assessment placed on the same bill as ad valorem taxes pursuant to applicable statutes 
and regulations promulgated thereunder. In the event this additional and alternative method of 
collection is used, the abatement cost shall include the fees incurred by the city for legal counsel, 
independent experts offering opinions, reports or testimony concerning the abatement benefit to the 
subject property or any other matters related or useful to the levy. This method of collection is 
cumulative to any other method of collection available to the city at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-69. - Appeals generally. 
(a) ?Any interested party may appeal to the city commission the interpretation or application of the code 
section, ordinance, statute, regulation or common law principle on which the notice and order of the 
city clerk by filing with the city clerk, within 30 days after service of the city clerk's notice and order, 
setting forth the grounds for the appeal. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city clerk shall 
forthwith transmit a copy of the notice of appeal, together with all related documents of the 
enforcement officer's department, to the city commission. Within ten days after the filing of notice of 
appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a date for the hearing thereof and give notice of the date for the 
hearing to the interested parties, in a manner as would afford them not less than ten days' notice. 
Under no circumstances shall the clerk establish a hearing date beyond 60 days from the filing of the 
notice of appeal. 
(b) ?All interested parties shall have 30 days within which to comply with the resolution of the 
commission. 
(c) ?Nuisances related to public streets, rights-of-way, and public thoroughfares shall be abated 
immediately. However, offenders shall have the right to appeal decision of abatement to the city 
commission for determination of whether the conduct constituted a nuisance. If there is a 
determination that such conduct did not constitute a nuisance, then any fines or penalties assessed 
against the alleged offender shall be forfeited by the city. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-70. - Final appeal to circuit court. 
    An interest party, having exhausted his administrative remedies before the city commission, may 
appeal to the circuit court the decision of the commission in like manner of appeals from county courts. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-71. - Appearance by counsel, etc.; witnesses sworn. 
    Any interested party appearing before the city commission may appear in person, by counsel, or by 
an agent possessing power of attorney provided the agency's instrument appears in the county's official 
record book, but nay not appear through any person otherwise a stranger to the record. All witnesses 
appearing before the city commission in proceedings under this chapter shall be sworn by the mayor or in 
his absence, by the person acting in his stead, except counsel representing a client. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-72. - Duties of other departments. 
(a) ?Members of the fire department, law enforcement, and public works department shall make written 
reports to the enforcement officer, of all dwellings or structures which appear to be substandard 
housing within the terms of this chapter. Such reports shall be submitted to the law enforcement as 
soon as practicable. 
(b) ?In carrying out his responsibilities hereunder, the enforcement officer may request assistance from a 
health officer, to determine violations of municipal ordinances, or state law, and rules and regulations 
of a health officer. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-73. - Entry powers of inspector. 
    The enforcement officer and his designees are hereby authorized to enter upon private property in 
order to enforce the provisions of this chapter. When necessary to obtain such entry, the enforcement 
officer and his designees may institute proceedings to obtain a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Sec. 34-74. - Alternative method. 
    This chapter shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the 
things authorized hereby, including without limitation the levy of assessments, sometimes called non-ad 
valorem assessments, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by 
other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter 
come into existence. This chapter, being necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants 
of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 12-2-2015) 


Secs. 34-75—34-100. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 


Secs. 34-101—34-104. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 525, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2015, repealed Art. IV, §§ 34-101—34-104, 
which pertained to nuisances and derived from Ord. No. 380, §§ II—IIIa, 12-7-1998. For current 
provisions, see Art. III above. 


Chapter 38 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Discrimination in the treatment of persons, F.S. ch. 760. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 416, adopted April 15, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code. At the 
discretion of the editor, former §§ 38-31—38-40 have been repealed and new §§ 38-31—38-43 have 
been enacted as set out herein. Said former sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 
Ord. No. 304, §§ 1—10, 2-10-1992 and Ord. No. 371, §§ 2—11, 3-2-1998. 
State Law reference— Fair housing act, F.S. § 760.20 et seq. 


Sec. 38-31. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public 
safety, public health, and general welfare, to assure equal opportunity to obtain adequate housing by all 
persons, regardless of race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, place of birth, handicap, familial status or 
national origin, and, to that end, to eliminate discrimination in housing. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 1, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-32. - Definitions. 
    When used herein: 
    City commission means the City of Springfield City Commission. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under §§ 38-34, 38-35, or 38-36 of this 
article. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designated or 
intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for 
sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Familial status is established when an individual who has not attained the age of 18 is domiciled 
with: 
(1) ?A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual; or 
(2) ?A designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with the written permission of 
such parent or other person. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Handicap means: 
(1) ?A person has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life 
activities, or he has a record of having, or is regarded as having, such physical or mental 
impairment; or 
(2) ?A person has a developmental disability. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor 
organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated 
organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to 
occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 2, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-33. - Exemptions. 
(a) ?Nothing in section 38-34 (other than subsection (b)) shall apply to: 
(1) ?Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual 
owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided 
further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner 
not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of 
such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with 
respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further, that such bonafide 
private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his/her 
behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to any right to all or a portion of the 
proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
provided further, that after the effective date of this article, the sale or rental of any such single-
family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house is sold or 
rented (A) without the use of any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental 
services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any 
person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such 
broker, agent, salesperson, or person and (B) without the publication, posting or mailing, after 
notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection 38-34(c) of this article; 
but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title 
companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title, 
or 
(2) ?Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by 
no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains 
and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b) ?For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or 
renting dwellings if: 
(1) ?He/she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more 
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
(2) ?He/she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his 
own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or 
more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
(3) ?He/she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, 
five or more families. 
(c) ?Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit 
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious 
organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it 
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving 
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, 
color, sex, familial status, handicap, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a 
private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes 
provides lodgings from which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting 
the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 3, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-34. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    As made applicable by section 38-33 and except as exempted by subsections 38-33(a) and (c), it 
shall be unlawful: 
(1) ?To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the 
sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of 
race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap, or national origin. 
(2) ?To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a 
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, 
color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap, or national origin. 
(3) ?To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or 
advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, 
limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap, or 
national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4) ?To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap, or 
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such 
dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5) ?For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by 
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or 
persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 4, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-35. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other 
corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of 
commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for 
the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate 
against him/her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such 
loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex, familial status, handicap, or 
national origin of such person or of any person associated with him/her in connection with such loan or 
other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or 
prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such 
loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given: Provided, that nothing contained in this section 
shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 38-33. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 5, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-36. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access or to membership or participation in any multiple-
listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the 
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him/her in the terms of conditions of 
such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, 
handicap, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 6, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-37. - Administration. 
(a) ?The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be with the city commission. 
(b) ?The city commission may delegate its functions, duties, and powers to an appointed board, 
including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, 
determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter 
under this article. 
(c) ?The city commission or its appointed board shall: 
(1) ?Implement the provisions of this article and rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and 
all city ordinances, codes, rules, and regulations pertaining to housing discrimination. 
(2) ?Receive, initiate, and investigate any and all complaints alleging violations of this article, and 
take appropriate action to eliminate, conciliate, prevent, and/or initiate prosecution of any such 
violations. 
(3) ?Provide assistance in all matters relating to equal housing opportunity. 
(4) ?Publish and disseminate public information and educational materials relating to housing 
discrimination. 
(5) ?Enter into written working agreements, as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this 
article, with federal, state, and county agencies involved in reducing housing discrimination. 
(6) ?Administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence 
before it by subpoenas issued by the city commission or its appointed board. 
(7) ?Take other informational, educational, or persuasive actions to implement the purposes of this 
article. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 7, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-38. - Procedure. 
(a) ?Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article must file a written complaint 
with the city commission or its appointed board within 45 days after the alleged unlawful practice 
occurs. 
(b) ?Upon receipt of a complaint, the city commission or its appointed board shall serve upon the 
individual charged with a violation (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), the complaint and a 
written resume setting forth the rights of the parties including, but not limited to, the right of the 
respondent to a hearing on the matter before adjudication by the city commission or its appointed 
board. 
(c) ?The city commission or its appointed board shall immediately investigate the complaint. Within 60 
days from the date of the receipt of the complaint, the city commission or its appointed board shall 
establish written report with findings of fact. 
(d) ?Copies of the city commission's or its appointed board's report shall be sent to the complainant and 
the respondent. Either may, within ten days after such services, request a hearing before the city 
commission or its appointed board. 
(e) ?When the complainant or the respondent requests a hearing by the city commission or its appointed 
board, or when the city commission or its appointed board itself determines that a hearing is 
desirable, the city commission or its appointed board shall call and conduct such hearing in 
accordance with section 38-39, below. 
(f) ?The city commission or its appointed board shall carry into execution the actions specified in its 
report, or, if a hearing is held shall carry into execution the actions determined upon by the city 
commission or its appointed board in the hearing. 
(g) ?The city commission or its appointed board in its review or its hearing may determine: 
(1) ?That the complaint lacks ground upon which to base action for violation of this article, or 
(2) ?That the complaint has been adequately dealt with by conciliation of the parties, or 
(3) ?That the case warrants filing charges against the offending party in the appropriate court. In 
some cases both/conciliation and adjudicative orders, or both adjudicative orders and initiation 
of court action may be indicated. 
(h) ?If the city commission or its appointed board issues an adjudicative order to correct, adjust, 
conciliate, prevent, or prohibit any unlawful act prohibited by this article, and the respondent refuses 
or fails to comply with or obey such adjudication, the city commission or its appointed board shall 
forthwith request that the state attorney file a complaint in the appropriate court. 
(i) ?The city commission or its appointed board shall, at all times, provide the complainant with full and 
timely information as to all the alternatives available to him/her under local, state, and federal law, 
including assistance to initiate judicial action if desired, under any circumstances. 
(j) ?The provisions of Rule 1.090, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure shall govern the computation of any 
period of time prescribed by this article. 
(k) ?All papers or pleadings required by this article to be served may be served by certified mail or in 
accordance with the provisions of Rule 1.080 (b), Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 8, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-39. - Hearings before the city commission. 
(a) ?When a hearing is required before the city commission or its appointed board, as specified in 
subsection 38-38(e) above, the city commission or its appointed board shall schedule the hearing 
and serve upon all interested parties a notice of time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be 
held promptly, but not less than 15 days after service of such notice and of the city commission's or 
its appointed board's written report (subsection 38-38(d) above). 
(b) ?The parties, or their authorized counsel, may file such statements with the city commission or its 
appointed board, prior to the hearing date, as they deem necessary in support of their positions. 
The parties may appear before the city commission or its appointed board in person or by duly constituted 
representative and may have the assistance of attorneys. The parties may present testimony and 
evidence, and the right to cross-examine witnesses shall be preserved. All testimony shall be given under 
oath or by affirmation. The city commission or its appointed board shall not be bound by strict rules of 
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity but due process shall be observed. The city commission or 
its appointed board shall keep a full record of the hearing, which records shall be public and open to 
inspection by any person, and upon request by any principal party to the proceedings the city commission 
or its appointed board shall furnish such party a copy of the hearing record at cost. The constitutional 
rights of the respondent not to incriminate himself/herself shall be scrupulously observed. 
(c) ?The city commission or its appointed board shall make a finding of fact, and a determination of 
action to be taken (subsection 38-38(g) above). 
(d) ?The city commission or its appointed board may issue subpoenas to compel access to or the 
production or appearance of premises, records, documents, individuals, or other evidence or 
possible sources of evidence relative to the complaint at issue. 
(e) ?Upon written application to the city commission or its appointed board, a respondent shall be 
entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the city 
commission or, to the some extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the 
city commission or its appointed board itself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall 
show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued 
at his/her request. 
(f) ?Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the city commission or its appointed board shall be entitled to 
the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the state courts of Florida. 
Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be 
paid by him/her, unless he/she is indigent in which case the city shall bear the cost of said fees. 
(g) ?Within ten days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the city 
commission or its appointed board to revoke or modify the subpoena. The city commission or its 
appointed board shall grant the petition if it finds that the subpoena requires appearance or 
attendance, at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not 
relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the 
evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(h) ?In case of refusal to obey a subpoena, the city commission or its appointed board or the person at 
whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 9, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-40. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which 
he/she might otherwise be entitled, or from filing of any complaint with any other agency or any court 
having proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 10, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-41. - Report to real estate commission. 
    If a real estate broker, a real estate salesperson, or an employee thereof has been found to have 
committed an unlawful practice in violation of this article, or has failed to comply with any order issued by 
the city commission or its appointed board, the city commission or its appointed board shall, in addition to 
the other procedures set forth herein, report the facts to the real estate commission of the State of 
Florida. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 11, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-42. - Conflicting ordinances repealed. 
    All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, 
hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 12, 4-15-2002) 


Sec. 38-43. - Limited invalidation. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, 
the remainder of the article and the application of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to 
other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 13, 4-15-2002) 


Chapter 42 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and 
vehicles, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Arrests, F.S. ch. 901; Florida contraband forfeiture act, F.S. § 932.701 et seq.; 
department of law enforcement, F.S. ch. 943. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 42-1. - Temporary police officers; appointment, removal and compensation. 
    Whenever, by reason of emergency, he deems it necessary, the mayor shall have the power and 
authority to appoint temporary police officers, and when so appointed, they shall be vested with the same 
police authority as regular police officers. Each such temporary police officer shall be entitled to 
reasonable compensation. Any such temporary appointee may be removed or discharged by majority 
action of the city commission during any meeting lawfully assembled. 
(Code 1972, § 2-2) 


Sec. 42-2. - Court cost assessments levied for law enforcement education. 
(a) ?There is hereby assessed by the city, in compliance with F.S. § 943.25(13), an additional $2.00 as a 
court cost against every person convicted for violation of a state penal or criminal statute or 
convicted of a municipal or county ordinance violation where such offense occurred within the city 
limits. In addition, $2.00 shall be deducted from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related 
to such penal statutes or ordinances. However, no such assessment shall be made against any 
person convicted for violation of any state statutes, municipal or county ordinance relating to the 
parking of vehicles. 
(b) ?All such assessments shall be collected by the appropriate court and shall be remitted to the city 
and earmarked for criminal justice education degree programs and training courses for members of 
the police department. The use and expenditure of such funds shall be in accordance with education 
and training programs for law enforcement personnel as determined by the mayor and in accordance 
with F.S. §§ 943.14 and 943.25. 
(Code 1972, § 7-3) 


Secs. 42-3—42-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEDURE FOR CODE ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental county or municipal code or ordinance enforcement procedures, 
F.S. § 162.21 et seq. 


Sec. 42-31. - Authority and purpose of article. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 162, pt. II as a supplemental method of enforcing the 
codes and ordinances of the city and is enacted to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the 
citizens of the city. In no way is this article intended to replace or exclude the enforcement of code or 
ordinance violations as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 1, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-32. - Designation of code enforcement officer. 
    For the purpose of this article, a code enforcement officer shall be any designated employee or 
agent of the city whose duty it is to enforce the codes and ordinances enacted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 2, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-33. - Authority of officer to issue citations. 
    Any code enforcement officer, so designated by the city, is hereby authorized to issue a citation to a 
person or business when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe 
that the person or business (the violator) has committed a civil infraction violation of a duly enacted code 
or ordinance of the city, and that the county court, in and for the county will hear the charge. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 3, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-34. - Notification prior to citation issuance. 
(a) ?Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide a notice to the violator that the 
violator has committed a violation of a city code or ordinance. The officer shall establish a 
reasonable time period within which the violator must correct the violation. 
(b) ?Notice shall conform to the requirements of F.S. § 162.21. 
(c) ?The time period for corrective action shall be no more than 30 days. 
(d) ?If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the violator has not corrected 
the violation, or, in the alternative, made substantial documented effort to correct the violation, the 
code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the violator. 
(e) ?A code enforcement officer shall not be required to provide the violator with a reasonable time 
period within which to correct the violation prior to issuing the citation, and may immediately issue a 
citation if the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious 
threat to public health, safety or welfare; or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible, or if the 
violator is known to have violated the same code or ordinance at the same location, and has 
previously been given notice and afforded the opportunity to correct the violation, within one year of 
the present violation. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 4, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-35. - Continuing violations. 
    Each day a violation continues subsequent to the issuance of a citation shall constitute a separate 
violation, for which the initial notice and period for corrective action shall suffice, for which a separate 
subsequent citation may issue, and for which a separate penalty may apply. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 5, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-36. - Form of citation. 
    The form of citation shall be as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 6, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-37. - Refusal to sign and accept citation. 
    Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer 
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 
775.083. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 7, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-38. - Penalties for violation of codes and ordinances. 
(a) ?A violation of a code or an ordinance cited and enforced under the provisions of this article shall be 
deemed a civil infraction. 
(1) ?For the first violation, by a civil penalty of $50.00. 
(2) ?For the second violation, by a civil penalty of $150.00. 
(3) ?For a third violation, by a civil penalty of $250.00. 
(b) ?Any person who fails to pay the appropriate civil penalty or to request a hearing within the time 
allowed, or who fails to appear in court to contest the citation when a hearing has been requested, or 
who fails to appear in court as may be required shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest 
the citation. A judgment may be entered against the person for an amount not to exceed $500.00, 
and/or the court may issue a rule to show cause, sui sponte, or upon the request of the city. The 
court rule shall require the violator to appear before the court to explain why action on the citation 
has not been taken. If the person who is issued such a rule to show cause fails to appear in 
response to the court's order, the violator may be held in contempt of court. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 8, 5-6-1996) 


Sec. 42-39. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing this Code and ordinances by 
any other means. The provisions of this section are additional and supplemental means of enforcing city 
codes and ordinances by any other means. These enforcement methods may include, but are limited to, 
the issuance of a citation, a summons, or a notice to appear in county court or arrest for violation of 
municipal ordinances as provided for in F.S. ch. 901. Unless otherwise provided by law, a person 
convicted of violating a municipal ordinance may be sentenced to pay a fine, not to exceed $500.00, and 
may be sentenced to a definite term of imprisonment, not to exceed 60 days, in a detention facility as 
authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 340, § 8, 5-6-1996) 


Secs. 42-40—42-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING OFFICER SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 433, adopted Apr. 19, 2004, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set 
out. Former art. III, §§ 42-61—42-128, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 381 
adopted Jan. 4, 1999. 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 42-61. - Civil offenses and penalties; hearing officers. 
    The violation of any city ordinance shall constitute a civil offense punishable by civil penalty in the 
amount prescribed herein. Accordingly, there is hereby created and established a code enforcement 
position to be filled by hearing officers to enforce the ordinances of the city contained in and enacted prior 
to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Secs. 42-62—42-90. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - HEARING OFFICERS 


Sec. 42-91. - Qualifications, appointment and removal of hearing officers; organization. 
(a) ?Hearing officers shall be residents of the City of Springfield, Florida who possess outstanding 
reputations for civic pride, interest, integrity, responsibility and business or professional ability. They 
shall have no criminal or code violation history in their background. Appointments shall be made by 
the city clerk on the basis of experience or interest in code enforcement. Such appointments shall be 
submitted to the city commissioners for ratification by majority vote. 
(b) ?The city clerk shall appoint as many hearing officers as are deemed necessary. Appointments shall 
be made for a term of one year. A hearing officer will be reappointed automatically, unless the city 
commission elects not to renew an appointment; provided, however, that the election not to renew a 
hearing officer's appointment and notice thereof occurs 30 days prior to the renewal of that hearing 
officer's term. There shall be no limit on the number of reappointments that may be given to any 
individual hearing officer. The mayor or the city commission shall have the authority to remove or 
suspend hearing officers for cause including, without limitation, those grounds specified by state law. 
Appointments to fill any vacancy shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c) ?Hearing officers shall not be city employees but shall serve without compensation. Hearing officers 
may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage, and per diem expenses as authorized by the mayor. 
(d) ?The city attorney may serve as general counsel to the city. If an appeal to the circuit court is 
requested pursuant to section 42-125(a) the city attorney shall represent the city at such 
proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-92. - Code enforcement procedure. 
(a) ?For the purpose of this article a "code inspector" is defined to be any agent or employee of the city 
whose duty is to assure code compliance. 
(b) ?Code inspectors shall have the authority to initiate enforcement proceedings as provided below. No 
hearing officer shall have the power to initiate such proceedings. 
(c) ?For the purpose of this article "violators" shall be deemed to be those persons or entities creating or 
permitting a violation of a city ordinance, or those persons or entities owning or possessing land on 
which a violation of an ordinance is created or maintained. The city finds and determines that the 
owner of land has an obligation to know whether conditions created or maintained on that land 
violates any city ordinance and therefore is deemed to have actual constructive knowledge of any 
such violation. The owner of land has a legal duty to determine whether conditions created or 
maintained on his or her land violate any city ordinance, and to correct such violations. 
(d) ?A code inspector who finds a violation of a city ordinance shall determine a reasonable time period 
within which the violator must correct the violation provided that such time period shall be no more 
than 30 days. The determination shall be based on consideration of fairness: practicality, ease of 
correction, ability to correct, severity of the violation; nature, extent and probability of danger or 
danger to the public; and other relevant factors relating to the reasonableness of the time period 
prescribed. A time for correction need not be specified if the violation is deemed to be an 
uncorrectable violation. 
(e) ?A code inspector who finds a violation shall issue a civil violation notice to the violator pursuant to 
section 42-93. 
(f) ?The civil violation shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1) ?Date and time of issuance. 
(2) ?Name of code inspector and division or department issuing the notice. 
(3) ?Name and address of the violator. 
(4) ?Ordinance number and section violated. 
(5) ?Brief description of the nature of the violation, including location, date and time of violation. 
(6) ?Amount of civil penalty for which the violator may be liable. 
(7) ?Instructions and due date for paying the fine or filing for an administrative hearing before a 
hearing officer to appeal the civil fine. 
(8) ?Time within which the violation must be corrected, if applicable. 
(9) ?Notice that each day of continued violation after the time period for correction has run shall be 
deemed a continuing violation subject to additional penalty in the same amount, without the 
need for additional notices of violation. No appeal is allotted for continued violations beyond the 
original date of appeal. 
(10) ?Notice that the filing of a request for an administrative hearing will toll the accrual of continuing 
violation penalties. 
(11) ?Notice that failure to request an administrative hearing within 20 days, or within the specified 
time period listed for a violation of a specific section of an ordinance, after service of a civil 
violation notice shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing before 
the hearing officer, and such waiver shall constitute an admission of the violation. 
(12) ?Notice that the violator may be liable for the reasonable costs of the administrative hearing 
should he be found guilty of the violation. 
(13) ?Notice that if the violator fails to pay civil penalty in the time allowed, or fails to appear in court 
to contest the violation, the violator shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the 
violation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the violator by the hearing 
officer for the amount of maximum civil penalty. 
(g) ?After issuing a civil violation notice to an alleged violator, the code inspector shall promptly deposit 
the original civil violation notice and one copy of the civil violation notice with the Clerk of the Court of 
Bay County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-93. - Notices. 
(a) ?All notices required by this part shall be provided to the violator by: 
(1) ?Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this paragraph to 
the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax 
notices, and at any other address provided to the city by such owner and is returned as 
unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subsection (2) and by 
first class mail directed to the addresses provided to the city by such owner with a properly 
executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2) ?Hand delivered by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person 
designated by the local governing body; 
(3) ?Leaving the violation notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing 
therein who is more than 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the 
notice; or 
(4) ?In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in 
charge. 
(b) ?In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a), at the option of the hearing officer, 
notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1) ?Such notice be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications 
being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the code enforcement 
board is located. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 
50 for legal and official advertisements. Proof of publication shall be made as prescribed in F.S. 
§§ 50.0541 and 50.051. 
(2) ?In lieu of publication provided in subsection (1), such notice may be posted at least ten days 
prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least 
two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and 
the other of which shall be the city hall. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person 
posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice and the date and places of 
its posting. 
(3) ?Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or 
attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as prescribed in subsection (a) of this 
section. Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in 
subsection (a) of this section together with proof of publication or posting as prescribed in 
subsection (b) of this section, shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part 
have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such 
notice. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Secs. 42-94—42-120. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - HEARINGS, PENALTIES AND APPEALS 


Sec. 42-121. - Civil penalties and related terms construed. 
(a) ?Penalties for violations of the ordinances to be enforced by this article shall be in the amount 
prescribed in the schedule of civil penalties section 42-128. 
(b) ?An "uncorrectable violation" is a violation which cannot be remedied after the violation has been 
committed because the violation constitutes a single prohibited act rather than an on-going condition 
or circumstance. Each reoccurrence of an uncorrectable violation shall constitute a separate violation 
and shall subject the violator to an additional penalty double that of the original violation. If, however, 
a violator has been found guilty of an uncorrectable violation and causes the same uncorrectable 
violation to occur a second time, each reoccurrence of the uncorrectable violation by the violator 
shall constitute a repeat violation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c) ?"Continuing violations" are those violations which remain uncorrected beyond the reasonable time 
period for correction in either the civil violation notice or the final order of the hearing officer, 
whichever is applicable. For each day of continued violation after the time for correction has run, an 
additional penalty of the same amount as that prescribed for the original violation shall be added. 
The maximum total fine for any one continuing violation shall not exceed 20 times the original 
penalty amount. 
(d) ?A "repeat violation" is a recurring violation of an ordinance by a violator who has been found guilty of 
the same violation within five years prior to the present violation, or who has admitted violating the 
same provision within five years prior to the present violation, notwithstanding the violations occurred 
at different locations. In the case of correctable violations, a repeat violation can occur only after 
correction of the previous violation has been made. For the first repeat violation the amount of the 
civil penalty shall be double the amount of penalty prescribed for the original violation by section 42-
128. The amount of civil penalty due for each subsequent repeat violation shall be double the 
amount of the penalty due for the first day of the immediately preceding violation, provided that the 
maximum penalty payable for the first day of any one repeat violation shall be $500.00. A repeat 
violation which remains uncorrected beyond the time prescribed for correction in the civil violation 
notice shall be treated as a continuing violation. 
(e) ?A civil penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $250.00 per day for a first violation 
and shall not exceed $500.00 per day for a repeat violation. 
(f) ?If a request for administrative hearing is not timely filed continuing violation penalties shall accrue 
from the date of correction given in the civil violation notice until the correction is made and payment 
of fine is received. If the named violator requests an administrative hearing on a correctable violation 
and losses his appeal, the hearing office shall determine a reasonable time period within which 
correction for the violation must be made, based on the considerations set forth in section 42-92(d). 
If correction is not made within the period set by the hearing officer, continuing violation penalties 
shall begin after the time of correction has run. No continuing violation penalties shall accrue during 
the time period from the date of the civil violation notice until the date of the administrative hearing, if 
the named violator timely requests an administrative hearing to appeal the decision of the code 
inspector. Continuing violation penalties cannot be imposed by the hearing officer for uncorrectable 
violations. 
(g) ?Civil penalties assessed pursuant to this article are due and payable to the Clerk of Court of Bay 
County, Florida, on the last day of the period allowed for the filing of an appeal to the circuit court 
from the hearing officer's decision, or, if proper appeal is made, when the appeal has been finally 
decided adversely to the named violator. 
(h) ?In addition, if the code inspector has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the 
violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation is 
irreparable or irreversible in nature, or if after attempts under this section to bring a repeat violation 
into compliance with a provision of a code or ordinance prove unsuccessful, the city may make all 
reasonable repairs which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the owner 
with reasonable cost of the repairs with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Making such 
repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city to make further repairs or to 
maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city for any damages to the 
property. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-122. - Rights of violators; payment of fine; right to appeal and correction of violation; failure to 
pay and correct, or to appeal. 
(a) ?A violator who has been served with a civil violation notice shall elect either to: 
(1) ?Pay the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the notice, and correct the violation within the 
time specified on the notice (if applicable); or 
(2) ?Request an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to appeal the decision of the code 
inspector which resulted in the issuance of the civil violation notice. 
(b) ?Appeal by administrative hearing of the notice of violation before a hearing officer shall be 
accomplished by filing a request in writing to the address indicated on the notice, received by the 
hearing officer within the time limit stipulated in the notice, or no later than 20 calendar days after the 
service of the notice, whichever is earlier. Failure of the named violator to appeal the decision of the 
code inspector within the prescribed time period shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to 
administrative hearing before the hearing officer. A waiver of right to administrative hearing shall be 
treated as an admission of the violation and penalties, including continuing violation penalties, shall 
be assessed by the hearing officer accordingly. 
(c) ?If the named violator, after notice, does not timely appeal and fails to pay the civil penalty and 
correct the violation within the time specified (if applicable), the code inspector shall notify the 
hearing officer and request the hearing officer to issue an order finding the violator guilty and 
imposing the civil penalty and, if applicable, continuing violation penalties. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-123. - Scheduling and conduct of hearing. 
(a) ?Upon receipt of a named violator's timely request for an administrative hearing, the hearing officer 
shall set the matter down for a hearing on the next regularly scheduled hearing date or as soon 
thereafter as possible or as mandated in the specified ordinance which is enforced pursuant to this 
article. 
(b) ?The hearing officer shall provide a notice of hearing by certified mail to the named violator at his last 
known address. Alternatively, the notice may be delivered as provided in section 42-124. The notice 
of hearing shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1) ?Name of the code inspector who issued the notice. 
(2) ?Factual description of the alleged violation. 
(3) ?Date of alleged violation. 
(4) ?Ordinance and section allegedly violated. 
(5) ?Place, date and time of hearing. 
(6) ?Right of violator to be represented by a lawyer. 
(7) ?Right of violator to present witnesses and evidence. 
(8) ?Notice that failure of violator to attend hearing may result in civil penalty being assessed 
against him. 
(9) ?Notice that requests for continuances will not be considered if not received by the hearing 
officer at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c) ?The hearing officers shall call hearings on a biweekly basis or upon request of the Clerk of Court of 
Bay County, Florida. All hearings shall be set for the next scheduled hearing date after receipt of the 
appeal. No hearing shall be set sooner than 20 calendar days from the date of service of the notice 
of violation. 
(d) ?A hearing date shall not be postponed or continued unless a request of continuance is received in 
writing by the hearing officer at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(e) ?All hearings of the hearing officer shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath and 
shall be electronically recorded. Assuming proper notice, a hearing may proceed in the absence of 
the named violator. 
(f) ?The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the expense of the 
party requesting the transcript. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings by each hearing officer. 
(g) ?The Bay County Clerk of Court shall provide clerical and administrative personnel, services, forms 
and facilities as may be reasonably required by each hearing officer for the proper performance of 
his duties and shall collect and pay over to the city all civil penalties, costs and other sums due and 
payable hereunder, retaining such portion thereof as from time to time may be established by 
resolution of the city commission to compensate the clerk for such assistance. 
(h) ?Each case before a hearing officer shall be presented by the city clerk or his designee. 
(i) ?The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with formal rules relating to evidence and witness 
but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Any relevant 
evidence shall be admitted if the hearing officer finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the 
existence of any common law or statutory rule to the contrary. 
(j) ?The hearing officer may take testimony from the code inspector and the alleged violator. Each party 
shall have the right to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross examine opposing 
witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct 
examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify; and to rebut 
the evidence against him. 
(k) ?The hearing officer shall make findings of fact based on evidence of record. In order to make a 
finding upholding the code inspector's decision, the hearing officer must find that a preponderance of 
evidence indicates that the named violator was responsible for the violation of the relevant section of 
the Code as charged. 
(l) ?If the named violator is found guilty of the violation, he may be held liable for the reasonable costs of 
the administrative hearing as set forth by the Bay County Clerk of Court. If the city prevails in 
prosecuting a case before the hearing officer, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in 
prosecuting the case before the hearing officer and such costs will be included in the lien authorized 
under section 42-128. 
(m) ?The fact-finding determination of the hearing shall be limited to whether the violation alleged did 
occur and, if so, whether the person named in the civil violation notice is held responsible for that 
violation as provided in section 42-123(c). Based upon this fact-finding determination, the hearing 
officer shall either reverse or affirm the decision of the code inspector as to the responsibility of the 
named violator for the Code violation, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief. If the 
hearing officer affirms the decision of the code inspector, the hearing officer shall issue an order and 
shall determine a reasonable time period within which correction of the violation must be made. If the 
hearing officer reverses the decision of the code inspector and finds the named violator not 
responsible for the Code violation alleged in the civil violation notice, the named violator shall not be 
liable for the payment of the civil penalty, absent reversal of the hearing officer's findings pursuant to 
section 5, O. If the decision of the hearing officer is to affirm, then the following elements shall be 
included in the order: 
(1) ?Amount of civil penalty. 
(2) ?Administrative costs of hearing. 
(3) ?Date by which the violation must be corrected to prevent imposition of continuing violation 
penalties (if applicable). 
(n) ?The hearing officer shall have the power to: 
(1) ?Adopt procedures for the conduct of hearings. 
(2) ?Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses for hearings, subpoenas may be served by the law 
enforcement officers, by the staff of the hearing officer or by the code inspector. 
(3) ?Subpoena evidence. 
(4) ?Take testimony under oath. 
(5) ?Assess and order the payment of civil penalties as provided herein. 
(o) ?Appeals: 
(1) ?A hearing officer shall postpone a hearing if the named violator, prior to the scheduled hearing 
date, files with a duly authorized city board of appropriate jurisdiction a timely administrative 
appeal concerning the interpretation or application of any technical provisions of the Code 
section allegedly violated. However, once an issue has been determined by a hearing officer in 
a specific case, that issue may not be further reviewed by a city board in that specific case. A 
named violator waives his right to appeal to other city boards if the violator does not apply for 
such appeal prior to the violator's code enforcement hearing before the hearing officer. 
(2) ?Upon exhaustion of a timely filed administrative appeal and finalization of the administrative 
order by such board, the hearing officer may exercise all powers given to him by this article. The 
hearing officer shall not, however, exercise any jurisdiction over such alleged Code violations 
until the time allowed for court appeal of the ruling of such board has lapsed or until such further 
appeal has been exhausted. 
(3) ?The hearing officer shall be bound by the interpretations and decisions of duly authorized city 
boards concerning the provisions of the codes. In the event such a board decides that an 
alleged violation of the ordinance is not in accordance with such boards interpretation of the 
ordinance provision on which the violation is based, the hearing officers shall not be empowered 
to proceed with the enforcement of the violation. 
(p) ?If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement action or proceeding transfers ownership 
of such property between the time the initial citation or citations were issued and the time of the 
hearing, such owner shall: 
(1) ?Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective 
transferee. 
(2) ?Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials 
relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3) ?Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for 
compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement 
proceeding. 
(4) ?File a notice with the hearing officer of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address 
of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days of the 
transfer. 
    A failure to make the disclosure described in subsections (p)(1), (2), and (3) above, before the 
transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the 
proceeding shall not be dismissed but the new owner will be added as an additional party of record and 
thereafter shall be provided a reasonable period of time as determined by the code inspector to correct 
the violation before the hearing is held. Continuing violation penalties, if any, shall continue to accrue 
against the original party. No civil penalty or continuing violation penalties shall accrue against the new 
owner until and unless the new owner shall fail to correct the violation within the reasonable period 
provided to the new owner. All parties shall be jointly and severally liable for any penalties up to the 
amount common among them, and the amounts paid the city shall be first applied to that common, joint 
and several amount. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-124. - Recovery of unpaid civil penalties; unpaid penalty to constitute a lien; foreclosure. 
(a) ?The city may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil 
penalties. In an action to compel payment of civil penalties, the prevailing party is entitled to recover 
all costs, including reasonable attorney's fee that it incurred in the action. The city shall be entitled to 
collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. 
(b) ?A certified copy of an order imposing a civil penalty, or a penalty plus repair costs, may be recorded 
in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation 
exists or, if the violator does not own the land, upon any other real or personal property owned by the 
violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a 
court judgment by the sheriffs of the state, including execution and levy against personal property of 
the violator, but such order shall not be deemed a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. 
After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or 
otherwise execute on the lien. 
(c) ?If an order is recorded in public records, and the order is complied with by the date specified in the 
order, the hearing officer shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in 
the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(d) ?Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code, no municipal officer, agent, employee or board shall 
approve, grant, or issue any operating permit, license, building permit, certificate of use and 
occupancy, occupational licenses, platting action or zoning action to any named violator with: 
(1) ?Unpaid civil penalties; 
(2) ?Unpaid administrative costs of hearing; 
(3) ?Unpaid investigative, enforcement, testing or monitoring costs; or 
(4) ?Unpaid liens, any or all of which are owned to the city pursuant to the provisions of the Code of 
the City of Springfield, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-125. - Appeals. 
(a) ?The named violator of the city may appeal a final order of the hearing officer for all violations by 
filing notice of appeal in the Circuit Court in and for Bay County, Florida. Such appeal shall not be 
hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the hearing 
officer. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order of the appealed. 
(b) ?Unless the findings of the hearing officer are overturned in a proceeding held pursuant to subsection 
(a) of this section all findings of the hearing officer shall be admissible in any proceeding to collect 
unpaid penalties. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-126. - Adoption of F.S. ch. 162; creation and adoption of a code enforcement hearing officer 
system as authorized in F.S. § 162.22. 
(a) ?The city has adopted F.S. ch. 162 and its provisions and powers in the enforcement of city 
ordinances. Florida Statutes § 162.22 authorizes the city to create and adopt it's own policies, 
procedures and methods in the enforcement of its Codes and Ordinances. 
(b) ?The city, by the adoption of Ordinance No. 381 adopted January 4, 1999, has established a code 
enforcement hearing officer system utilizing a one-person hearing officer through which the decision 
of the code inspector may be appealed. The system sets forth the entire procedure for appointment 
of the hearing officer, length of term, removal, duties, responsibilities and powers. It also sets forth 
the code enforcement procedures, penalties for violations, rights of the violator to appeal, schedule 
and conduct of the hearings and the city's method of recovering unpaid penalties. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-127. - Supplemental provisions. 
    Nothing contained in this provision shall prohibit the city from enforcing its Code by any other means. 
The enforcement procedures outlined herein are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be 
prerequisites to filling suit for the enforcement of any section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Sec. 42-128. - Schedule of civil penalties. 
    The following table shows the sections of this article, as they may be amended from time to time, 
which may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of this article; and the dollar amount of civil penalty for 
the violation of these sections as they may be amended. 
    The "descriptions of violations" are for informal purposes and are not meant to limit or define the 
nature of the violations or the subject matter of the subject Code sections, except to the extent that the 
different types of violations of the same Code section may carry different civil penalties. For each Code 
section listed in the schedule of civil penalties, the entirety of that section may be enforced by the 
mechanism provided in this article, regardless of whether all activities proscribed or required within that 
particular section are described in the "Description of Violation" column. To determine the exact nature of 
any activity proscribed or required by this Code, the relevant Code section must be examined. 
(Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 
Viol
atio
n 
Ord
ina
nce 
No.
/  
Cod
e 
sect
ion 
Civi
l  
Pen
alty 
Oth
er 
380
, 
Ch. 
50 
$?
25.
00 
Ani
mal 
cru
elty 
341
, 
Sec. 
14-
61; 
398
, 
Sec. 
14-
61 
100
.00 
Ani
mal
, 
pen 
viol
atio
n 
341
, 
Sec. 
14-
69(
a), 
(b); 
398
, 
Sec. 
14-
69(
a)
—
(c) 
50.
00 
Ani
mal 
viol
atio
ns, 
oth
er 
341
, 
Ch. 
14 
25.
00 
Unl
awf
ul 
acc
um
ulat
ion 
of 
tire
s/ri
ms 
330
, 
Sec. 
34-
31 
et 
seq
. 
50.
00 
Imp
rop
er 
dis
pos
al 
co
mm
erci
al 
gar
bag
e 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
a)(2
) 
50.
00 
Imp
rop
er 
dis
pos
al 
haz
ard
ous 
mat
eria
ls 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
a)(2
) 
200
.00 
San
itar
y 
nui
san
ce 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
a)(3
) 
100
.00 
Viol
atio
n of 
sto
p 
ord
er 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
63(
b)(
4) 
200
.00 
Wa
ter 
poll
utio
n 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
a)(1
4) 
200
.00 
Bur
nin
g 
viol
atio
n 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
a)(1
7) 
50.
00 
Wa
ter 
ban 
viol
atio
n 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
a)(1
9) 
50.
00 
Bur
nin
g 
duri
ng 
stat
e or 
loc
al 
ban 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
a), 
(20) 
100
.00 
Use 
of 
mo
bile 
ho
me 
for 
pur
pos
e 
oth
er 
tha
n 
resi
den
ce 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
25)
a 
50.
00 
Occ
upy
ing 
RV, 
ca
mp
er 
or 
trail
er 
out
sid
e 
RV 
par
k 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
25)
b 
50.
00 
Imp
rop
er 
con
nec
tion 
of 
utili
ties 
to 
an 
RV, 
ca
mp
er 
or 
trail
er 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
25)
c 
50.
00 
Par
kin
g 
mo
bile 
ho
me 
wit
hou
t 
per
mit 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
25)
d 
100
.00 
Aba
ndo
ned
/un
mai
ntai
ned 
mo
bile 
ho
me 
380
, 
Sec. 
34-
62(
25)
e 
50.
00 
Ref
usal 
to 
sign 
Cod
e 
Enf
orc
em
ent 
Cita
tion 
340
, 
Sec. 
42-
37 
50.
00 
Fail
ure 
to 
hav
e 
mo
bile 
ho
me 
per
mit
ted 
or 
ins
pec
ted 
348
, 
Sec. 
46-
34 
100
.00 
Obs
truc
ting 
drai
nag
e 
206
, 
Sec. 
50-
5 
50.
00 
Dea
ling 
in 
jun
k 
279
, 
Ch. 
62, 
Art. 
III 
100
.00 
Du
mpi
ng 
or 
allo
win
g 
du
mpi
ng 
fro
m 
out
sid
e 
city 
limi
ts 
377
, 
Sec. 
66-
2(a) 
200
.00 
Imp
rop
er 
dis
pos
al 
of 
bio. 
haz
ard
s 
377
, 
Sec. 
66-
2(c) 
200
.00 
San
itati
on 
viol
atio
ns, 
oth
er 
377
, 
Sec. 
66-
3 
25.
00 
Co
mm
erci
al 
tras
h 
fee 
viol
atio
n 
365
, 
Sec. 
66-
7 
100
.00 
Buil
din
g 
nu
mb
erin
g 
viol
atio
n 
404
, 
Sec. 
70-
33 
50.
00 
Occ
upa
tion
al 
lice
nse 
viol
atio
n 
358
, 
Ch. 
74, 
Art. 
II 
100
.00 
Der
elic
t 
veh
icle 
382
, 
Sec. 
78-
62 
100
.00 
Veh
icle, 
oth
er 
382
, 
Sec. 
78-
63 
50.
00 
Wa
ter/
sew
age
, 
ma
nda
tor
y 
con
nec
tion 
viol
atio
n 
329
, 
Sec. 
82-
31 
et 
seq
. 
50.
00 
Buil
din
g/s
epti
c 
tan
k 
viol
atio
n 
209
, 
Sec. 
82-
153 
100
.00 
Sig
n 
viol
atio
n, 
oth
er 
LDR
, 
Art. 
IV 
100
.00 
Sig
n 
per
mit 
viol
atio
n 
LDR
, 
Art. 
IV, 
Sec. 
4-5 
300
.00 
Sig
n, 
pro
hibi
ted 
LDR
, 
Art. 
IV, 
Sec. 
4-6 
300
.00 
Uns
afe 
stru
ctur
e 
by, 
ren
tal 
Ren
tal, 
Sec. 
II, 
A, 1 
200
.00 
Viol
atio
n of 
do 
not 
ren
t 
Ren
tal, 
Sec. 
II, 
A, 5 
200
.00 
Re
mo
val 
of 
pos
ted 
civil 
viol
atio
n 
Ren
tal, 
Sec. 
II, 
F, 1 
100
.00 
 
(Ord. No. 381, art. III, § 8, 1-4-1999; Ord. No. 433, 4-19-2004) 


Chapter 46 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; unfit or unsafe structures, § 34-61 et seq.; 
planning, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; traffic and 
vehicles, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Standards for mobile homes and recreational vehicles, F.S. § 320.822; factory-
built housing, F.S. § 553.35 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 46-1. - Importation of used dwelling units; prohibited. 
(a) ?No used dwelling unit, including mobile home, manufactured home, trailer, building or structure 
used or intended to be used for human habitation shall be brought into the city from any location 
outside the city unless the unit was constructed or manufactured within five years of the date on 
which a complete permit application is submitted for the location, relocation, placement, 
replacement, installation or reinstallation of the unit within the city. 
(b) ?The sale, resale, importation, installation or transportation of a used dwelling unit in violation of this 
chapter is strictly prohibited. The city clerk may grant limited waivers for the sole purpose of 
transporting a substandard mobile home out of the city or to a permitted site for demolition and 
disposal. 
(Ord. No. 362, §§ 1, 2, 7-22-1997) 


Secs. 46-2—46-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME AND MANUFACTURED HOME ONSITE INSTALLATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Onsite inspection mandate, F.S. § 320.8285. 


Sec. 46-31. - Purpose and objectives of article. 
    The public purposes and objectives of this article are to: 
(1) ?Promote compliance with the city comprehensive plan and land use code; 
(2) ?Avoid unnecessary physical and economic hardships associated with the improper or unlawful 
placement or setup of mobile homes or manufactured homes; 
(3) ?Ensure that mobile homes or manufactured homes are properly set up, installed, inspected and 
permitted so as to promote compliance with applicable electrical, plumbing, fire safety and 
related codes; and 
(4) ?Reduce the risk of electrical shock, fire, wind damage and other similar threats to public safety 
caused by the placement and setup of mobile homes and manufactured homes that are not 
properly inspected and permitted. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 3, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 363, § 3, 7-22-1997) 


Sec. 46-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Manufactured home means a mobile home fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in an offsite 
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, with each section bearing a seal 
certifying that it is built in compliance with the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety 
Standard Act. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or 
more in width and which is built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling when 
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical 
systems contained therein. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation or association controlling any mobile home or 
manufactured home by right of purchase, gift, lease or otherwise. 
    Person means any manufactured home or mobile home owner, manufacturer, dealer or any other 
engaged in the business of transporting and setting up manufactured homes and mobile homes. 
    Setup means the operations performed at the occupancy site which render a mobile home fit for 
habitation. Such operations include, but are not limited to, transporting, positioning, blocking, leveling, 
supporting, tying down, skirting, connecting utility systems, making minor adjustments or assembling 
multiple or expandable units. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 2, 7-1-191996; Ord. No. 363, § 2, 7-22-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 46-33. - Penalties for violations of article; additional remedies. 
    Violations of this article are punishable as provided by law. Additional remedies available to the city 
would include, but are not limited to, the right of the city to abate the nuisance and place a lien on the real 
property. The lien of the city shall encompass in addition to the abatement cost, all administrative, legal, 
postal and publication expenses, as well as all other direct and indirect costs associated therewith. This 
lien upon the property shall be superior to all others except taxes. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 7, 7-1-1996) 


Sec. 46-34. - Permit required. 
    The improper or unlawful placement or setup of a mobile home or manufactured home is hereby 
declared to be a public nuisance. No person shall place, install, locate or set up any mobile home or 
manufactured home intended for residential occupancy on any lot or parcel of land including mobile home 
parks, without first obtaining a development permit authorization from city hall and a subsequent mobile 
home/manufactured home permit from the county building division. Such permits shall be granted or 
denied based upon criteria and standards set forth in both the city comprehensive plan/land development 
regulations and those contained in F.A.C. chs. 15C-1, 15C-2. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 5, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 363, § 5, 7-22-1997) 


Sec. 46-35. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to licensed mobile homes or manufactured homes 
placed on dealer's or manufacturer's lots when the placement of such is for purposes of sale, resale, 
repair or manufacturing. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 6, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 363, § 6, 7-22-1997) 


Secs. 46-36—46-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - INSPECTION OF MANUFACTURED BUILDINGS 


Sec. 46-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Manufactured building means a closed structure, building assembly, or system of subassemblies 
which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating ventilating, or other service systems 
manufactured in manufacturing facilities for installation or erection, with or without other specified 
components, as a finished building or as a part of a finished building, which shall include, but not limited 
to; residential, commercial, institutional, storage and industrial structures. This does not apply to mobile 
homes. The term "manufactured building" may also mean, at the option of the manufacturer, any building 
of open construction made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site for 
installation or assembly on the building site. (F.S. ch. 553) 
    Mobile home means any residential unit constructed to standards promulgated by the United States 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (F.S. ch. 553) referred to as manufactured homes in this 
article. 
(Ord. No. 405, § I, 12-4-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 46-62. - Prohibitions. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful to place or set up any manufactured building or home, either temporarily or 
permanently, on private or commercial property, without such manufactured building or home having 
first undergone a preliminary point of sale inspection carried out by an agent of the city. 
(b) ?All manufactured buildings and homes relocated from within the city to another location within the 
city shall be subject to this requirement for preliminary inspections. Such structures shall not be 
moved from their original location until the preliminary inspection is accomplished. 
(c) ?All manufactured buildings and homes constructed within the past two model years prior to the date 
of a development permit request shall be exempt from preliminary inspection. However, all 
manufactured buildings and homes placed or set up inside the city limits shall comply within 
preliminary inspection standards as well as compliance with all other ordinances, building codes, 
LDR development standards, etc., adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 405, § II, 12-4-2000) 


Sec. 46-63. - Inspection procedures. 
(a) ?The applicant or applicant's agent must file for a preliminary inspection permit with the city. 
(b) ?The city's agent will inspect the manufactured building within seven days of the date of application 
at its point of sale or at the location the structure is being held prior to transportation into the city. 
(c) ?After successfully passing the preliminary inspection performed by the city a copy of the inspection 
results will be given to the applicant. The applicant will then be referred to the county building 
inspector at the county department of developmental services, builder's services division to make 
application for level one development permits. The preliminary inspection permit shall be valid for 30 
days after the date of issue. After expiration the applicant must apply for a reinspection permit with 
the city. 
(Ord. No. 405, § III, 12-4-2000) 


Sec. 46-64. - Application forms, procedures, fees. 
    Application forms, procedures and fees required for the preliminary inspection procedure shall be 
those adopted by the city by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 405, § IV, 12-4-2000) 


Chapter 49 - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 49-1. - Tattoo salons, body piercing salons, massage establishments, adult theaters and 
establishments dealing in sexually explicit materials—Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have meaning described to 
them in this subsection, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult theater shall be an establishment devoting any space used for presenting either filmed, or 
other video media or live plays, dances or other performances by individuals or groups distinguished or 
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" 
or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this section for observation by patrons therein or for the 
production or creation of any such film or video mater for public distribution or sale. 
    Body piercing shall mean for commercial purposes the act of penetrating the skin to make, generally 
permanent in nature, a hole mark or scar. "Body piercing" does not include the use of mechanized, 
presterilized ear piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear or both. 
    Body piercing salon shall mean any place where body piercing occurs or any establishment which 
engages in the act of piercing, puncturing or cutting the skin of any human body for the purpose of 
inserting or implanting any foreign materials including jewelry, decorations or other materials whether 
artistic or not. This will not include piercing of the outer perimeter of the ear or lobe. 
    Church shall mean any church, temple, synagogue or other structure used on a permanent basis 
primarily for public worship. 
    Establishment dealing in sexually explicit materials shall be any establishment whether open to the 
public at large or where entrance is restricted by membership or other requirements having as a 
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films, video, newspapers, 
photographs, paintings, drawings, or other publications, or graphic media which are distinguished or 
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" 
or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this section, or an establishment with a section devoted to 
the sale or display of such materials. 
    Massage establishment shall mean any commercial establishment or place of business offering or 
practicing the manipulation of the superficial tissues of the human body with the hand, foot, arm or elbow, 
whether or not such manipulation is aided by hydrotherapy, including colonic irrigation or thermal therapy; 
any electrical or mechanical device; or the application to the human body of a chemical or herbal 
preparation; provided, however, that for the purpose of this subdivision, the term "message 
establishment" shall not include any massage establishment wherein at least one State of Florida-
licensed massage therapist is employed and on duty full time during the hours open for business. Nothing 
in this definition shall be construed to apply to licensed barbers, cosmetologists, manicurists, pedicurists, 
physical therapists, midwives, nurses, or agents, servants or employees of a licensed hospital, nursing 
home or other licensed healthcare entity, licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors podiatrists, 
naturopathic physicians or other licensed medical practitioners, or agents, servants or employees of such 
licensed medical practitioners acting in course of such agency, service or employment and under the 
supervision of the licensee; provided in all cases that such license is issued by the state and is in good 
standing. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall mean: 
(1) ?Less than completely and opaquely covered - human genitals or pubic region, buttock, female 
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2) ?Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
    Special sexual activities shall mean: 
(1) ?Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2) ?Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, whether actual or stimulated. 
(3) ?Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or breast. 
(4) ?Sadism or masochism. 
    Special cabarets or adult club shall be any establishment whether food or beverages, alcoholic or 
non-alcoholic, are served or allowed or not which feature topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancer, 
strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers, live entertainment including the exhibition 
of any portion of the entertainer's buttocks or simulation thereof, or, if female, any portion of the 
entertainer's breast below the top of the areola or simulation thereof or dancing with employees or 
independent contractors in exchange for compensation or any such establishment which advertises by 
any method or media as featuring such with such words as "adult", "topless", "nude" or other words of 
similar import. 
    Public recreational area or park shall mean and include any publicly owned facility. 
    Tattoo shall mean a permanent design or mark made on the skin by pricking it and ingraining in it an 
indelible pigment or by raising scars on it. 
    Tattoo salon shall mean any place where tattooing occurs. This will not include any medical facility 
where a medical physician and/or a registered nurse is on hand full time. 
(Ord. No. 419, § I, 9-3-2002) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 419, § I, adopted September 3, 2002, did not specifically amend the 
Code, hence, inclusion as § 49-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 49-2. - Same—Restrictions. 
(a) ?F.S. § 877.04. It is unlawful for any person to tattoo the body of any human being, except that 
tattooing may be performed by a person licensed to practice medicine or dentistry or by a person 
under his general supervision as defined by the board of medicine. 
(b) ?Distance limitations. 
(1) ?No establishment dealing in sexually explicit materials, adult theater, special cabaret, body 
piercing salon, tattoo salon, massage establishment or adult theater shall be located in the city 
and no person dealing in or performing such activities shall do so within 2,000 feet of any 
residential area, church, public or private school or any public recreational area or park. 
(2) ?No establishment which is the subject of this shall be located nearer than 1,000 feet radial 
spacing to any other establishment which is the subject of this section or within 1,000 feet of the 
right-of-way of any tourism corridor named in this section. 
(3) ?No establishment which is the subject of this section shall be located within 200 feet of the 
rights-of-way of the following corridors of the city: 
15th Street 
Tyndall Parkway 
Tram Road 
11th Street 
7th Street 
3rd Street 
State Road 22 
Cherry Street 
Everitt Avenue 
School Avenue 
Transmitter Road 
Bob Little Road (State Road 22A) 
(c) ?Sign and appearance requirements. All establishments that are the subject of this section shall 
comply with the following on-premises sign and appearance requirements: 
(1) ?All signs shall be flat wall signs. 
(2) ?The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of sign area per linear foot of 
frontage of that premises, to a maximum of 25 square feet. 
(3) ?No merchandise or pictures of adult oriented products, materials or entertainment on the 
premises shall be displayed in the building glass areas or any area viewable from the exterior of 
the building. 
(4) ?Window signs are prohibited for any adult oriented products, materials or entertainment. A 
single one square foot sign shall be placed on the door to state the hours of operation and 
"Admittance to adults only". A single three-foot square sign stating "Open" or "Closed" may be 
placed in a window or glass area. 
(5) ?Exterior free standing signs are prohibited. 
(d) ?Application to new churches and residential subdivisions. Where establishments which are the 
subject of this section may be in conformity with this subsection, the subsequent locating of a church 
within 2,000 feet radial spacing of such establishment shall not be construed to cause such 
establishment to be in violation of this subsection. 
(e) ?Application to new schools and public recreational areas and parks. Where establishments which 
are the subject of this section may be in conformity with this subsection, the subsequent locating of a 
public school, recreational area or park shall cause the establishment to be in a nonconforming use. 
Such subsequent nonconforming use shall be allowed to continue for one year from the date of the 
opening of the public school, recreational area or park whereupon the establishment must be 
relocated into conforming use or closed. 
(f) ?Subsection not independently authorizing use. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to 
permit the establishment of any adult theater, special cabaret, adult club, message establishment, 
tattoo salon, body piercing salon or establishment dealing in sexually explicit materials not otherwise 
permitted by any other applicable code or section. 
(Ord. No. 419, § II, 9-3-2002) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 419, § II, adopted Sept. 3, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code, 
hence, inclusion as § 49-2 was at the discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 49-3. - Regulation of motor vehicle repair shops. 
(a) ?Definitions. As used in this section: 
The City of Springfield adopts the requirements set forth by the State of Florida in F.S. ch. 559, 
pt. IX, Motor Vehicle Repair, including definitions set forth therein for the following terms: 
Customer, department, employee, final estimate, motor vehicles, motor vehicle repair shop, 
place of business, motor vehicle repair. 
(b) ?Limitations on the keeping or storage of motor vehicles on the premises of motor vehicle repair 
shops. 
(1) ?The city hereby requires that all motor vehicle repair shops operating inside the city provide all 
customers with an estimate of repairs as defined in F.S. ch. 590, pt. IX, and further requires that 
a copy of such estimate of repairs be maintained in the records of the repair shop on all 
customer vehicles kept on the repair shops premises for as long as such vehicle is in their 
custody for repairs. 
(2) ?The repair shop shall not have a vehicle on or about the premises of the shop unless an active 
estimate of repairs, signed by the customer, is on file. 
(3) ?The repair shop shall not keep or store any motor vehicle or motor driven vehicle on the 
premises, including water craft with or without a motor or engine power source unless an active 
estimate of repairs, signed by the customer, is on file. 
(4) ?There shall be no outside storage of vehicle parts or accessories. Parts and accessories to be 
used for the repair of customer vehicles shall be kept inside. Inside storage shall mean inside a 
conventionally constructed building. Portable storage buildings shall not be allowable for the 
purpose of storing parts and accessories unless such building's interior is in excess of 120 
square feet, is permitted, and meets all construction standards as required by the Bay County 
Building Inspector, including setbacks. 
(5) ?The city recognizes that repair shops specializing only in watercraft frequently set aside an 
area for storage of watercraft temporarily or full time in which customers pay storage fees. Such 
a storage area shall be a separate compound on or off the premises, if the zoning permits such 
storage, and shall require a separate occupational license. There shall be no partially 
dismantled, unlicensed, unregistered, non-operational vehicles permitted in such storage areas. 
(6) ?There shall be no outside commercial storage facilities allowed in the city for the storage of 
street or off-road driven motor vehicles. As per ordinance 279 of the City of Springfield, 
junkyards are not permitted. 
(7) ?In the case of commercial wrecker or towing services and vehicle repossession services, such 
services shall have their temporary storage facilities fenced with a privacy fence which shall be 
no less than six feet in height and shall encompass the entire storage facility. The fence shall be 
continuously maintained in a fashion so as to prevent deterioration in its appearance or the 
integrity of its construction. Existing vehicle wrecker, tow or repossession services shall have six 
months in which to comply with the requirements of this section. 
8. ?In no case shall any vehicle be stored on the property of an motor vehicle repair business, 
wrecker, tow or repossession service for longer than 90 days. 
(c) ?Remedies. 
(1) ?Any motor vehicle repair shop or water craft repair shop found to be in violation of this section 
shall be subject to a fine of $100.00 per vehicle, per violation. Allotted time for correction of such 
violation shall be at the reasonable discretion of the code enforcement officer or other 
designated city agent based upon guidelines of F.S. ch. 162 but in no case more than 30 days. 
(2) ?All existing motor vehicle repair businesses in the city shall comply with this section within 30 
days of its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 437, §§ 1—3, 10-4-2004) 


Sec. 49-4. - Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities banned. 
    Pursuant to the recently amended F.S. § 381.986(11)(b), as stated in chapter 2017-232, Laws of 
Florida, the City of Springfield hereby bans medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities from 
being located within the boundaries of the City of Springfield. 
(Ord. No. 541, 8-7-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 541, adopted Aug. 7, 2017, added provisions to the Code, but did not 
specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been 
included as § 49-4. 


Secs. 49-5—49-20. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - ESCORT SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 420, §§ 1—8, adopted September 3, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code; 
hence inclusion as Art. II, §§ 49-21—49-28 was at the discretion of the editor. 


Sec. 49-21. - Short title. 
    This article may be referred to as the Springfield Escort Service Conduct Regulation Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 1, 9-3-2002) 


Sec. 49-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have meaning described to 
them in this subsection, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Escort service means any business, agency or person who, for compensation or other consideration 
such as a fee, commission, higher, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or 
who introduces, furnishes or arranges for escorts and includes any person assisting in the operation of an 
escort service who is not an officer, owner, partner, directory or employee of another escort service. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or a 
date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or provide a private light touch 
body rub or massage for another person, or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Specified sexual activity shall mean: 
(1) ?Human genitalia in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(2) ?Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, 
flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, 
sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerastia; or 
(3) ?Fondling or other exotic touching of human genitalia, or pubic region, buttocks, anus or female 
breast. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall mean: 
(1) ?Human genitalia or pubic region; or 
(2) ?Human buttocks; or 
(3) ?That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the 
horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect at that point immediately above the top of the 
areola (the colored ring around the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion 
of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human 
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel 
provided the areola is not so exposed; or 
(4) ?Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal activity shall mean any of the following offenses: 
(1) ?Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display 
of harmful material to minor; sexual performance by child; possession or distribution of child 
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in 
organized criminal activity; sexual assaults; molestation of child; gambling; or possession or 
distribution of a controlled substance; or any other similar offenses to those described above 
under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 2, 9-3-2002) 


Sec. 49-23. - Prohibited acts. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for an escort to encourage, suffer or permit a customer to expose or display his 
or her (the customer's) specified anatomical areas. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for an escort to suggest or imply that a customer should or is permitted to 
expose or display his or her (the customer's) specified anatomical areas. 
(c) ?It shall be unlawful for an escort to expose or display his or her (the escort's) specified anatomical 
areas at any time the escort is in the presence of the customer. 
(d) ?It shall be unlawful for an escort to expose or display his or her (the escort's) specified anatomical 
areas. 
(e) ?It shall be unlawful for any escort to straddle a customer. 
(f) ?It shall be unlawful for any escort to offer or to agree to straddle a customer. 
(g) ?It shall be unlawful for any escort to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of any 
customer at any point below the waist and above the knee of the customer. 
(h) ?It shall be unlawful for any escort to suffer or permit a customer to touch the clothed or unclothed 
body of the escort at any point below the waist or above the knee of the escort. 
(i) ?It shall be unlawful for any escort to touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any customer. 
(j) ?It shall be unlawful for any escort to suffer or permit a customer to touch the clothed or unclothed 
breast of the escort. 
(k) ?All fees and charges paid by a customer of an escort or escort service shall be paid to the escort 
before the service begins. 
(l) ?No escort shall accept any tip or other compensation from a customer unless that amount is the 
amount the customer is told would be charged before the service begins. 
(m) ?It shall be unlawful for an escort to engage in any specified sexual activity with a customer. 
(n) ?It shall be unlawful for any person or business to engage in, conduct or carry on, as an escort, or 
escort service, without first having obtained a license under this chapter. 
(o) ?It shall be unlawful for a customer of an escort to suffer or permit the escort to violate any of the 
above. 
(p) ?It shall be unlawful for customer of an escort to encourage or solicit an escort to violate any of the 
above. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 3, 9-3-2002) 


Sec. 49-24. - Licenses required. 
(a) ?Within 30 days after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful: 
(1) ?For any person to operate an escort service without a valid escort service business license 
issued by the city pursuant to this article. 
(2) ?For any person who operates an escort service to employ a person to work for the escort 
service who is not licensed as an escort service employee by the city pursuant to this article. 
(3) ?For any person to obtain employment with an escort service without having secured an escort 
service employee license pursuant to this article. 
(b) ?An application for a license for an escort service must be made on a form provided the city. 
(c) ?An application for a license to work as an escort must be made on a form provided by the city. 
(d) ?If a person wishes to operate an escort service business the individual must sign the application for 
the license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an escort service is other than an 
individual, each individual who has twenty percent or greater interest in 'the business must sign the 
application for license as the applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following section 
and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e) ?The completed application for an escort service business license shall contain the following 
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1) ?Depending on the form of ownership, if the applicant is: 
a. ?One or more individuals, each individual will state his/her legal name and any aliases and 
submit proof that he/she is 18 years of age; 
b. ?A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, 
whether the partnership or general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if 
any; 
c. ?A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, 
evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state of 
incorporation, the names and capacity of all the officers, directors and principle stock 
holders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered 
office for service of process. 
(2) ?If the applicant intends to operate the escort service business under a name other than that of 
the applicant, he or she must state the escort service business's fictitious name and submit the 
required registration documents. 
(3) ?Whether the applicant or the person residing with the applicant has been convicted of a 
specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and, if so, the specified criminal activity 
involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(4) ?The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
(5) ?A recent photograph of the applicant or applicants. 
(6) ?Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(7) ?A colored photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face and the applicant's 
finger prints on a form provided by the city police department. Any fees for the photographs and 
finger prints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(f) ?Fees. 
(1) ?Every application for an escort business license, whether a new license or for a renewal of the 
existing license, shall be accompanied by a $250.00 non-refundable application and 
investigative fee. 
(2) ?Every application for an escort service employee license, whether a new license or for a 
renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by an annual $250.00 non-refundable 
application, investigative and license fee. 
(3) ?All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the city police department. 
(4) ?Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and maybe renewed only by 
making application as provided in this section. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 
days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, 
the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(g) ?Advertising. The license number of each licensed escort service employee or escort business shall 
appear in each offer of services, contract, or advertisement, regardless of medium, used by that 
escort service employee or escort business in connection with such services. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 4, 9-3-2002) 


Sec. 49-25. - Issuance of a license. 
(a) ?Within 45 days of receiving an application for a license the city will notify the applicant whether the 
application is granted or denied. 
(b) ?Whenever an application is denied, the city shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for 
such action. 
(c) ?Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the 
application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination 
under oath regarding said application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate within any 
investigation required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is 
ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the city. 
(d) ?Any party aggrieved by the decision of the city regarding the issuance, denial to issue, suspension 
or revocation of a license may file an action for review of that decision by a court of competent 
jurisdiction in Bay County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 5, 9-3-2002) 


Sec. 49-26. - Suspension of a license. 
(a) ?The city will suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it is determined that the licensee 
or any employee of the licensee has: 
(1) ?Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 6, 9-3-2002) 


Sec. 49-27. - Revocation of a license. 
    The city shall revoke a license if it is determined that: 
(1) ?A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application 
process; 
(2) ?A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances by 
employees; 
(3) ?A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution by employees; 
(4) ?A licensee knowingly operated an escort service business during a period of time that the 
licensee's license was suspended. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 7, 9-3-2002) 


Sec. 49-28. - Withholding of license. 
(a) ?The city shall not issue a license if it is determined by preponderance of evidence that one or more 
of the following findings is true: 
(1) ?The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for the issuance of a 
license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2) ?The applicant is under the age of 18 years; 
(3) ?The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this article; 
(4) ?The escort service business employee license is to be used for employment in a business 
prohibited by local or state, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of 
this article. 
(b) ?A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written 
application of the applicant and a finding by the city that the applicant has not been convicted of any 
specified criminal activity as defined in this article or committed any act during the existence of the 
previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. 
(c) ?The issuance of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 8, 9-3-2002) 


Secs. 49-29—49-40. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF HOMELESS SHELTERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 523, adopted Nov. 3, 2014, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify 
manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as Art. 
III, §§ 49-41—49-50. 


Sec. 49-41. - Definitions. 
    Homeless shelter or shelter means a facility intended to provide temporary housing to people in need 
and without homes (please note "Exception" for disaster response and relief below). 
    Participant means an individual that has qualified for admission into the shelter for temporary relief 
and assistance with basic necessities of life such as food and clothing. A participant under the definition 
and terms of this article however does not provide residency nor "intent to reside" status to an individual 
participating. Participant is an individual that receives the benefit of the shelter services however, may not 
claim residency of the shelter as a home, domicile, residence or "intent to reside." 
    Person means an individual (18 years or older), a business entity or organization, or a governmental 
entity. 
    Protected corridor includes those parcels mapped and designated in the city located within 1,000 
feet of the rights-of-way of the following corridors of the city: 
15th Street 
Tyndall Parkway 
Tram Road 
11th Street 
7th Street 
3rd Street 
State Road 22 
Cherry Street 
Everitt Avenue 
School Avenue 
Transmitter Road 
Bob Little Road (State Road 22A) 
As well as those parcels mapped and designated in the city located within 2,000 feet of any residence, 
church, public or private school, or any public park or recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 1, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-42. - Permit required. 
    No person may establish or operate a homeless shelter in the city without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 2, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-43. - Application. 
    A person who wishes to establish and operate a homeless shelter shall file an application for a 
permit with the city clerk or his or her designee. The application shall specify the shelter's proposed 
location and the number of anticipated participants, and any other information considered necessary by 
the city to process the application. The application should include a statement by the applicant addressing 
each element of the burden of proof required for the issuance of a permit as described in section 49-44 
below. When filing the application, the applicant shall pay the processing fee established by the city 
commission through this article of $2,500.00 to offset the extraordinary city staff time for review and 
preparation of this unique and specific permit approval process. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 3, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-44. - Burden of proof. 
    An applicant for a permit under this chapter has the burden of demonstrating each of the following 
elements: 
(1) ?The proposed facility is appropriate for the shelter under consideration; 
(2) ?The proposed location for the shelter is appropriate, given proximity to protected corridors; 
(3) ?The shelter's participants will be provided basic necessities of life, such as food and clothing; 
inclusive with this provision shall be the facilities required compliance with any and all state and 
local regulations for food preparation, distribution and delivery to its participants (analogous to 
state public school requirements and/or state correctional facilities food requirements); 
(4) ?The shelter's participants will receive any necessary medical treatment as provided by the 
facility's trained and licensed staff, and have adequate access to social services and other 
support services such as counseling for employment and permanent housing opportunities; 
(5) ?The shelter will provide transportation for shelter participants as may be needed to implement 
the shelter's program, particularly to any off-site location where services are provided; 
(6) ?The shelter will provide adequate on-site supervision and security; inclusive with this 
supervision shall be all participants provided a temporary participant card qualifying and 
identifying their participation in the facility's services during their stay; 
(7) ?The shelter's operating rules provide for immediate termination of participant" services and 
provide an immediate plan for transportation out of the city of any participant who engages in 
criminal activity; 
(8) ?The shelter will provide adequate coordination with the law enforcement department for the 
provision of screening and security functions; 
(9) ?The shelter will provide a community liaison to ensure sufficient avenues of communication 
with the neighborhood and effective response to complaints from citizens; 
(10) ?Adequate law enforcement services are capable of being provided and are available; 
(11) ?The facility and location comply with applicable provisions of the city's building and land 
development regulations; inclusive with this compliance shall be the city's ability for random 
unscheduled inspections for continued compliance and safety precautions; 
(12) ?The applicant and its staff possess the requisite experience to properly manage the shelter; 
inclusive of the necessary and required medical staff to handle needs of participants; 
(13) ?The facility and its professionals submit sufficient plans demonstrating structured discharge 
planning, including the rehabilitation, training, life counseling and calendar for progression 
through educational and/or vocational endeavors to the participant; 
(14) ?The facility and its professionals submit self-sufficient plans demonstrating structured 
emergency evacuation (inclement weather, natural disaster, emergency) planning and including 
section 49-48, Revocation, providing for a documented plans for relocation in lieu of permit 
revocation; 
(15) ?The applicant is prepared to pay the permit fee described in section 49-46 of this article; 
(16) ?The permittee must identify the agent of record for purposes of contact, communication and 
individual enforcement; 
(17) ?The permit shall comply with all state and federal guidelines in addition the foregoing 
permitting review and conditions; and subject to city revocation power under section 49-48 for 
any and all violations issued by state and or federal guidelines and agencies. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 4, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-45. - Public hearing—Decision—Term. 
    Upon receipt of a complete application, the city clerk shall set the matter for a public hearings, 
evaluation and consideration before the city planning board. The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing 
by (1) publishing a notice of time and place of hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation at least 
ten days before the hearing, and (2) posting the notice of public hearing at city hall. The city clerk may 
give notice in such other manner considered appropriate under the circumstances, including posting on 
the city website. Upon a recommendation from the planning board, the city commission shall thereafter 
conduct a public hearing with like notice and may approve the application if the applicant demonstrates 
that each element of the burden of proof described in section 49-44 is met. If it approves the application, 
the commission may specify the term of the permit. The term of the permit may not exceed 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 5, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-46. - Permit fee. 
    If the city commission approves the application, it shall as a part of the approval process fix the 
amount of the permit fee. The permit fee is in addition to the processing fee referred to in section 49-43 
as well as the standard building, planning and city administrative permitting fees. Once an application is 
approved by the city commission, the applicant shall pay the permit fee fixed by the commission. The 
permit fee shall be based upon the city's anticipated increased costs in providing police, emergency 
medical, administrative fees for city, additional code enforcement and oversight, additional health 
department inspections and oversight and all other related support services for a projected annual term 
as a result of the shelter's operation. The annual renewable permit fee shall be established by vote of the 
city commission following the research, review and final recommendation of city staff. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 6, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-47. - Location. 
    No homeless shelter may be located within any protected corridor within the city as defined by 
section 49-41. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 7, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-48. - Revocation. 
    The city commission may revoke a permit at any time issued under this section if it determines that 
the shelter is not operating in accordance with the terms of the permit. Before it considers revocation of 
the permit, the city commission shall first conduct a noticed public hearing giving the permittee an 
opportunity to respond to grounds in support of revocation. Notice of the revocation hearing shall be 
mailed postage prepaid by certified (return receipt requested) mail to the permittee at the address set 
forth in the application at least ten days before the date set for the hearing. If necessary and upon 
revocation of permit, the shelter administration shall be responsible for the immediate transportation 
within 24 hours for the relocation of any and all participants to another qualified facility identified by the 
shelter administration at the time of its permit application process. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 8, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-49. - Exception. 
    This article does not apply to a temporary emergency homeless shelter established immediately after 
a natural disaster which results in a local disaster proclamation by the city commission. A temporary 
emergency homeless shelter may operate for a maximum of 45 days, unless extended by the city 
commission additional periods not to exceed 45 days. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 9, 11-3-2014) 


Sec. 49-50. - Violation—Penalty. 
    The city commission is authorized to enforce this article and may follow the established procedures 
and schedule of violations and penalties set forth below to be assessed by city code enforcement 
officials: 
(a) ?Violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1) ?First violation: $500.00 fine; $100.00 per day thereafter. 
(2) ?Second violation: $1,000.00; $500.00 per day thereafter. 
(3) ?Third violation: Fine not to exceed $5,000.00 and/or imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed 
60 days. 
(b) ?Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. In the initial stages and 
implementation of this article, code enforcement officials may provide violators with no more than 
one written warning. 
(c) ?The city shall also have available such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be 
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the section of this article in addition to the 
violations set forth above, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief to rejoin and restrain any 
person from violating the provisions of this section of this article and to recover such damages as 
may be incurred by the implementation of the specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 523, § 10, 11-3-2014) 


Secs. 49-51—49-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - LOCAL BUSINESS PREFERENCE POLICY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 526, adopted July 20, 2015, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify 
manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as Art. 
IV, §§ 49-61—49-66. 


Sec. 49-61. - Purpose. 
    The City of Springfield annually spends significant amounts on purchasing personal property, 
materials, and contractual services and in constructing improvements to real property or to existing 
structures. The dollars used in making those purchases are derived, in large part, from taxes, fees, and 
utility revenues derived from local businesses in the corporate limits of Bay County. The city commission 
has determined that funds generated in and from the local community should, to the extent possible, be 
placed back into the local economy. Therefore, the city commission has determined that it is in the best 
interest of the City of Springfield to give a preference to local businesses in Bay County in making such 
purchases whenever the application of such a preference is reasonable in light of the dollar-value of 
proposals received in relation to such expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 7-20-2015) 


Sec. 49-62. - Definitions. 
    General services means support services performed by an independent contractor requiring 
specialized knowledge, experience, or expertise that includes, but is not limited to, pest control, janitorial, 
laundry, catering, security, lawn maintenance and maintenance of equipment. 
    Goods includes, but is not limited to, supplies, equipment, materials and printed matter. 
    Local business means a vendor or contractor who has a valid occupational license or business tax 
receipt issued by the applicable governmental entity within the geographical limits of Bay County for at 
least six months prior to bid or proposal opening date, does business in Bay County by providing goods, 
services, or construction, and maintains a physical business addresses located within the jurisdictional 
limits of Bay County in an area zoned for the conduct of such business from which the vendor or 
contractor operates or performs business on a day-to-day basis. Post office boxes are not verifiable and 
shall not be used for the purpose of establishing said physical address. 
    Professional services includes any services where the city is obtaining advice, instruction or 
specialized work from an individual, firm, or corporation specifically qualified in a particular area. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 2, 7-20-2015) 


Sec. 49-63. - Local preference in purchasing and contracting. 
(a) ?In bidding for, or letting contracts for procurement of goods, general services and professional 
services as described in the purchasing policies of the city, the city commission, or other authorized 
purchasing authority, may give a preference to local businesses in making purchases or awarding 
contracts in an amount not to exceed: 
(1) ?Five percent for purchases $50,000.00 or less; 
(2) ?Four percent for purchases $50,000.01 to 250,000.00; 
(3) ?Three percent for projects $250,000.01 to $500,000.00; 
(4) ?Two percent for projects $500,000.01 to $1,000,000.00; 
(5) ?One percent for projects $1,000,000.01 to $2,000,000.00; 
(6) ?Zero percent for projects $2,000,000.01 and above. 
(b) ?An additional 0.5 percent preference will be given to those qualified local businesses located within 
the city limits of the City of Springfield holding a local business tax receipt issued by the City of 
Springfield. 
(c) ?The total bid price shall include not only the base bid price, but also all alterations to that base bid 
price resulting from alternates which were both part of the bid and actually purchased or awarded by 
the city commission or other appropriate authority. 
(d) ?In the case of requests for proposals or qualification, letters of interest, or other solicitations in which 
objective factors are used to evaluate the responses, local businesses shall be assigned three 
percent of the total points of the total evaluation points. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 3, 7-20-2015) 


Sec. 49-64. - Exceptions to local preference policy. 
(a) ?The procurement preference set forth in this article shall not apply to any of the following purchases 
or contracts: 
(1) ?Goods or services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement or interlocal 
agreement; 
(2) ?Contracts for professional services, procurement of which is subject to the Consultants' 
Competitive Negotiation Act or subject to any competitive consultant selection policy or 
procedure adopted or utilized by the city commission; 
(3) ?Purchases or contracts which are funded, in whole or in part, by a governmental entity and the 
laws, regulations, or policies governing such funding prohibit application of that preference; 
(4) ?Purchases made or contracts let under emergency or noncompetitive situations, or for litigation 
related legal services; or 
(5) ?Purchases with an estimated cost of less than $5,000.00. 
(b) ?Application of local preference to a particular purchase, contract, or category of contracts for which 
the city commission is the awarding authority may be waived upon written justification and 
recommendation by the mayor and approval of the city commission. 
(c) ?The preference established in this article does not prohibit the right of the city commission or other 
purchasing authority to compare quality or fitness for use of supplies, materials, equipment and 
services proposed for purchase and compare qualifications, character, responsibility and fitness of 
all persons, firms, or corporations submitting bids or proposals. 
(d) ?The bid preference established in this article does not prohibit the city commission, or other 
authorized purchasing authority, from giving any other preference permitted by law in addition to the 
preference authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 4, 7-20-2015) 


Sec. 49-65. - Application and enforcement of preference policy. 
(a) ?The local preference policy established in this article shall apply to new contracts and procurements 
solicited after the effective date of this article. 
(b) ?This article shall be implemented in a fashion consistent with otherwise applicable city purchasing 
policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 5, 7-20-2015) 


Sec. 49-66. - Promulgation of rules. 
(a) ?The mayor is hereby authorized to adopt administrative rules supplemental to the provisions of this 
article as deemed necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this article. 
(b) ?The provisions of this article and the rules adopted by the mayor shall be provided to potential 
bidders, vendors and contractors to the widest extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 6, 7-20-2015) 


Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; law enforcement, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 50-1. - State misdemeanors adopted; penalty. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful to commit within the city any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of 
the state as a misdemeanor. 
(b) ?Whosoever shall violate the provisions of this section and the laws adopted shall be punished as 
provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1972, § 13-1) 
Case Law reference— Adoption of state law relating to misdemeanors by city upheld, see 
McFarland v. Roberts, 74 So.2d 88 (Fla. 1954); also Orr v. Quigg, 135 Fla. 653, 185 So.726 and 
Wright v. Worth, 83 Fla. 204, 91 So.87; adoption of state law misdemeanors by reference 
includes laws both in existence at the time and those later adopted by the state legislature, see 
State v. Smith, 189 So.2d 846 (Fla. 4th D.C.A. 1966). Follows rule in Hecht v. Shaw, 112 Fla. 
762, 151 So.333(1933). "…when the adopting statute makes no reference to any particular 
statute or part of statute by its title or otherwise, but refers to the law generally which governs a 
particular subject, the reference in such a case includes not only the law in force at the date of the 
adopting act, but also all subsequent laws on the particular subject referred to…." 
(1)  
A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the 
same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So.2d 
496 (Fla. 1975). 
(2)  
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by 
general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, within 
city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id. 
(3)  
An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, 
revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
State Law reference— State law misdemeanors, see Florida Statutes general index under 
heading "Crimes" for listing of state law misdemeanors; penalty for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 
775.082, 775.083. 


Sec. 50-2. - Abandoned or derelict property; disposition by city. 
    Any derelict or abandoned personal property found upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other 
public ways in the city, or abandoned upon private property may be disposed of by the city in the following 
manner: The city shall hold such property for a period of 30 days during which time the rightful owner may 
claim and remove such property upon reimbursing the city only the actual cost of removal and care or 
storage, but if not claimed at the expiration of 30 days, the city, after giving public notice by legal 
publication in a newspaper published in the county, once a week for two consecutive weeks with the first 
publication being at least ten days prior to the date of sale, shall offer such property for sale to the highest 
and best bidder for cash at the city hall during the legal hours of sale on the date shown in such notice. 
The city shall hold the proceeds of the sale for a period of 60 days and shall deliver such property over to 
the rightful owner if claimed during such time less the actual cost of removal, storage, advertising notice 
of sale and conducting sale. When all the proceeds of any such sale are not claimed within 60 days by 
the rightful owner, it shall be forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 13-2) 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Lost or abandoned property on public property, F.S. ch. 705. 


Sec. 50-3. - Noise. 
(a) ?Noise disturbances. No person shall unnecessarily make, continue or cause to be made or 
continued any noise disturbances. 
(b) ?Specific prohibitions. The following acts, and the causing or permitting thereof in such a manner as 
to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line, or within a noise 
sensitive zone, are hereby declared to be a violation: 
(1) ?Radios, television sets, musical instruments, and similar devices. Operating, playing or 
permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical 
instrument or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound either mechanically 
or electronically. 
(2) ?Loudspeakers. Using or operating for any purpose other than those activities specifically 
exempted in subsection (d)(4) of this section, any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system or similar 
device, including sound emitting devices which may be physically attached to any motor vehicle. 
(3) ?Street sales. Offering for sale, selling or advertising for sale by shouting or outcry, anything 
within any area of the city. 
(4) ?Animals. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which frequently, or for continued 
duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or otherwise makes sounds which create a noise 
disturbance. 
(5) ?Loading or unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, 
containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects in such a manner as to cause a 
noise disturbance. 
(6) ?Construction. Operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in 
construction, drilling, excavation, clearing, repair, alteration or demolition work on weekdays 
after 10:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. the next morning, or at any time during Sundays or legal 
holidays. 
(7) ?Fixed mechanical equipment. Operating or causing the operation of fixed mechanical 
equipment located on real property, including HVAC equipment, motors, engines, pumps, 
compressors, fans, tools, machinery and their component parts, or any other similar stationary 
mechanical devices and their component parts, except as otherwise exempted in subsection 
(d)(6) of this section. 
(8) ?Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, 
motorcycle or other vehicle, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of such 
signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for 
an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; and the use of any horn, whistle or other 
device operated by engine exhaust. 
(c) ?Residential disturbance. Sound levels which unreasonably interfere with the rest and normal 
activities of inhabitants inside a place of residence shall be prohibited. The determination of whether 
the sound level is prohibited within the meaning of this subsection may be determined by an officer 
of the law, at the request of the inhabitants, which officer will observe the sound level in the 
residence without the use of mechanical sound measuring devices and with the windows and doors 
of the residence closed. Under the delineated conditions, if the officer of the law determines that the 
noise, created by some external source outside of the control of the inhabitants of the residence, 
unreasonably interferes with the ability of the occupants to enjoy sleep and rest and the conduct of 
normal activities, then such noise shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(d) ?Exemptions. The following acts and the causing or permitting thereof shall be specifically exempted 
from the prohibitions of subsections (a)—(c) of this section: 
(1) ?Operating motor vehicle noise enforcement procedures shall be as established in F.S. ch. 316, 
and applicable rules and regulations of the state department of highway safety and motor 
vehicles; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any sound emitting devices 
which may be attached to any motor vehicle as prohibited by subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(2) ?Noise generated by aircraft and interstate railway locomotives and cars are exempt from this 
section. 
(3) ?Any noise generated as a result of emergency work or for the purpose of alerting the public to 
the existence of any emergency situation. 
(4) ?Any noise generated by any noncommercial public speaking or public assembly activities 
conducted pursuant to lawful authority on any public space or right-of-way, including sporting 
events. 
(5) ?Any noise generated by the operation and use of domestic power tools and lawn maintenance 
equipment. 
(6) ?Fixed mechanical equipment; noise generated by the operation and use of air conditioning 
units in residential districts. 
(7) ?Noises consistent with cultural, sporting, historical or traditional observances, holidays, 
festivals, ceremonies, parades and concerts, provided that any such event is operated and 
conducted pursuant to, and in accordance with, the conditions of a special permit issued by the 
city manager or his designee. 
(8) ?Construction operations for which building permits have been issued, or construction 
operations not requiring permits due to ownership of the property by an agency of government; 
provided, however, that such equipment is operated in accordance with the manufacturers' 
specifications and with all manufacturers' mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in 
proper operating condition. 
(9) ?Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(10) ?Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for 
which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the city. Regulation of noises emanating 
from operations under permit shall be according to the conditions and limits stated on the 
permit. 
(Code 1972, §§ 13-17, 13-18) 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle noise, F.S. §§ 316.293, 403.415. 


Sec. 50-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 497, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, repealed § 50-4, which pertained to 
discharging firearms and derived from Code 1972, § 13-29. 


Sec. 50-5. - Obstruction of drainageways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, in whole or in part, any public drainage ditch, drainage 
pipe, drainage easement or other drainage facility in the city, whether dedicated or not. 
(Code 1972, § 13-36) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Obstruction of drainage units constructed by water control districts, F.S. 
§ 298.66. 


Sec. 50-6. - Borrow pits prohibited; exceptions. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful to create, construct or maintain any borrow pit in this city, or to aid or abet in any 
creation, construction or maintenance of any such borrow pit, and for the purpose of this section, any 
owner of any right, title or interest in the land wherein a borrow pit is created, constructed or 
maintained shall be deemed as an active participant in the creation, construction or maintenance of 
any such borrow pit. Any person who in any way participates in the removal of sand, dirt or other 
minerals so as to contribute to the creation, construction or maintenance of such a borrow pit shall 
be deemed to be one who aids or abets in the creation, construction or maintenance of any such 
borrow pit. 
(b) ?This section shall not be applicable to excavations conducted in accordance with plans and 
specifications providing for the construction of foundations, basements or other landscaping 
necessary for the construction of buildings or improvements covered by such plans and 
specifications. Any such excavations shall be made in a careful and prudent manner and shall at all 
times be protected by substantial enclosures of sufficient strength and design to preclude any person 
or animal from exposure to the dangers of such excavation. The abandonment of any construction 
contemplated by this section for a period in excess of 30 days shall automatically preclude the 
excavation from the exemption of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 13-37) 


Secs. 50-7—50-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - MERCHANDISING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 423, §§ 1—7, adopted Dec. 2, 2002, was not specifically amendatory of the 
Code and has been included as art. II, §§ 50-31—50-37 at the editor's discretion. 


Sec. 50-31. - Recitals. 
    The foregoing recitals are true and correct and incorporated herein by reference as findings of fact 
and conclusions of law. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1, 12-2-2002) 


Sec. 50-32. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to prevent the sale or delivery of tobacco products to persons under the age 
of 18 by regulating the commercial marketing and placement of such products. This article shall not be 
interpreted or construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of tobacco products, which are otherwise lawful or 
regulated pursuant to F.S., ch. 569. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 2, 12-2-2002) 


Sec. 50-33. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall mean: 
    Open display unit means a case, rack, shelf, counter, table, desk, kiosk, booth, stand or other 
surface that allows direct public access to the product placed therein. 
    Restricted access area means an area reasonably physically confined with access designated by the 
vendor as limited to the vendor. 
    Self-service tobacco merchandising means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale 
tobacco related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of the vendor. 
    Snack includes, but is not limited to, items such as chips, crackers, cookies, ice cream, beefjerky, 
popcorn, pretzels, etc. 
    Specialty tobacco store means an establishment primarily in the business of selling cigars and pipe 
tobacco. 
    Tobacco product means loose tobacco leaves, and products made from tobacco leaves, in whole or 
in part, which can be used for smoking, sniffing or chewing, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, 
pipe tobacco, snuff or smokeless tobacco, and chewing tobacco. Tobacco product also includes cigarette 
wrappers. This would also include "bidis" or "beedies" which is a tobacco product wrapped in temburni or 
tendu leaf or other product. 
    Tobacco product promotion includes any advertisement, the display of any logo, brand name, 
character, graphic or designs that are trademarks of a particular brand of tobacco product. Tobacco 
product promotion does not include any public service messages sponsored by a federal, state or local 
government entity or by a non-profit entity, designed to communicate the hazards of smoking or to 
encourage minors to refrain from using or buying tobacco products. 
    Vending machine means any mechanical, electrical, or electronic device that, on the insertion of 
money, tokens, or other form of payment, dispenses tobacco products automatically or by operation of a 
lockout device as defined in F.S. § 569.12. 
    Vendor means any individual, sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation, partnership, cooperative 
association, or other legal entity licensed as a dealer in tobacco products pursuant to F.S. ch. 569, and 
any employee or agent of said dealer. 
    Vendor assisted sale means the customer has no physical access to tobacco products without the 
assistance of the vendor or employee. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 3, 12-2-2002) 


Sec. 50-34. - Regulation of tobacco product promotion of placement of tobacco products in open display 
unit. 
    No vendor shall place tobacco products in an open display unit unless such unit is located in a 
restricted access area. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 4, 12-2-2002) 


Sec. 50-35. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1) ?An establishment that prohibits persons less than 18 years of age on the premises. 
(2) ?Specialty tobacco stores. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 5, 12-2-2002) 


Sec. 50-36. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by any procedure permitted by F.S. ch. 162, or other 
applicable Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 6, 12-2-2002) 


Sec. 50-37. - Territory embraced. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all areas of the City of Springfield. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 7, 12-2-2002) 


ARTICLE III. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS 


Sec. 50-38. - Findings and intent. 
(a) ?Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and sexual offenders who 
prey on children are sexual predators and present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual 
offenders are likely to use physical violence to repeat their offences, and most sexual offenders 
commit many offences, and have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for 
only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to the society at 
large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
(b) ?It is the intent of this article to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the 
city's citizens by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in 
concentrated numbers, where certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from 
establishing a temporary or a permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord No. 457, § 1, 1-4-2007) 


Sec. 50-39. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more 
consecutive days. 
    Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or 
more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, 
or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or 
nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord No. 457, § 1, 1-4-2007) 


Sec. 50-40. - Sexual offender and sexual predator residence prohibition: penalties; exceptions. 
(a) ?[ Generally. ] It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of F.S. §§ 794.011, 
800.04, 827.071, or 847.0145, or the equivalence of such statutes from other states, regardless of 
whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of 
age, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school, 
designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children 
regularly congregate. 
(b) ?Measurement. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall 
be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or 
temporary residence to nearest outer property line of a school, designated public school bus stop, 
day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(c) ?Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or 
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a 
second or subsequent conviction of a violation of this section. Such person shall be punished by a 
fine, not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment in the county jail not more than 12 months, or by both 
such fine and imprisonment. 
(d) ?Exceptions. A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, 
day care, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate does not commit a 
violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1) ?The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and 
registered the residence pursuant to F.S. §§ 775.21, 943.0435 or 944.607, prior to July 1, 2005. 
(2) ?The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an 
adult. 
(3) ?The person is a minor. 
(4) ?The school, designated public school bus stop or day care center within 2,500 feet of the 
person's permanent residence was opened after the person established the permanent 
residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to F.S. 
§§ 775.21, 943.0435 or 944.607. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord No. 457, § 1, 1-4-2007) 


Sec. 50-41. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and 
sexual predators; penalties. 
(a) ?It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the 
knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person 
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to section 
50-40 of this Code, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located 
within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, 
playground, or other place where children congregate. 
(b) ?A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this 
section, and shall subject the property owner to the code enforcement provision and procedures as 
provided in this Code, including the provisions that allow the city to seek relief as otherwise provided 
by law. 
(Ord. No. 448, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord No. 457, § 1, 1-4-2007) 


Secs. 50-42—50-49. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 


Sec. 50-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm or alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged, designed, or 
used to signal the occurrence in the city of a burglary, robbery or other criminal offense, fire emergency or 
other emergency requiring urgent attention, and to which police or fire personnel are expected to 
respond. Alarm systems included those through which public safety personnel are notified directly or 
indirectly by way of third persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to the fire 
or police department. Alarm systems also include those designed to register a signal which is so audible, 
visible or in other ways perceptible outside a protected building, structure or facility as to notify persons in 
the neighborhood or beyond the signal location who in turn may notify the police or fire department of the 
signal. Alarm systems do not include those affixed to automobiles. Multiple alarm systems in a single 
structure or alarms in separate structures are to be counted as separate systems, even though owned or 
controlled by the same person or entity. 
    Automatic telephone dialing alarm system shall not be considered alarms and are prohibited. 
"Automatic telephone dialing alarm system" shall mean the automatic dialing device or an automatic 
telephone dialing alarm system or any system which, upon being activated, automatically transmits by 
telephone or telephone line to the city police department, a voice recorded message indicating a need for 
emergency response; or a system which, upon activation, connects to an answering service whose 
function it is to transmit to the city police department or city fire department a need for emergency 
response. 
    Excessive false alarms occurs when any alarm system produces more than three false alarms in any 
six-month period; provided however, persons installing a new alarm system or making substantial 
modifications to an existing system shall be entitled to a grace period during which alarms generated by 
such system shall be deemed non-false alarms, provided further, that this grace period shall cease 30 
days after installation of or modification of an alarm system, and provided further that the chief of the 
police or chief of the fire department shall have the authority to grant an extended grace period for good 
cause shown upon request in writing. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the police or fire department when a 
situation requiring a response by the police or fire department does not in fact exist. False alarm does not 
include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not 
reasonably subject to control by the alarm operator or alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 4-1-2014) 


Sec. 50-51. - False police and fire alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, controls or has custody of any police or fire alarm to 
suffer or permit the existence of excessive false alarms by such devices. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 4-1-2014) 


Sec. 50-52. - Response to alarms. 
(a) ?Whenever an alarm is activated in the city, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location 
by the police or fire department and the police or fire department does respond, the police or fire 
department personnel on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by 
the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was in fact required as indicated 
by the alarm system or whether the alarm signal was a false alarm. 
(b) ?Any alarm system which produces three or more alarms in any one-hour period due to telephone 
line malfunctions shall be placed in a "No Dispatch" status after the department has notified the user 
designate of such intended action. 
(c) ?If the police or fire department personnel at the scene of the activated alarm system determine the 
alarm to be false, the officers shall make a report of the false alarm, a notification of which shall be 
mailed or delivered to the alarm user at the address of such alarm system installation location, 
advising the alarm user of the false alarm. 
(d) ?The chief of police or fire department shall have the right to inspect any alarm system on the 
premises to which a response has been made, and he may cause an inspection of such system to 
be made at any reasonable time thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 4-1-2014) 


Sec. 50-53. - Penalty fee assessment. 
(a) ?If any alarm system produces three false alarms in any six-month period, the chief of the affected 
department shall provide written notice of the fact, which shall be given by mail or delivery to the 
alarm user asking the alarm user to take corrective action in regard to false alarms and informing the 
alarm user of the false alarm fee schedule provided herein. 
(b) ?Upon any alarm system producing a fourth, fifth or sixth false police or fire alarm in a six-month 
period, a fee of $50.00 per false alarm shall be charged to the user or owner. The following fee 
schedule shall be used for each additional false alarm: 
(1) ?Seventh, eighth and ninth false police or fire alarm in a six-month period, a fee of $100.00 per 
false alarm shall be assessed. 
(2) ?Ten or more false alarms in a six-month period, the location shall be placed into a "No 
Dispatch" status for a period of 90 days and proof of proper maintenance/repair of the alarm 
system. 
(c) ?Failure to pay any fee assessment within 30 days of notification or within 30 days of any final 
hearing shall result in the alarm system being disconnected from the police or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 4-1-2014) 


Sec. 50-54. - Appeal of false alarm. 
(a) ?Any owner or user who has been notified of a false alarm or assessed a false alarm fee may appeal 
to the mayor by giving notice within three days of the notification of a false alarm assessment. Upon 
receipt of the appeal notice, a time certain not to exceed 30 days of receipt of the appeal shall be 
established for a hearing. 
(b) ?The appellant shall be given reasonable notice of such hearing date. 
(c) ?The mayor shall serve as the hearing officer, and the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to 
show by a preponderance of the evidence that the alarm signal in question was not a false alarm. 
(d) ?After receipt of all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall render his decision within 30 days. 
The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 4-1-2014) 


Sec. 50-55. - Emergency notification. 
    Each alarm system user shall provide current emergency notification telephone numbers of at least 
two representatives to the city police department, to permit prompt notification of alarm responses and to 
aid in their inspection of the property. Failure to respond to emergency notification or to provide current 
emergency telephone numbers shall constitute grounds for termination of alarm responses. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 4-1-2014) 


Sec. 50-56. - Automatic telephone dialing systems prohibited. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, install, maintain, lease, operate or assist in 
the operation of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system over any telephone lines exclusively 
used by the public to directly request emergency service from the city police department. 
(b) ?The chief of police, when he has knowledge of the unlawful maintenance of an automatic telephone 
dialing alarm system, installed or operated in violation of subsection a above, shall in writing, order 
the owner, operator or lessee to disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours of 
receipt of the order. 
(c) ?Any automatic telephone dialing system installed unlawfully as set forth in subsection (a) above 
shall be removed within 30 days of the order as contained in subsection (b) above. 
(d) ?Automatic telephone dialing systems already installed and operating prior to January 1, 2014, shall 
not be in violation of this article; however, any such system shall be registered as specified in section 
50-55, and shall be subject to the penalty fee assessments in section 50-53. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 4-1-2014) 


Chapter 52 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 


Sec. 52-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressive manner means: 
(1) ?Approaching, speaking to, or following a person in the course of or subsequent to panhandling 
such person if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily 
harm to oneself or to another, or damage to or loss of property, or to otherwise be intimidated 
into giving money or other thing of value; 
(2) ?Continuing to panhandle a person after the person has given a negative response to such 
panhandling; 
(3) ?Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's 
consent in the course of panhandling; 
(4) ?Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by 
any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive 
action to avoid physical contact; 
(5) ?Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person; 
(6) ?Following the person being panhandled, with the intent of asking that person for money or 
other things of value; 
(7) ?Panhandling anyone who is waiting in line for entry to a building or for another purpose. 
    Applicant means any person who applies for a permit. 
    Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is 
able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, 
balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments. 
    Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller 
machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking 
hours. 
    Charitable, nonprofit or veterans' organization means an organization which has qualified for an 
exemption from federal income tax as an exempt organization under the provisions of Section 501(c) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, or Section 528 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as may be 
amended or superseded, which is engaged in charitable, civic, community, benevolent, religious or 
scholastic works or other similar activities. 
    Check cashing business means any person or business duly registered pursuant to F.S. pt. III, ch. 
560, engaging in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration. 
    Chief means the individual designated by the city commission to perform the duties of the chief of 
police of the city. 
    City means City of Springfield, Florida, a municipal corporation. 
    City commission means the governing body of the city. 
    Clerk means clerk of the city, or other person designated by the city commission to perform the 
duties of clerk under this chapter. 
    Financial institution means any banking corporation, credit union, or other institution defined in F.S. § 
655.005. 
    Law enforcement officer means any police officer of the city or any employee of the city or other 
person duly designated by the city commission to enforce this chapter or any other person whether 
federal, state, county or city as defined in F.S. §§ 112.531, 316.1906, and/or 943.10, as may be amended 
or superseded from time to time. 
    Panhandling means asking for money or objects of value, with the intention that the money or object 
be transferred at that time, and at that place. Panhandling shall include using the spoken, written, or 
printed word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation 
of money or other thing of value. Panhandling shall not include soliciting, peddling or canvassing as 
defined in this chapter. 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, motor 
vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from residence-to-residence or from street 
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, 
farm products, periodicals, books, magazines or provisions, offering articles to prospective purchasers, or 
who without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, motor 
vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. Anyone who solicits orders and, as a separate 
transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of 
this chapter shall be deemed a peddler. The term "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and 
"huckster." 
    Permit means evidence of compliance with this chapter by a person issued in written form by the 
city, and includes some pictorial positive identification of the permit holder. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or other group or 
combination acting as a unit, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, trustee, executor, 
administrator, receiver, or other fiduciary, agency of the state, district, federal agency or any other legal 
entity or its legal representative, agent, or assign, and includes the plural as well as the singular. 
    Premises means separate and identifiable real property including, but not limited to, buildings, 
habitations, institutions or places of business. 
    Public lands means any park or school yard or open space adjacent thereto, and all waterways and 
sovereign lands, highways, streets and alleys as designated by the state or the United States 
Government. 
    Residence means every separate living unit for residential purposes by one or more persons, 
contained in any type of building or structure. 
    Soliciting, peddling or canvassing means any word derived from such words and shall include any 
act which directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for 
the purpose of promoting, either directly or indirectly, the interests thereof by sales. 
    Solicitor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, 
motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from residence-to-residence or from 
street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal 
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the 
future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or 
not. Such definition shall include any person who, for himself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or 
occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or 
any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future 
delivery. This term shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1) ?Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services 
of any kind, character or description whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever; 
(2) ?Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other 
type or kind of publication; or 
(3) ?Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money or clothing or other valuable items, tangible or 
intangible, for the support or benefit of any charitable, nonprofit or veterans' organization. 
The term "solicitor" shall include the terms "canvasser," "peddler," "transient or itinerant merchant or 
vendor" or "transient or itinerant photographer." This term shall not apply to sales made to dealers or 
permanent merchants by commercial travelers selling in the usual course of business; and law 
enforcement officers, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officials selling goods, wares or 
merchandise according to law. 
    State means State of Florida, its agencies and instrumentalities. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 2, 4-5-1999; Ord. No. 508, § 2, 7-2-2012) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 52-2. - Permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or act as a solicitor or peddler within the corporate 
limits of the city without first obtaining a permit as provided in this section, except as set forth in this 
chapter. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 3, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-3. - Filing of application. 
(a) ?Applicants for permits under this section must file with the chief or the chief's designee a sworn 
written application in duplicate, on forms to be furnished by the city, which shall give the following 
information: 
(1) ?Name and address of the applicant, including date of birth; 
(2) ?Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3) ?If applicable, a brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4) ?Proposed method of operation; 
(5) ?Social security or taxpayer identification number of applicant; 
(6) ?If applicable, the place where the goods or properties are proposed to be sold; 
(7) ?Physical description of applicant; 
(8) ?If employed, the name and address of the employer; 
(9) ?The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(10) ?If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with license number and 
driver's license number or other means of identification; 
(11) ?The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a permit under this 
chapter, if any; 
(12) ?Whether a permit of registration issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been 
revoked; 
(13) ?Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any 
other state or of the United States; 
(14) ?Names of magazines, journals or books to be sold, if applicable; 
(15) ?Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited residence-to-
residence, if applicable; 
(16) ?Such other relevant information as may be required by the city; and 
(17) ?Signature of applicant. 
(b) ?All statements made by the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c) ?The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by a law enforcement officer upon request by the city in 
connection with the application for the permit. 
(d) ?The chief or the chief's designee shall keep an accurate record of every application received and 
acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto, and all permits issued 
under this chapter and of the denials of permits. Applications for permits shall be numbered in 
consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with 
the duplicate number of the application upon which it is issued. 
(e) ?No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the 
provisions of this chapter, nor to any person whose permit issued under this chapter has previously 
been revoked as provided in section 52-12. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 5, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-4. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.00 or 
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both. Every day of a violation of this chapter shall constitute a 
separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 20, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-5. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this chapter, the original shall be referred to 
the chief or the chief's designee, who shall investigate the applicant's background for charges of criminal 
or unethical conduct or civil unfair trade practices. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 5, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-6. - Display of permit required. 
(a) ?Any person issued a permit in accordance with this chapter shall prominently display, upon his 
person at all times that he is engaged in solicitation or other activities regulated by this chapter within 
the city, the permit issued to him by the chief or the chief's designee. 
(b) ?All permits issued for residence-to-residence sales and solicitations at residences or other private 
premises shall have printed the hours during which such sales are permitted, pursuant to this section 
or any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 6, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-7. - Fee. 
    The fee for the solicitation permit shall be $25.00 per individual involved. 


Sec. 52-8. - Duration of permits. 
    All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be dated and signed by the chief or the chief's 
designee and shall be valid during the term specified, not to exceed 90 days after the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 8, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-9. - Permits nontransferable; marking. 
    The permits described in this chapter shall be inscribed upon a card which shall be endorsed in red 
letters: "Not Transferable and Not an Endorsement or a Recommendation." The permit shall state the 
expiration date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 9, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-10. - Unauthorized use of permit. 
    A permit issued under this chapter shall not be used at any time by any person other than the one to 
whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 10, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-11. - Disapproval. 
    If, as a result of the investigation provided for in section 52-5 or for any other lawful reason, the 
application or the applicant is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief or the chief's designee shall endorse 
on such application the disapproval and reasons for the disapproval, and return the application to the 
applicant. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 11, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-12. - Revocation and denial. 
(a) ?Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be denied or revoked by the city for any of 
the following causes: 
(1) ?Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application; 
(2) ?Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of the applicant carrying on his 
business as solicitor or peddler; 
(3) ?Any violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city; or 
(4) ?Conducting the business of soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as 
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or welfare of 
the public. 
(b) ?Any permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the chief or the chief's designee if the 
holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a 
false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a 
permit under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall 
be given by the chief or the chief's designee to the holder of the permit personally or by certified 
United States mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. 
(c) ?Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 12, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-13. - Appeals. 
    The denial or revocation of a permit under this chapter may be appealed to the city commission by 
serving a notice of such appeal upon the clerk within 30 days after such denial or revocation. Such appeal 
shall be heard and resolved by the city commission in such a manner as to afford due process within 30 
days after the filing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 13, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-14. - Loud noises; use of streets by peddlers. 
    In addition to the general provisions set forth elsewhere in this chapter, peddlers shall be subject to 
the following special provisions: 
(1) ?No peddler, nor any person on the peddler's behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, 
ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound-amplifying 
system upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted, or 
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the public lands for the purpose 
of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(2) ?No peddler shall have exclusive right to any location in the public lands, nor shall any be 
permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area 
where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. 
(3) ?No person shall solicit, canvass or peddle within the city on Sunday, or between the times of 
sunset and sunrise daily, except in conjunction with a recognized and publicized charitable fund 
drive. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 14, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-15. - No soliciting or peddling at posted residences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person for the purpose of soliciting, canvassing or peddling, whether 
holding a permit or not, to go on the private residence of any person in the city that displays a sign near 
the place of entrance reading "No Soliciting" or "No Peddling," or words of similar meaning. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 15, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-16. - Prohibited areas designated; permit conditions; application procedure; issuance. 
    No person, without prior permission of the mayor and/or city commission, shall solicit, canvass, or 
otherwise take orders for the sale of merchandise, goods, or property of any kind or character in the 
following areas situated within the city: 
(1) ?All of the beach areas upland of the mean high water line. 
(2) ?All public lands, including parks. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 16, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-17. - Permit required for charitable endeavors. 
(a) ?It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to solicit or to accept alms, gifts or monies for any 
person, any charitable, nonprofit or veterans' organization to promote or participate in any 
entertainment, fair, bazaar, or carnival, or offer for sale tickets therefor, in the name of charity, 
patriotism, religion, fraternalism, or philanthropy, or to solicit or accept gifts except by an organization 
on its own premises; without first obtaining a permit from the city as provided in this chapter. All 
provisions of this chapter dealing with solicitors shall apply to such persons, except as specifically 
noted. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful within the city for any person to hold a rummage sale, or sell or offer for sale any 
merchandise or property, which has been given for sale to any charitable, nonprofit or veterans' 
organization or for any charity, religion, philanthropy, fraternalism or patriotism, except on their own 
respective premises, without first obtaining a permit from the city as provided in section 52-2. 
(c) ?In addition to the other information required for a permit, should a charitable or benevolent 
organization that is unknown or of a new origin apply for a permit to collect funds or donations of any 
kind, it shall also supply in writing a statement of where such organization was organized, where its 
chief office is located, and for what purpose it solicits funds, and also whether or not any federal 
entity, state, city or town has supervision of its expenditures, or whether the public is fully apprised of 
the manner in which the donations are to be distributed. 
(d) ?If the chief or the chief's designee shall be satisfied from the application so filed and from such other 
information as may be gathered from any other source that: 
(1) ?The statements contained in the application are true; 
(2) ?The applicant is a person in good standing and a bona fide solicitor for a reputable charitable 
organization or for deserving and bona fide charitable purpose; and 
(3) ?There is a reasonable certainty that the funds so required will be devoted to the purpose or 
purposes for which they are solicited, less a reasonable commission or salary to be paid the 
solicitor; then the chief or the chief's designee shall issue such permit as required by this 
section. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 17, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-18. - Exemptions. 
(a) ?The provisions of this section shall not apply when solicitation is conducted on an appointment 
basis, with a time for such appointment set either by telephone or through the United States mail, or 
by other than residence-to-residence solicitation and/or sale. 
(b) ?Any person peddling or soliciting under the terms of this chapter who holds a valid current license 
from a state agency authorizing such peddling and solicitation, and which state agency regulates any 
person so licensed by the state, is hereby exempt from the provisions of this chapter relating to 
permits. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 18, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-19. - Occupational license required. 
    If the applicant desires to or does conduct any activity being regulated thereby in excess of the 90 
day permit within any given calendar year period, the person shall comply with the terms and conditions 
of chapter 74, as may be amended or superseded, in lieu of obtaining a permit as required by this 
chapter. Aside from the issuance of an occupational license in lieu of a permit, the person shall comply 
with all other terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 19, 4-5-1999) 


Sec. 52-20. - Panhandling prohibited. 
(a) ?No person shall panhandle in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(b) ?No person shall panhandle on private property without permission from the owner or other person 
lawfully in possession of such property. 
(c) ?No person shall panhandle within 20 feet of the entrance or exit of any public restroom located on 
publicly owned or leased property. 
(d) ?No person shall panhandle within 20 feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution or check 
cashing business or within 20 feet of any automated teller machine without the consent of the owner 
of the property or another person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that 
when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such 
distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility. 
(e) ?No person shall panhandle an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is 
located on any street, for the purpose of performing or offering to perform a service in connection 
with such vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. Provided, however, that this 
paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by 
the operator or passenger of such vehicle. 
(f) ?No person shall panhandle any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in 
exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the operator or 
occupant to a public parking space. 
(g) ?No person shall panhandle while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(h) ?No person shall panhandle by stating that funds are needed to meet a specific need, when the 
panhandler has the funds to meet that need, does not intend to use funds to meet that need, or does 
not have that need. 
(i) ?No person shall panhandle in any public transportation vehicle; or at any bus or train station or stop. 
(j) ?No person shall panhandle within six feet of an entrance to a building without the consent of the 
owner of the building or another person legally in possession of such building. 
(k) ?No person shall panhandle within 20 feet of any pay telephone; provided that when a pay telephone 
is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the 
entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility. 
    A warning shall be issued for a first panhandling violation of this section. Subsequent violations shall 
be punished pursuant to section 52-4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 3, 7-2-2012) 


Chapter 54 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; compensation and bond of officers and employees, § 2-33. 
Related law reference— Civil service system, Part I, Subpart B. 
State Law reference— For authority to create a civil service system, Fla. Const. Art. III, § 14. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - SOCIAL SECURITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Social security for public employees, F.S. ch. 650. 


Sec. 54-31. - Coverage determination. 
    It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of January 1, 1955, to 
the employees and officials of the city, not excluded by law, nor excepted in this article, and whether 
employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old age 
and survivor's insurance as authorized by the Federal Security Act and amendments thereto, including 
Public Law 734 of 81st Congress, and by F.S. ch. 650; and to cover by such plan all services which 
constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of the city by employees of 
the city, with no exceptions. 
(Code 1972, § 14-16) 


Sec. 54-32. - Authority to execute agreements; coverage commencement date. 
    The mayor, or other chief executive officer of the city, is authorized and directed to execute all 
necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the division of retirement, as state agency, for the 
purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old age and survivor's insurance to the 
employees and officials of this city as provided in this article, which agreements shall provide for such 
methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary for the 
proper and efficient administration thereof, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment 
covered by such agreements performed after January 1, 1955. 
(Code 1972, § 14-17) 


Sec. 54-33. - Withholdings. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose 
provided in this article are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such 
times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the 
state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1972, § 14-18) 


Sec. 54-34. - Employer contributions. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from taxation of any kind except ad 
valorem taxes, such amounts, at such times, as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and 
assessments required of the city as employer by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which 
shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law 
and regulation. 
(Code 1972, § 14-19) 


Sec. 54-35. - Records and reports; compliance with regulations. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or 
federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the regulations of the state agency. 
(Code 1972, § 14-20) 


Sec. 54-36. - Exclusion of members of other retirement systems. 
    There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to make any agreement with respect to any 
position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered, by any other ordinance or 
law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 14-21) 


Sec. 54-37. - Adoption of social security act. 
    The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, 
and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended by Public 
Law, No. 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof and of its 
departments and agencies, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or 
authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or 
employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable 
state or federal laws or regulations, or whose service is specifically excepted in section 54-31. 
(Code 1972, § 14-22) 


Sec. 54-38. - Fund custodian; withholding and reporting agent. 
    The city clerk is designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and 
employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the treasurer of the city is 
made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for 
the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 14-23) 


Secs. 54-39—54-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Florida retirement system, F.S. ch. 121. 


Sec. 54-61. - Plans for general employees of city and firefighters and police officers established. 
    A retirement plan and trust of the general employees of the city and one for the employees of the city 
who are firefighters and police officers are hereby established effective December 13, 1995. The 
instruments which represent the terms of such plan and trust will be and remain an exhibit to this article, 
remanded to the custody of the city clerk who will maintain such instruments for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 336, § 1, 12-13-1995) 


Sec. 54-62. - Amendment of plans. 
    The city commission shall have the power to amend such plan and trust at such time or times as 
considered in the best interest of the city, its general employees, employees who are firefighters and 
police officers and citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 336, § 2, 12-13-1995) 


Sec. 54-63. - Florida Municipal Pension Trust Fund—Participation. 
    The city commission hereby expressly authorizes the participation of such plan and trust in the 
Florida Municipal Pension Trust Fund and hereby authorizes the administration of such plan and trust, 
and the investment of funds of the plan and trust within the procedure, policies and methods outlined in 
the Funds Master Trust Agreements. 
(Ord. No. 336, § 3, 12-13-1995) 


Sec. 54-64. - Documents and agreements for trust fund. 
    The city commission hereby empowers the mayor of the city with the authority to execute such 
documents and agreements as are required for participation in the Florida Municipal Pension Trust Fund. 
(Ord. No. 336, § 4, 12-13-1995) 


Sec. 54-65. - Firefighters and police officers pension trust fund. 
    The city firefighters and police officers' pension trust fund, adopted by article III of this chapter, as 
subsequently amended, is hereby amended and restated as set forth in the document designated City of 
Springfield Firefighters' and Police Officers' Pension Trust Fund and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 407, § 1, 12-4-2000) 


Secs. 54-66—54-90. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - LIFE AND HEALTH INSURANCE FOR RETIREES 


Sec. 54-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Eligible employee means an employee that meets the standard coverage requirements of the then 
existing group insurance program. 
    Group life, health and dental insurance program means the city group insurance program existing on 
the employee's retirement date and subject to changes in insurance providers, or carriers and benefits 
provided therein and premium cost allocation thereof. The city reserves the right to require that 
employees pay the whole cost or a portion of their premiums. 
    Retired employee: 
(1) ?If an employee was hired before January 1, 1996, he or she must have been continuously 
employed by the city for at least ten consecutive years and is at least 55 years of age on their 
retirement date and who is covered by the then existing group insurance program and who is 
eligible for retirement under the then existing retirement program. The employee must retire 
from current employment with the city. 
(2) ?If an employee was hired after January 1, 1996, he or she must have been continuously 
employed by the city for at least 15 consecutive years and is at least 62 years of age on their 
retirement date and is covered by the then existing group insurance program and who is eligible 
for retirement under the then existing retirement program. The employee must retire from 
current employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 5-5-1986; Ord. No. 282, § 1, 3-7-1988; Ord. No. 311, § 1, 5-3-1993; Ord. 
No. 323, § 1, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 351, § 1, 8-5-1996) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 54-92. - Payment of premiums by city. 
    The city shall pay the group life, health and dental insurance premiums of employees that retire from 
current employment with the city and who are covered by the then existing group insurance policy and 
are eligible for the then existing retirement program and meets the standard eligibility requirements for 
group insurance coverage under the then existing group insurance program. The city reserves the right to 
terminate its obligation to pay any portion of the described premiums. Once the employee qualifies for 
medicare benefits or some other type of health care coverage then the city's group insurance program 
shall become supplemental to the primary provider. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 2, 5-5-1986; Ord. No. 282, § 2, 3-7-1988; Ord. No. 311, § 2, 5-3-1993; Ord. 
No. 323, § 2, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 351, § 2, 8-5-1996) 


Sec. 54-93. - Obligation of city; limitations. 
    This article creates no obligation of the city to provide any type of insurance or pay any premium for 
employees that retire pursuant to this article who are not normally eligible for standard coverage under 
the then existing group life, health and dental insurance program. 
(Ord. No. 323, § 3, 8-15-1994; Ord. No. 351, § 3, 8-5-1996) 


Chapter 58 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from 
repeal, § 1-7(9); any land use or land development regulations saved from repeal, § 1-7(10); 
administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 30; manufactured homes and 
trailers, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, 
ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— County and municipal planning and land development regulation, F.S. § 
163.3161 et seq.; state and regional planning, F.S. ch. 186; state comprehensive plan, F.S. ch. 187. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Designation of local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 


Sec. 58-31. - Creation. 
    A local planning board is hereby created to implement a comprehensive planning program to guide 
future development in the city. The local planning agency shall be called the city planning board. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 1, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 396, § 1, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 58-32. - Membership; terms; vacancy; removal; compensation. 
(a) ?The planning board shall consist of five members, all of whom shall reside in the city and be 
qualified electors who are not officials or employees of the city, and shall be appointed by the city 
commission. 
(b) ?The terms of the members of the planning board shall be for four years. All terms of appointment 
expire on January 1. 
(c) ?Any vacancy in the membership of the planning board shall be filled for the unexpired term by the 
city commission, who shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, upon written 
charges, after a public hearing. The city commission may replace, upon the motion of the remaining 
members of the planning board, without notice or hearing, members of the planning board who have 
failed to attend three consecutive meetings. 
(d) ?The members of the planning board shall receive compensation as a result of their official positions 
to be paid in an amount and in a manner to be determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 2, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 396, § 2, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 58-33. - Quorum. 
    Three members of the planning board shall constitute a quorum to conduct business of the planning 
board. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 3, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 396, § 3, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 58-34. - Organization. 
(a) ?Selection of officers. The planning board shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson 
and one of its members as secretary. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for 
reelection. 
(b) ?Open meetings; notice; minutes. All meetings of the planning board shall be open to the public, and 
all records of the planning board shall be public records pursuant to state statutes. All meetings shall 
be publicly noticed. The secretary of the planning board shall keep minutes of the meetings of the 
board, showing particularly the action taken on each question considered. All minutes shall be filed 
with the city clerk. 
(c) ?Places, dates and times of meetings. The planning board shall meet at a place selected by the city 
commission. The dates and times of regular meetings shall be determined by the city commission by 
resolution. 
(d) ?Special meetings; notice required. Special meetings shall be at the call of either the chairperson, the 
request of any three members of the planning board, or at the request of the mayor. A minimum of 
two calendar days' prior notice shall be required for any special meeting unless waived in writing by 
the members. 
(e) ?Rules of procedure. The planning board shall make its own rules of procedure. All meetings of the 
planning board shall be governed procedurally by the chairperson's rules. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 4, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 58-35. - Powers and duties. 
(a) ?From and after the time when the planning board shall have organized and selected its officers and 
shall have adopted its rules of procedure, the planning board shall have all the powers, duties and 
responsibilities set forth in this section. 
(b) ?The city commission assigns the planning board the general responsibility for the conduct of the 
comprehensive planning program. Specifically the planning board shall: 
(1) ?Be the agency responsible for preparation of the comprehensive plan or plan amendment and 
shall make recommendations to the city commission regarding the adoption or amendment of 
such plan. The city commission in cooperation with the planning board may designate any 
agency, committee, department, or person to prepare the comprehensive plan or plan 
amendment, but final recommendation of the adoption of such plan or plan amendment to the 
city commission shall be the responsibility of the planning board. 
(2) ?Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan and recommend 
to the city commission such changes in comprehensive plan as may from time to time be 
required, including preparation of the periodic reports required by F.S. § 163.3191. 
(3) ?Review proposed land development regulations, land development codes, or amendments 
thereto, and make recommendations to the city commission as to the consistency of the 
proposal with the adopted comprehensive plan or element or portion thereof. 
(4) ?Prepare and recommend to the city commission for adoption rules and regulations governing 
the approval of maps and plats of the subdivision of land within the city in accordance with the 
requirements of F.S. ch. 177. 
(5) ?Report to the city commission when requested the status of the planning program; meet 
annually with the city commission to discuss capital improvement amendments; the city clerk 
shall furnish to the planning board all ordinances, plans and any other information relative to the 
public improvements within the city. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 5, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 396, § 5, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 58-36. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from decisions of the planning board shall be taken to the city commission, provided such 
appeal is filed with the city clerk in writing within ten days of the planning board's decision. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 6, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 396, § 6, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 58-37. - Funding. 
    The planning board shall be funded by the city commission. The planning board shall prepare 
periodic financial reports as requested by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 334, § 7, 11-6-1995; Ord. No. 396, § 7, 10-4-1999) 


Secs. 58-38—58-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 


Sec. 58-61. - Adoption. 
(a) ?In accordance with the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development 
Regulation Act, F.S. §§ 163.3161—163.3243, the city hereby adopts by reference the 
comprehensive plan, including, but not limited to: 
(1) ?Introduction; 
(2) ?Community profile; 
(3) ?Definitions; 
(4) ?Purpose and intent; 
(5) ?Authority; 
(6) ?Scope; 
(7) ?Legal status; 
(8) ?Plan amendments; 
(9) ?Concurrency; 
(10) ?Public participation; 
(11) ?Plan elements, to include among other things the future land use element containing the 
future land use map, the traffic circulation element containing the future traffic circulation map, 
the housing element, the general utilities element, the coastal management element, the 
conservation element, the recreation and open space element, the intergovernmental 
coordination element, and the capital improvements element; 
(12) ?Evaluation and monitoring; and 
(13) ?Concurrency management system. 
(b) ?A copy of the comprehensive plan, as amended, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 2, 5-14-1990) 


Sec. 58-62. - Regulation of development. 
    All future land development within the city shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the 
land development regulations enacted by the city. All actions taken by the city and its agencies, 
commissions or officials shall be consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 3, 5-14-1990) 


Sec. 58-63. - Procedures. 
    Any application for a development order incident to the proposed development or construction of 
improvements on real property located within the city shall be subject to and processed in accordance 
with the comprehensive plan and the appropriate ordinances, resolutions, policies and procedures of the 
city relating to regulation of the land use. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 4, 5-14-1990) 


Sec. 58-64. - Severability. 
    If any section, paragraph, sentence, element or clause of this article or the comprehensive plan is 
declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of 
this article and the comprehensive plan shall be unaffected thereby, and shall remain in full force and 
effect. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 5, 5-14-1990) 


Secs. 58-65—58-90. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE 


Sec. 58-91. - Adoption. 
(a) ?In accordance with the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development 
Regulation Act (F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.), the city hereby adopts by reference the Comprehensive 
Planning and Land Development Regulation Code including, but not limited to, the general 
provisions, administrative procedures, concurrency management, land use districts, development 
standards and sign regulations. A copy of such code, as amended, shall be filed in the office of the 
city clerk. 
(b) ?The land development regulations of the city shall be separated from the comprehensive plan and 
removed from subsection (a) of this section and readopted and redesignated under subsection (b) of 
this section. 
(Ord. No. 296, § 1, 12-3-1990; Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-5-1997) 


Chapter 62 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned, wrecked, junked or disabled vehicles, § 78-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Secondhand dealers and secondary metals recyclers, F.S. ch. 538. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR JUNKYARDS OR FLEA MARKETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 34. 


Sec. 62-31. - Establishing, maintaining or operating. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, company, partnership or any other combination to establish, 
maintain or operate an outdoor junkyard or flea market upon any parcel of land whose sole purpose is the 
buying, trading, storing or selling any used item including, but not limited to, dilapidated furniture, 
appliances, machinery, equipment, building materials, household fixtures, automobile parts, tires or any 
other items which are either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, dented, unfinished, dismantled or 
inoperative condition. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 1, 8-7-1995) 


Sec. 62-32. - Failure to abide by article a public nuisance; abatement; lien; other remedies. 
    Failure to abide by this article is a public nuisance. If a violation of this article has not been abated 
after 30 days' written notice, the city will abate the nuisance and assess a lien for all costs related to the 
proper removal, transportation and disposal of such nuisance. In addition to the abatement procedures, 
the city may impose all other remedies available under the law. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 2, 8-7-1995) 


Secs. 62-33—62-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - JUNK 


Sec. 62-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junk means: 
(1) ?Any wornout and discarded material that is no longer used as a manufactured article. 
(2) ?Rubbish of any kind. 
(3) ?Articles that have outlived their usefulness in their original form, and are commonly gathered up 
and sold to be converted into another product. 
(4) ?Odds and ends that are used or worn out. 
    Place or lot means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 279, § 2, 9-8-1987) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 62-62. - Establishing, maintaining or operating building or lot for purchase, sale or storage of junk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate any building, place or lot for the 
buying, selling or storing of junk within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 13-15; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 9-8-1987) 


Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 535, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 2016, amended Ch. 66 in its entirety to read as herein 
set out. Former Ch. 66, §§ 66-1—66-7, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1972, 
§§ 10-1, 10-5; Ord. No. 256, §§ I, II, 7-5-1983; Ord. No. 365, §§ 1—7, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 377, §§ I—IV, 
11-2-1998. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 34; 
manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 82; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413; resource recovery and management, F.S. § 
403.702 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 66-1. - Purpose. 
    This article, adopted under the provisions and authority of the general laws of Florida, and the 
provisions hereof and all sections contained herein, shall be construed as having been adopted in the 
interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appliance. Some examples are, but not limited to: clothes washers and dryers, dishwashers, water 
heaters, residential furnaces, garbage disposals, trash compactors, conventional and microwave ovens, 
ranges and stoves, air conditioners, dehumidifiers, refrigerators, freezers. 
    Bulky waste. 
(1) ?Yard waste: Large tree or shrubbery cuttings, including, but not limited to, tree limbs and logs 
exceeding ten inches in diameter and/or four feet in length, and small tree stumps up to ten 
inches in diameter. 
(2) ?White goods waste: Discarded appliances, including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, 
washing machines, dryers, bathtubs, commodes and toilets. 
(3) ?Household items: Televisions, computers, small appliances, etc. 
    Cardboard means cardboard, paperboard or pasteboard boxes that have been broken down flat with 
all packing material removed and placed adjacent to the trash container. 
    Commercial establishment means any public or private place, building and/or enterprise devoted in 
whole or in part to a business enterprise, whether nonprofit or profit-making in nature including, but not 
limited to, hotels, motels, office buildings, stores, markets, theatres, hospitals, or other institutional 
buildings, but excluding any structure which constitutes a single-family dwelling unit as defined in this 
section. For the purposes of this article, "commercial establishment" shall include structures including 
three or more dwelling units. 
    Commercial hauler means any person who owns, operates, or leases vehicles for the purpose of 
contracting to collect or transport solid waste and/or source-separated materials from residential, 
commercial, or industrial properties. 
    Commercial bulk container is commonly referred to as a dumpster, and means a container that is 
provided and/or authorized by the city for commercial garbage and trash disposal services. 
    Common area means any area used for placement of yard debris by one or more residents not on 
their own property. 
    Construction and demolition (C&D) waste means building materials and rubble including, but not 
limited to, earth, stone, brick, flooring, lumber, plaster, roofing and any other waste resulting from 
construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of any building, pavement or other structure. Such waste 
materials include trees; tree limbs and tree stumps generated by tree surgeons, landscape, and lawn 
maintenance contactors. 
    Contaminated yard and garden waste pile means any yard and garden waste pile containing material 
other than grass and leaves, tree limbs, palm fronds, and shrubbery cuttings incident to the care of lawn 
and gardens. Collection of contaminated waste requires scheduling of a special pick up service. The 
sorting of special pickup materials is the responsibility of the producer. Failure to sort materials will result 
in code enforcement actions. 
    Director means the Public Works Director of the City of Springfield. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any waste 
into or on any land or water so that the waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be 
emitted into the air, or discharge into any waters, including ground waters. 
    Garbage means every type of refuse accumulation, including animal, fruit, or vegetable matter which 
is subject to decay and production of noxious or offensive odors, or which, during or after decay, may 
serve as a breeding place or as feeding material for germ-carrying insects; specifically included are 
bottles, cans, or other containers or materials which, due to their ability to retain moisture, may serve as 
breeding places for water-breeding insects. 
    Hazardous waste means waste which requires special handling due to its acute or chronic effects on 
air and water quality, on fish, or wildlife, and on the health and welfare of the public, including, but not 
limited to, explosives, pathological wastes; radioactive materials, and acidic, caustic, toxic or highly 
flammable chemicals. 
    Industrial waste means all solid waste which results from industrial process and manufacturing 
operations such as factories, processing plants, repair and cleaning establishments, refineries and 
rendering plants. 
    Nuisance means a use of property or course of conduct that interferes with the legal rights of others 
by causing damage, annoyance, or inconvenience, and as further defined in chapter 34 of this Code. 
    Property owner, occupant or manager means the person, who owns, manages and/or occupies real 
property on which garbage or trash is accumulated and placed for collection by the city. 
    Residential dwelling means any detached single-family or duplex residential unit as defined in the 
zoning codes of the city. Condominiums, patio houses, apartments and other such facilities used for 
residential purposes are classified as commercial establishments unless declared otherwise by the city. 
    Residential garbage container means an approved watertight, leakproof and spillproof can provided 
by the city or its contractor, not exceeding 64 or 96 gallons capacity. 
    Solid waste means garbage, refuse, demolition waste, and other discarded waste materials and 
sludge, in solid, semi-solid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting from industrial, commercial, 
mining and agricultural operations, and from community activities. 
    Solid waste collection means the gathering of solid waste from public or private places. 
    Special pickup material means material other than normal trash and garbage, which requires 
scheduling a special pickup. Materials such as bulky waste and contaminated yard and garden waste 
piles (as defined herein) are specifically included and require a special pickup and must be separated by 
the producer prior to collection. 
    Unacceptable waste means solid waste that does not have collection, processing, or disposal 
capabilities within the City of Springfield. Such waste includes, but is not limited to: tires, paint cans, oil, 
grease, gas, or explosives; hospital, pathological, and biological waste; commercial and industrial 
hazardous waste, as regulated by federal, state, and local law; and chemicals and radioactive materials. 
    Yard rubbish means grass and leaves, tree limbs less than ten inches in diameter and less than four 
feet in length, palm fronds, and shrubbery cuttings incident to the care of lawn and gardens. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-3. - Collection and disposal standards of private collectors and outside collectors. 
(a) ?Requirements during construction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city building 
official for the extensive renovation or modification of a structure, or the construction of a new 
structure, provisions must be made for the on-site storage and handling of refuse. [The director shall 
make the determination for on-site refuse handling due to a structure renovation or modification.] 
(b) ?Procedures for removal of construction and demolition wastes. Homeowner and/or property owners, 
builders, building contractors and construction tradesman and other contractors shall use city 
provided services for removing from the site all excavation, construction and demolition wastes as 
defined in section 66-2 emanating from their work. 
(c) ?Responsibility for removal of waste by producer. It shall be unlawful for any person upon vacating or 
moving from any dwelling, storeroom or any other building situated within the corporate limits to fail 
to remove all garbage, rubbish and debris from such building and premise and grounds appurtenant 
thereto or to fail to place said waste in an approved sanitary container for disposal in accordance 
herewith. Failure of a renter, lessee, and/or tenant to comply with this requirement shall obligate the 
property owner of record or his designee to fulfill the responsibility of compliance with this article. 
(d) ?Transportation over town streets. Collectors of commercial refuse and collectors of refuse collected 
from outside the city desiring to haul over the streets of the city may do so provided they use 
vehicles designed or outfitted so as to prevent the refuse carried therein from being blown, dropped 
or spilled from said vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-4. - Prohibitions. 
(a) ?Waste hazards. Hazardous wastes, infectious wastes, septic tank wastes, or dead animals, shall not 
be placed in garbage cans, bags, or dumpsters for collection by the city. 
(b) ?Unauthorized placement. The placement or scattering of yard clippings, tree limbs and/or other 
refuse in or upon street gutters and/or the street surface, or drainage canal banks is hereby declared 
a nuisance and a danger to storm drainage control and shall be prohibited. 
(c) ?Unauthorized accumulation. Any accumulation of garbage, trash, and/or recyclable material on any 
premises in violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove 
any such existing accumulation of garbage, trash, and/or recyclable material within 48 hours after 
due notice thereof shall be deemed a violation of this article. Upon repeated violations by a property 
owner using a 64 gallon container, in addition to any other actions permitted by this chapter, the 
director may require the property owner to switch to a 96 gallon container. 
(d) ?Public places. No garbage, trash, recyclable material and/or yard and garden waste shall be stored 
in any public place at any time. No garbage, trash, recyclable material, or lawn and garden waste 
shall be stored upon any private property other than that owned or occupied by the individual. No 
common dumping areas are allowed on the public right-of-way. 
(e) ?Location of residential garbage or trash container. No residential garbage, trash, and/or recyclable 
material container shall be placed or maintained upon or adjacent to any street, sidewalk, parkway, 
front yard except as allowed by this article for the purposes of collection thereof. Disabled residents 
can receive "backdoor service" at regular curbside rates, provided that an able bodied person does 
not reside in the same residence. Proof of disability, age or infirmity must be presented at city hall 
and the resident must be approved before this service is available. 
(f) ?Burying. No refuse, waste matter, rubbish or garbage, including, but not limited to, old buildings and 
structures, whether or not such materials are biodegradable, shall be buried on any parcel of private 
property within the city unless properly permitted by required agencies and the City of Springfield. 
(g) ?Burning. No person shall burn or cause to be burned any refuse or waste anywhere within the city 
limits, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(h) ?Pilfering. It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized to do so to open, remove, untie, or to 
interfere with the orderly and legitimate collection of any refuse container or to disturb or scatter 
refuse stored in containers placed for collection and disposal. 
(i) ?Dead animals. It shall be the responsibility of any person occupying property within the city upon 
which a dead animal is found, to notify the city director of public works immediately upon discovery of 
the dead animal. However, in no event will any person allow a dead animal to remain undisposed of 
on his/her premises for more than 12 hours. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-5. - Waste collection fees set by resolution of city commission. 
    The monthly bill for utility services sent to each utilities consumer for city water shall include a charge 
for solid waste removal. This service shall include trash and garbage removal and shall be charged to the 
consumer at a rate prescribed by resolution of the city commission. If the utilities customer is a lessee of 
the premises serviced, or one other than the record owner thereof, the property owner of record shall be 
jointly responsible for the payment of the utilities that will include the fees for waste removal. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION SERVICES 


Sec. 66-6. - Exclusive collection by city. 
    The city or its contractors exclusively shall provide for the collection and disposal of all residential 
solid waste, garbage, trash, yard rubbish and cardboard. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-7. - Mandatory service. 
    Every single-family dwelling, duplex, and multifamily dwelling and all commercial establishments 
within the city, as defined in this chapter, shall subscribe for garbage, trash, yard and garden waste 
collection and disposal services from the city. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-8. - Provision of containers; location; collection schedule. 
(a) ?The city or its approved contractor shall provide each residential occupant with a container in which 
to deposit household garbage. The container shall be located at a point suitable to the occupant, but 
on collection days the occupant shall place the container in the right-of-way of the alley or roadway 
along the usual collection route. The city shall notify all occupants of the collection days along the 
route. The occupant shall remove the container from the alley or roadway within 24 hours of 
collection. 
(b) ?Residential garbage. The city, or its contractor, will collect garbage under the following conditions: 
(1) ?Residential garbage shall be collected as set according to the current contract. 
(2) ?Customers will utilize a 64 or 96 gallon can and only those cans provided by the city or its 
contractors will be collected. 
(3) ?Garbage can consist of paper, boxes, crockery and kitchen waste. 
(4) ?Garbage must be placed into bags if the can is full. 
(c) ?Yard rubbish. 
(1) ?Limbs must not exceed four feet in length and ten inches in diameter. 
(2) ?Bushy limbs must be trimmed to lay flat. 
(3) ?Yard rubbish piles may not exceed four foot wide by four foot high and eight foot long. 
(4) ?Persons exceeding these limits must contact the city public works department to schedule a 
pick-up date and time for removal as a "special service" pick-up as provided herein. 
(5) ?Yard rubbish must be placed on the right-of-way for pick up. But not upon the paved street, 
sidewalk, storm gutter or canal bank. The city will not be responsible for damage to sprinkler 
systems, sprinkler heads, water meters and other objects, including fences, gates and hedges, 
other plants and trees damaged due to yard trash being placed over or piled on or against such 
items as a result of being placed there for collection by the occupants and/or owner of the 
property. 
(6) ?Yard rubbish or trash placed for collection in violation of any section of this chapter, including 
contaminated yard rubbish, shall receive a written notice posted at the residence stating that the 
occupant of the premises must remove same within 48 hours; if the occupant fails to remove the 
yard and garden wastes or trash, the city will pick up this accumulation which is in violation of 
this article and the occupant will be charged for a special pickup, including the cost of any 
sorting of materials/wastes which must be done. This special pickup fee will be added to the 
occupant's monthly utility bill. If there are no city utilities connected to the property an invoice 
will be sent to the owner. 
(7) ?The city may collect yard rubbish following a storm or hurricane upon a schedule to be 
determined by the city. 
(d) ?Bulky wastes . (For example television, couches, and other large items). 
(1) ?Bulky wastes shall be collected separately from all other wastes. It is the responsibility of the 
person or business disposing of bulky wastes to request a special pick-up. Bulky wastes may 
not be placed on the right-of-way for pick up more than 24 hours prior to scheduled special 
pickup. If these items are placed for collection at any other time it will considered a violation and 
the owner will be subject to fines. Collection of bulky wastes is by special pick-up only. 
(2) ?No refrigerator or freezer shall be placed for collection without removal of its door. 
(d) ?Special pickups. Special pickups must be coordinated with the resident and the public works 
department as to time, place, date and items to be picked up. A reasonable fee shall be charged for 
all special pickups, which fee shall bear a reasonable relationship to the volume, difficulty of 
collection, and other relevant factors. 
(1) ?Special pickup fees: To be set by contractor/city. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL COLLECTION SERVICES 


Sec. 66-9. - Service required. 
    The city or its contactors shall provide for the collection and disposal of all solid wastes from 
commercial establishments. Service arrangements shall be approved by the city and all commercial 
garbage shall be collected according to the city's approved category of service. It shall be unlawful for the 
owner or occupant of any commercial establishment in the city to dispose of any solid waste except by 
subscribing to the city's collection disposal service. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-10. - Bulk containers, placement, contents, and collection schedule. 
(a) ?Bulk containers. Commercial businesses shall utilize a "city-or contractor provided" container. 
Based on need, volume and frequency of pickup, commercial customers may elect one or two 96-
gallon cans or two, four, six or eight cubic yard containers. All dumpsters shall be obscured where 
possible. In the event a compaction system is used the city will charge the equivalent of three dumps 
for every pick up performed. 
(b) ?Placement of containers. It will be the responsibility of the property/business owner to provide a 
place for a dumpster to be located on the property at which the dumpster is assigned. 
    This location shall be approved by the director to insure there is enough room to safely operate 
necessary equipment. 
(c) ?Contents of bulk containers. 
(1) ?Hazardous wastes, infectious wastes and/or septic tank wastes as defined in this chapter shall 
not be placed in commercial bulk containers for collection. Substances in this class shall be 
disposed of as prescribed by the director of public works. 
(2) ?Dead animals shall not be placed in bulk containers for regularly scheduled collection, but shall 
be disposed of in a manner prescribed herein. 
(3) ?It will be the responsibility of the business owner to keep the area around the dumpster clean at 
all times. The city is not responsible for any unauthorized garbage or debris placed in or around 
an assigned dumpster. Dumpster lids are to be kept close at all times. A lock may be installed 
on the container at the business owners expense, but the city will at no time be responsible for 
the key or the locking device. 
(4) ?No bulk container shall be so filled as to render impossible its complete closure. 
(d) ?Collection schedule and place. 
(1) ?All commercial garbage and trash shall be collected according to the city's approved category 
of service as established by the public works director or his designee; as established by the 
current waste collection contract. 
(2) ?Commercial garbage and trash shall be placed in such location that the container can be easily 
serviced by the manpower and equipment making the collection. Commercial bulk containers 
shall be located on private property except as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Sec. 66-11. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory 
requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties: 
First violation: Warning or up to $250.00 fine. 
Repeat violations: Can bring fines of up to $500.00 fine amounts will vary upon severity and nature 
of offense. 
(Ord. No. 535, § 1, 11-7-2016) 


Chapter 68 - STORMWATER AND ILLICIT DISCHARGES 


Sec. 68-1. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to reduce the discharge of pollutants from the municipal separate storm 
sewer system (MS4) to surface waters of the state to the maximum extent practicable. This chapter 
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with 
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean: 
    Authorized enforcement agency . City of Springfield Public Works Department including its director 
and any designees of the director or of the mayor. 
    Best management practices . Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house 
keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other 
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, 
receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. Best management practices also include treatment 
practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water 
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Hazardous materials . Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which 
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or 
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or 
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of Stormwater except 
discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit and the following categories of non-stormwater discharges 
provided they do not cause a violation of water quality standards: water line flushing, landscape irrigation, 
diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 
CFR 35.2005(20)), uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources, 
foundation drains, air conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, 
footing drains, lawn watering runoff, water from individual residential car washing, flows from riparian 
habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residual street wash water, and 
discharges or flows from fire fighting activities. 
    Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4 . A conveyance or system of conveyances 
including roads with Stormwater systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, 
constructed channels, or storm drains owned or operated by the City of Springfield, designed or used for 
collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not a combined sewer or part of a publicly owned 
treatment works. 
    Person . Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity 
recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Premises . Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved 
including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Publicly owned treatment works . Any device or system used in the treatment of municipal sewage or 
industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is owned by a state or municipality. This definition includes 
sewers, pipes, or other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works 
providing treatment. 
    Stormwater . Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of 
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-3. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all water entering the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-4. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this 
chapter. Powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated 
by the Director of the City of Springfield Public Works Department or the Mayor, but only if done so in 
writing. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-5. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
    This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other federal, state, or local law. The 
requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other federal, state, or local law. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-6. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made an illicit discharge except an illicit discharge specified in 
writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health or a illicit 
discharge necessary for dye testing after notification to the authorized enforcement agency. If the 
authorized enforcement agency determines that a discharge allowed under the definition of illicit 
discharge or under this section is causing adverse impacts to the MS4, it shall request that the city 
commission modify the illicit discharge definition or eliminate the exception that allows the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-7. - Investigation of suspected illicit discharges. 
    When the authorized enforcement agency suspects that an illicit discharge has occurred or is 
occurring, it shall investigate the discharge and the premises from which the discharge has occurred or is 
occurring. The authorized enforcement agency shall set up devices on public property, such as on a 
public right of way, as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to monitor and 
sample the premises' stormwater discharge in order to evaluate the suspected illicit discharge. It shall be 
a violation of this chapter to interfere with or damage such devices. If the owner or operator of the 
premises does not consent to entry and inspection of a building or the area immediately surrounding it by 
the authorized enforcement agency, the authorized enforcement agency may still enter to inspect or 
sample the suspected illicit discharge if exigent circumstances exist, there is a violation of this chapter 
occurring in plain sight, or after obtaining a search warrant upon probable cause of a violation. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-8. - Citizen response to suspected illicit discharges. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any who is person responsible for a property 
or operation or who is responsible for emergency response for a property or operation has information 
regarding any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in an illicit 
discharge, that person shall take all necessary steps to contain, minimize, and abate the release. In the 
event of a release of hazardous materials that person shall immediately notify emergency response 
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous 
materials, that person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile 
no later than the next business day. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-9. - Violations despite following best management practices. 
    The City of Springfield has adopted best management practices intended to prevent illicit discharges, 
which are in addition to any best management practices required by any federal, state, or local permit or 
authorization. Compliance with these best management practices is required independent of this chapter. 
An illicit discharge that occurs despite compliance with these best management practices is still a 
violation of this chapter unless such illicit discharge is allowed pursuant to section 68-6. The authorized 
enforcement agency shall recommend to the city commission any other best management practices that 
should be adopted by the city commission in order to continue to meet the requirements of the city's 
NPDES MS4 permit. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-10. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
    A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant 
to any part of this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
    Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. In the event of an actual or threatened 
discharge which presents an imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or 
welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the state, the authorized enforcement agency shall issue 
an emergency order to the person responsible for the premises or the discharge to suspend all 
discharges as necessary to prevent the imminent and substantial danger. If the person fails to 
immediately comply with the emergency order or if the violator or person responsible for the premises 
cannot be contacted, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as necessary to prevent or 
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons, including 
immediate suspension of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or both, or other reasonable actions 
to suspend the facility's access to the MS4. 
    Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. After issuing a notice of violation, which includes 
notice of a proposed suspension, and the expiration of the time to appeal, the authorized enforcement 
agency may suspend access to the MS4, including suspension of a facility's water supply, sewer 
connection, or both, or other reasonable actions to suspend the facility's access to the MS4, if such 
suspension would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-11. - Enforcement. 
    An illicit discharge, whether continuing or wholly in the past, constitutes a nuisance under chapter 34 
of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Springfield, Florida. Whenever abatement or remediation ordered 
will be in the nature of environmental cleanup or restoration or repair to the MS4 or waters of the state, 
the authorized enforcement agency shall proceed either under chapter 34 nuisance abatement 
procedures, in a civil action in a court of law, or both. Regardless, whenever the authorized enforcement 
agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the 
authorized enforcement agency shall issue under this chapter a written notice of violation to the 
responsible person ordering any continuing or threatened illicit discharge to immediately cease and 
ordering compliance with this chapter. 
    The notice of violation shall also contain: 
(1) ?The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2) ?The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the 
violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3) ?A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4) ?A description of any remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and 
a time schedule for the completion of such remedial measures; 
(5) ?A statement that an illicit discharge, whether continuing or wholly in the past, constitutes a 
nuisance under chapter 34 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Springfield, Florida and that 
the violator and the property may be subject to a nuisance abatement action at any time and 
that in a nuisance abatement action, the authorized enforcement agency's cost of abatement 
and remediation of the illicit discharge, including any including any abatement or remediation of 
any damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, and including any administrative and legal fees 
and costs, may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed and, 
if not paid, may become a lien against the real property; and 
(6) ?A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to authorized enforcement 
agency by filing a written notice of appeal to the authorized enforcement agency on or before 
the fifth business day following receipt of the notice of violation. 
    Such notice may require: 
(1) ?Any penalty consistent with section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of Springfield, Florida; 
(2) ?Suspension of access to the MS4; 
(3) ?Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(4) ?Implementation of source control or treatment best management practices. 
(5) ?Any other measure consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-12. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized 
enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received on or before the fifth business day from 
receipt of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the authorized enforcement agency or its 
designee shall take place within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The 
decision of the authorized enforcement agency or its designee shall be the final decision of the city but 
the named violator may appeal this decision to a court of appropriate jurisdiction in accordance with the 
procedures and within the time provided by the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for the review of 
administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-13. - Abatement by the city. 
    The authorized enforcement agency may abate and remediate any damage to the MS4 or waters of 
the state at any time. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency will seek to recover its costs of 
abatement and remediation of the illicit discharge, including any including any abatement or remediation 
of any damage to the MS4 or waters of the state, and including any administrative and legal fees and 
costs, it shall do so by proceeding either with a nuisance abatement action under chapter 34 of the Code 
of Ordinances of Springfield, Florida, a civil action in a court of law, or both. Any such action shall be in 
addition to the issuance of a notice of violation under this chapter and enforcement of this chapter. If an 
illicit discharge has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in a notice of violation 
before the time for appeal expires, or, in the event of an appeal, on or before the third business day 
following the date of a decision upholding the existence of a violation, then the authorized enforcement 
agency or its designee may enter the premises and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary 
to abate and remediate the illicit discharge. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in 
possession of any property to refuse to allow the authorized enforcement agency or its designee to enter 
the premises for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Sec. 68-14. - Availability of other relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the 
requirements of this chapter. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies 
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized 
enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies or to petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction 
restraining the person from violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation 
including environmental cleanup or restoration or repair to the MS4 of waters of the state. In lieu of 
enforcement proceedings, assessment of penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the 
authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as, 
but not limited to, storm drain stenciling, maintenance or improvement; ditch maintenance or 
improvement; attendance at compliance workshops; or stream or bay cleanup. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 2, 12-1-2008) 


Chapter 70 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, 
widening or vacating any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(4); any ordinance 
establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(6); 
consumption of alcoholic beverages in public, § 6-5; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; 
manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; obstruction of drainageways, § 50-5; planning, ch. 58; traffic 
and vehicles, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Supplemental and alternative method of making local municipal improvements, 
F.S. ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. ch. 180; uniform minimum standards for design, construction 
and maintenance of public streets, etc., F.S. § 336.045. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 70-1. - Obstructing public ways. 
(a) ?Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the 
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different 
meaning: 
    Street, alley or other public way means the entire right-of-way, whether dedicated or not; provided, 
however, that such sections shall not apply to undedicated streets or alleys or other public ways which 
have been in use by the public for less than one year prior to the placing of such obstruction or the 
parking of such vehicle. Streets, alleys and public ways shall be construed to include all passageways 
that, regardless of width, are used generally for the passage of persons or motor vehicles, and all 
passageways that have been previously dedicated as streets, alleys or other public ways, whether 
actually in use or not. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect a fence, set posts or place any other obstruction 
whatsoever of a permanent nature in any street, alley or other public way of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 15-1) 


Secs. 70-2—70-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM 


Sec. 70-31. - Authority and purpose. 
    This article provides for the regulation of road names and addresses in the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 404, § A, 7-3-2000) 


Sec. 70-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a building which is clearly incidental or subordinate to and customarily 
utilized in connection with a principal building located on the same lot. 
    Building front means an area of the building which faces the public or private way pursuant to which 
the building is numbered. 
    Driveway means a paved or unpaved vehicular way that provides access from a public or private 
street to adjacent residential or nonresidential land uses. A driveway will be presumed to be a local street 
when such driveway provides access to more than two individual lots or parcels intended to be sold to 
separate owners. 
    Grid system means a series of designated north/south parallel lines intersecting a second set of 
east/west parallel lines within one square mile area (i.e., section), as indicated on the official property 
numbering maps of the county. 
    Numbering system means a uniform method of assigning and coordinating the addresses of 
buildings and properties based on a designated grid system contained in the official property numbering 
maps of the county. 
    Occupant means any person, firm, entity, partnership, trust, corporation, association, or other 
organization, who is occupying or leasing a building or other property for a period exceeding 30 days. 
    Owner means any and all persons, firms, entities, partnerships, trusts, corporations, associations, or 
other organizations who own the fee title to, or have an undivided interest in, any building or property 
which is subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Principal building means any structure which is designed, built or used for the support, enclosure, 
shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind for any residential, commercial 
or industrial purpose. 
    Road or street means a public or private vehicular thoroughfare which affords primary means of 
access to abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 404, § B, 7-3-2000) 


Sec. 70-33. - Posting of numbers. 
    All buildings in the city shall have the assigned building number properly displayed, whether or not 
mail is delivered to such building or property. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of each 
building in the city to post the assigned building number on the property in the following manner: 
(1) ?The building number shall be affixed to the front of the building, and to a separate structure in 
front of the building such as a mailbox, post, wall, or fence in such a manner so as to be clearly 
visible and legible to the public or private way on which the building fronts. There shall be no 
objects or vegetation obstructing the visibility of the numbers. 
(2) ?If the building is not visible from the road or street due to it's proximity or due to obscuring by 
vegetation or any other object the address must be posted on the building and at the 
intersection of the building driveway and the road or street where the driveway connects. 
(3) ?If there is no driveway and the building's visibility is obstructed as stated above the address will 
be posted, clearly visible from the street or road on which the number was assigned. Such 
posting shall be securely mounted on a permanently constructed sign, post or wall of sufficient 
size to accommodate the following requirements: 
a. ?On a residential address the numbers shall be no less than four inches in height and a 
corresponding width ratio. Reflective numbers are encouraged. 
b. ?The numerals shall be a highly visible contrast to the immediate background upon which 
they are posted. 
Numerals for all commercial buildings shall be no less than six inches in height and a 
corresponding width ratio. The numerals for a commercial building shall be placed on the 
business sign in front of the commercial building or shopping center as well as on the 
building itself. There shall be no obstruction existing or created which obstructs the view of 
the numerals. 
1. ?Placement of the numerals on individual addresses within a shopping plaza or 
shopping center shall be clearly visible from the parking lot or entrance connecting to 
the road or street on which the number was assigned. The numerals shall be placed 
on or above the front door entrance to the business in order to provide uniformity. 
2. ?Commercial addresses located within a shopping plaza, center or complex shall also 
have their address posted on or above the back entrance door of the business in the 
same manner as stated above. 
c. ?Numbers placed on mailboxes shall be posted on both sides of the mailbox so that the 
numerals are clearly visible from both directions of travel on the street in front of the 
building or property for which the address is posted. The numerals must meet size 
specification. If the mailbox is not in front of the property and on the same side of the road 
or street as the property then posting the mailbox with the address numbers does not 
satisfy this article. If the mailbox for the property is grouped or clumped in a group of other 
mailboxes, including centralized mailboxes, or the address posted on the mailbox is or 
would be obscured, the posting of the address on the mailbox does not satisfy this article. 
If the property's mailbox is used for the posting of address numerals the location of the 
mailbox must clearly indicate which property it belongs to. It is not the intent of this article, 
in the use of mailboxes for posting addresses, to control or interfere with the delivery of 
mail. Any postal regulations concerning the numbering or placement of a mailbox should 
take precedence over modifications made by the owner to satisfy this article. The posting 
of address numerals on mailboxes will satisfy the requirement of this article only if the 
posting is done to the specifications of this article. Numerals of an address must always be 
posted on the primary building of the property. 
(Ord. No. 404, § C, 7-3-2000) 


Secs. 70-34—70-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - CITY-OWNED ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY 


Sec. 70-61. - Permit required. 
    Except as provided in section 70-62, no person shall construct or maintain any structure, facility or 
utility or make any other use of city-owned road rights-of-way unless and until a permit has been issued 
by the city commission approving and authorizing such construction, maintenance or use. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 2, 8-2-1999) 


Sec. 70-62. - Exceptions. 
    The following shall be exceptions from the requirements of section 70-61: 
(1) ?Improvement of city-owned rights-of-way by a property owner of such rights-of-way adjacent to 
his property with landscaping, shrubbery or grass which is not inconsistent with the use of the 
road rights-of-way for road purposes. 
(2) ?The parking of motor vehicles on that portion of the rights-of-way not used as traffic lanes is not 
otherwise prohibited. 
(3) ?Use of city-owned road rights-of-way for road and traffic purposes other than such purposes 
involving vehicles of such weight or of such characteristic (for example, metal tires or treads) as 
may, in the opinion of the city engineer, damage the road surface. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 3, 8-2-1999) 


Sec. 70-63. - Penalties. 
    A violation of this article is a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted in the name of the state in a 
court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof, and upon conviction shall 
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days 
or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 6, 8-2-1999) 


Sec. 70-64. - City utility accommodation guide. 
    The city commission shall specify the policies, standards and requirements and the procedures to be 
satisfied to secure a permit pursuant to this article in a document to be approved and adopted on motion 
of the city commission upon recommendation of the city engineer. Such document shall be entitled the 
"City of Springfield Utility Accommodation Guide" and shall be made available to the public. Such guide 
may be amended from time to time by motion of the city commission upon recommendation of the city 
engineer. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 4, 8-2-1999) 


Sec. 70-65. - Nonpermitted structures, facilities or utilities. 
    Any structure, facility or utility constructed or maintained on city-owned road rights-of-way in violation 
of this article shall be removed from such rights-of-way and such rights-of-way shall be restored to the 
conditions which existed immediately prior to the construction or maintenance of such structure, facility or 
utility at the expense of the person constructing, maintaining or owning such structure, facility or utility. If 
such structure, facility or utility has not been removed and the rights-of-way restored as required by this 
section within ten days of demand by the city commission to do so, then such structure, facility or utility 
may be removed by the city commission at the expense of the person constructing, maintaining or owning 
such structures, facilities or utilities. If such person does not pay to the city commission the cost of 
removing the structures, facilities or utilities and restoring the rights-of-way as required by this section 
within ten days of demand, the cost shall be and constitute a lien against all property owned by such 
person in the county, to be foreclosed in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 393, § 5, 8-2-1999) 


Chapter 74 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying taxes saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; ad valorem taxation, F.S. 
ch. 192 et seq. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 74-1. - Additional homestead exemption for persons 65 years of age or older. 
(a) ?In accordance with section 6(d), Art. VII of the Constitution of the State of Florida, and pursuant to 
F.S. § 196.075, the City of Springfield does hereby allow an additional homestead exemption of 
$25,000.00 for any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon 
his or her permanent residence, who has attained age 65 and whose household income does not 
exceed the income limitation described in subsection (b) below. 
(b) ?Pursuant to the formula contained in F.S. § 196.075(3), the income exemption for 2014 ad valorem 
taxes is $27,994.00. The income limitation of $27,994.00 shall be adjusted annually, beginning 
January 1, 2015, and every January 1 thereafter, by the percentage change in the average cost-of-
living index in the period January 1 through December 31 of the immediate prior year compared with 
the same period for the year prior to that. The index is the average of the monthly consumer-price-
index figures for the stated 12-month period relative to the United States as a whole, issued by the 
United States Department of Labor. 
(c) ?This additional homestead exemption of $25,000.00 applies only to taxes levied by the City of 
Springfield including its dependent special districts and municipal service taxing units. 
(d) ?Any taxpayer claiming the exemption must annually submit to the property appraiser, not later than 
March 1, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the department of 
revenue. 
(e) ?The ordinance from which this section was derived shall be delivered to the property appraiser no 
later than December 1, 2014. Any person entitled to the homestead exemption in F.S. § 196.031, 
may apply for and receive additional homestead exemption as provided herein. Receipt of the 
additional homestead exemption provided for herein shall be subject to the provision of F.S. §§ 
196.131 and 196.161, if applicable. 
(f) ?If title is held jointly with right of survivorship, the person residing on the property and otherwise 
qualifying may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead exemption. 
(Ord. No. 522, §§ 1—6, 11-3-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 522, §§ 1—6, adopted Aug. 7, 2017, added provisions to the Code, but 
did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions 
have been included as § 74-1. 


Secs. 74-2—74-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - LOCAL OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— License for amusement parks and carnivals, § 10-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local occupational license taxes, F.S. ch. 205. 


Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business, profession, and occupation do not include the customary religious, charitable or 
educational activities of nonprofit religious, nonprofit charitable and nonprofit educational institutions in 
this state, which institutions are more particularly defined and limited as follows: 
(1) ?Religious institutions means churches and ecclesiastical or denominational organizations or 
established physical places for worship in this state at which nonprofit religious services and 
activities are regularly conducted and carried on, and also means church cemeteries. 
(2) ?Educational institutions means state tax-supported or parochial, church and nonprofit private 
schools, colleges or universities conducting regular classes and courses of study required for 
accreditation by or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, the state 
department of education, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. Nonprofit libraries, art 
galleries and museums open to the public are defined as educational institutions and eligible for 
exemption. 
(3) ?Charitable institutions means only nonprofit corporations operating physical facilities in this 
state at which are provided charitable services, a reasonable percentage of which are without 
cost to those unable to pay. 
    Classification means the method by which a business or group of businesses is identified by size or 
type, or both. 
    Local occupational license means the method by which the city grants the privilege of engaging in or 
managing any business, profession or occupation within its jurisdiction. It does not mean any fees or 
licenses paid to any board, commission or officer for permits, registration, examination or inspection. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, these are deemed to be regulatory and in addition to, but not in lieu of, 
any local occupational license imposed under the provisions of this article. 
    Taxpayer means any person liable for taxes imposed under the provisions of this article; any agent 
required to file and pay any taxes imposed hereunder; and the heirs, successors, assignees and 
transferees of any such person or agent. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, F.S. § 205.022. 


Sec. 74-32. - Violations, penalty. 
(a) ?Any person engaging in or conducting a business, and any other persons, firms or corporations who 
shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this article, shall upon conviction thereof be punished 
by a fine of not more than $100.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by 
both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court and provided that each day any such 
person, firm or corporation shall fail to report and/or pay as required by this article, such failure shall 
be considered a separate offense and any person who is required by this article to furnish 
information who shall be guilty of furnishing false information shall be guilty of a violation of this 
article and subject to the penalties provided in this section. 
(b) ?Any person who engages in any business, occupation or profession covered by F.S. ch. 205, who 
does not pay the required occupational license tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, 
and who does not obtain the required occupational license is subject to civil actions and penalties, 
including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional facilities costs incurred as a result of 
collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 15, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-33. - License required; payment of tax, compliance with article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to exercise any of the privileges or to carry on 
or engage in or conduct any of the businesses, occupations, or professions, specifically enumerated in 
this article without paying a license tax at the time and in the amount provided in this article, or fail to 
make reports to the city clerk as provided in this article, or to violate any other provision of this article. In 
order to be granted the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation 
within the city, every person, corporation, partnership or other business entity (referred to as "person") is 
required to obtain an occupational license. Any person who exercises any of the privileges of carrying on, 
engaging in, managing or conducting any business, occupation, or profession within the city must pay a 
license tax at the time and in the amount as provided in this article. 
The license provides regulatory information to the city so that the city can maintain the health, safety and 
welfare of the citizens. An occupational license tax is hereby levied on any person who maintains a 
permanent business location or branch office within the city for the exercise of any of the privileges of 
carrying on, engaging in, managing or conducting any business, occupation, or profession within the city. 
Alternatively, any person who does not qualify under the above provision and who transacts any business 
or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if such license tax is not prohibited by 
section 8 of article I of the United States Constitution, must comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 1, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-34. - License permit to be issued before beginning business. 
    Each and every person or place of business subject to the payment of the license fees or 
occupational license tax imposed by this article, shall secure a license permit from the city clerk, which 
shall authorize them to engage in such business or occupation upon compliance with all the provisions of 
this article. The city clerk shall prescribe the form of the license permit application and the license permit. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 2, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-35. - Compliance with article provisions by corporations. 
    It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of all corporations to see that all corporations comply 
with the provisions of this article; and all officers or agents of any corporation required by this article to be 
licensed, which shall carry on or conduct any business without having made the payment and otherwise 
complied with the terms of this article, shall be subject to the same penalty or penalties imposed upon 
persons violating the provisions of this article. The members of any firm who fail or refuse to comply with 
the provisions of this article shall likewise be subject to the same penalty or penalties imposed upon 
persons violating the provisions of this article. In the absence of any owner, proprietor, manager or agent, 
any person operating or in charge of any business being conducted without the requirements of this 
article having been complied with, shall be subject to the same penalty or penalties imposed upon 
persons violating provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 3, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-36. - Requirement to report status of fictitious name registration. 
    As a prerequisite to receiving a local occupational license under this article or transferring a business 
license under section 74-41, the applicant or new owner must present to the city either: 
(1) ?A copy of the applicant's or new owner's current fictitious name registration, issued by the state 
division of corporations of the department of state; or 
(2) ?A written statement, signed by the applicant or new owner, which sets forth the reason that the 
applicant or new owner need not comply with the Fictitious Name Act. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.023. 


Sec. 74-37. - Posting license. 
    It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep the license 
posted in a prominent place on the premises of the business. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 4, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-38. - Separate licenses required for separate locations. 
    If any person operates any of the businesses provided for in this article at more than one location, 
each location shall be considered a separate business and a separate license therefor is required unless 
otherwise provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 5, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-39. - Occupations falling into more than one classification. 
    When a person's occupation, profession or business falls into more than one occupational license 
classification as determined by the city clerk, such occupation, business, profession or privilege shall be 
required to comply with the license required of each such classification or privilege. Each classification 
must be licensed and reflected on the license. Classifications shall be determined by the city commission 
by resolution and shall be adopted from time to time as needed. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 6, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-40. - Transfer of licenses. 
    All business licenses may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the 
business upon payment of a transfer fee of $10.00 and presentation of evidence of the sale and the 
original license. Upon written request and presentation of the original license, any license may be 
transferred from one location to another location in the same city upon payment of a transfer fee of 
$10.00. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 7, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-41. - Licenses not to affect other taxes or permit fees. 
    Licenses imposed and collected under this article shall not be construed to exempt the payor from 
liability for other forms of taxation on property used in the licensed business, occupation, or profession 
nor shall it exempt the payor from liability for payment of other taxes or permit fees set forth in any other 
section of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 8, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-42. - Nuisance. 
    No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance or is in 
violation due to noncompliance of acknowledged articles or articles of agreement established prior to the 
issuance, renewal or reissuance of an occupational license. All licensed persons, firms or companies 
must comply with the Code of Ordinances established by the city commission which are subject to 
change from time to time. Operating a business other than what's permitted on an issued license is cause 
for revocation and cancellation of any prior issued license and otherwise constitutes a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 9, 3-3-1997; Ord. No. 397, § 9, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 74-43. - Issuance of licenses; signing, recording. 
(a) ?All licenses shall be made out, signed, and issued by the city clerk or designee upon payment of the 
license tax, and a list of all such licenses issued shall be preserved, showing the date of issuance, 
the name of the party to whom issued, the number of the license, and the nature of the business or 
occupation licensed. Prior to issuing a license, the city clerk or designee must verify compliance of 
the business, occupation or profession's location in relation to the city comprehensive plan and land 
development regulations. No license for the privilege of carrying on, engaging or conducting any 
business, occupation, vocation, profession or trade shall be issued, renewed or transferred where 
such activity, or any building or structure used in connection with such activity, is in violation of any 
applicable zoning, building, safety or health code of the city. 
(b) ?Any occupation or business which is operated from a property whose principle use is residential will 
be classified as a "home occupation" and subject to the guidelines and definition given in the city 
comprehensive plan and land development regulation. All licenses issued to occupations and 
businesses classified as "home occupations" will be so annotated in clearly understood print. 
Continuance of the license will be predicated on compliance with all applicable governing codes. In 
order to approve the occupational license application, the city clerk will verify that: 
(1) ?The business activity constitutes a home occupation or a home office of convenience as 
defined in the city land development regulation. 
(2) ?The license application complies with the provisions of this article, the city comprehensive plan, 
the city land development regulations and other applicable law. If the city clerk finds that the 
occupational license application does not comply with the aforementioned, then the application 
shall be disapproved. If the license applicant disagrees with the determination, a written appeal 
can be made within 30 days to the city commission, whose determination shall be final. The city 
clerk or the clerk's designee shall maintain a list of all licenses issued showing the date of 
issuance, the name of the party to whom the license is issued, the number of the license and 
the nature of the home occupation licensed to that applicant. 
(c) ?The city may require proof of compliance with trade and other competency requirements. Failure to 
produce proof will constitute grounds for restriction or withdrawal of the city occupational license for 
that business based on review by the city clerk or city attorney. 
(d) ?Each application for issuance, renewal or transfer of a license to another person or to another 
location shall contain the name and street address of the business, occupation, profession, vocation 
or trade, the owner of the premises if different from the applicant, a general description of the 
business activity to be conducted and an affirmation by the applicant or his duly authorized 
representative, to the best of his knowledge and belief, that the business activity and any building or 
structure used in connection with such activity, is in compliance with all applicable zoning, building, 
safety or health codes of the city, county and state. Application shall be made upon such forms as 
may be prescribed by the city clerk. 
(e) ?Unless otherwise arranged, new or renewal licenses must be picked up within 30 days or will be 
considered null and void. Reapplication and review will be required. 
(f) ?The provisions of this section shall be cumulative to all other enforcement remedies for zoning, 
building, safety and health codes, and the issuance of any occupational license by the city shall not 
limit or restrict authority of the city to enforce its zoning, building, safety or health codes as otherwise 
provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 10, 3-3-1997; Ord. No. 397, § 10, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 74-44. - License renewals. 
(a) ?All license renewals shall be sold beginning August 1 of each year and shall be due and payable on 
or before September 30 of each year. Every license expires on September 30 of the succeeding 
year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax shall be due and payable on or before 
the first working day in October. 
(b) ?Licenses that are not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject to a delinquency 
penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each 
subsequent month of delinquency until the end of the calendar year, December 31. However, the 
total delinquency penalty may not exceed 25 percent of the occupational license tax for the 
delinquent establishment. 
(c) ?If a person, corporation, partnership or other business entity owes the city for past due occupational 
license fees, the outstanding fees plus applicable penalties must be paid prior to renewal of the 
license at the rates included in this article. If outstanding fees and penalties are not paid by 
December 31 of the then current year, the license will be considered as canceled, not to be renewed 
without payment of all assessed penalties. Renewal will require resubmission and review according 
to rules in effect at that time. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 11, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-45. - Computation of tax based on quantity. 
    When the amount of a license tax is based upon or measured by the amount of floor space, the 
seating capacity, the number of employees, the number of units of equipment, or any other units of 
measurement, the license tax shall be due and payable according to the greatest amount of floor space, 
the highest seating capacity, the greatest number of employees, the greatest number of units of 
equipment, and the greatest number of any other units of measurement, employed or used during any 24 
hour period of the license year. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 12, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-46. - Vending and amusement machines. 
    The business premises where a coin-operated or token-operated vending machine that dispenses 
products, merchandise or services, or where an amusement or game machine is operated must ensure 
that any required occupational license for the machine is secured. The term "vending machine" does not 
include coin-operated telephone sets owned by persons who are in the business of providing local 
exchange telephone service and who pay the occupational license under the category designated for 
telephone companies or a pay telephone service provider certified pursuant to F.S. § 364.3375. The 
license tax for vending and amusement machines must be assessed based on the highest number of 
machines located on the business premises on any single day during the previous licensing year or, in 
the case of new businesses, be based on an estimate for the current year. Replacement of one vending 
machine with another machine during a licensing year does not affect the tax assessment for that year, 
unless the replacement machine belongs to an occupational license tax classification that requires a 
higher tax rate. For the first year in which the city assesses an occupational license tax on vending 
machines, each business owning machines located in the city must notify the city, upon request, of the 
location of such machines. Each business owning machines must provide notice of the provisions of this 
section to each affected business premises where the machines are located. The business premises 
must secure the license if it is not otherwise secured. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.0537. 


Sec. 74-47. - Exemptions—Motor vehicles. 
    Vehicles used by any person licensed under this article for the sale and delivery of tangible personal 
property at either wholesale or retail from his place of business on which a license is paid shall not be 
construed to be separate places of business, and no license may be levied on such vehicles or the 
operators thereof as salespersons or otherwise. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.063. 


Sec. 74-48. - Same—Farm, aquacultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural, and 
tropical fish farm products. 
(a) ?No local occupational license shall be required of any natural person for the privilege of engaging in 
the selling of farm, aquacultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural or tropical fish 
farm products, or products manufactured therefrom, except intoxicating liquors, wine or beer, when 
such products were grown or produced by such natural person in the state. 
(b) ?A wholesale farmers' produce market shall have the right to pay a tax of not more than $200.00 for 
a license that will entitle the market's stall tenants to engage in the selling of agricultural and 
horticultural products therein, in lieu of such tenants being required to obtain individual local 
occupational licenses to so engage. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.064. 


Sec. 74-49. - Same—Nonresident persons regulated by the state department of business and 
professional regulation. 
    If any person engaging in or managing a business, profession or occupation regulated by the state 
department of business and professional regulation has paid an occupational license tax for the current 
year to the county or municipality in the state where the person's permanent business location or branch 
office is maintained, no other local governing authority may levy an occupational license tax, or any 
registration or regulatory fee equivalent to the occupational license tax, on the person for performing work 
or services on a temporary or transitory basis in another municipality or county. In no event shall any work 
or services performed in a place other than the county or municipality where the permanent business 
location or branch office is maintained be construed as creating a separate business location or branch 
office of that person for the purposes of this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.065. 


Sec. 74-50. - Same—Certain disabled persons, the aged and widows with minor dependents. 
(a) ?All disabled persons physically incapable of manual labor, widows with minor dependents and 
persons 65 years of age or older, with not more than one employee or helper, and who use their own 
capital only, not in excess of $1,000.00, shall be allowed to engage in any business or occupation in 
the city if they reside in the county without being required to pay for a license. The exemption 
provided by this section shall be allowed only upon the certificate of the county physician, or other 
reputable physician, that the applicant claiming the exemption is disabled, the nature and extent of 
the disability being specified therein, and in case the exemption is claimed by a widow with minor 
dependents, or a person over 65 years of age, proof of the right to the exemption shall be made. Any 
person entitled to the exemption provided by this section shall, upon application and furnishing of the 
necessary proof, be issued a license which shall have plainly stamped or written across the face of 
such license the fact that it is issued under this section, and the reason for the exemption shall be 
written thereon. 
(b) ?In no event under this or any other law shall any person, veteran or otherwise, be allowed any 
exemption whatsoever from the payment of any amount required by law for the issuance of a license 
to sell intoxicating liquors or malt and vinous beverages. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.162. 


Sec. 74-51. - Same—Disabled veterans. 
    Any person exempted from the payment of any license tax, or part thereof, by F.S. § 205.171, shall 
be exempt to the same extent from the payment of any city license tax. 


Sec. 74-52. - Same—Religious tenets. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a license for practicing the religious tenets of any 
church. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.191. 


Sec. 74-53. - Same—Charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service or other organizations; 
occasional sales; fundraising. 
    No occupational license shall be required of any charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service 
or other such organization when the organization makes occasional sales or engages in fundraising 
projects when the projects are performed exclusively by the members thereof and when the proceeds 
derived from the activities are used exclusively in the charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic and 
service activities of the organization. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.192. 


Sec. 74-54. - Same—Mobile home setup operations. 
    A duly licensed mobile home dealer or a duly licensed mobile home manufacturer, or an employee of 
such dealer or manufacturer, who performs setup operations as defined in F.S. § 320.822 is not required 
to be licensed to engage in such operations. However, such dealer or manufacturer shall be required to 
obtain a local occupational license for his permanent business location or branch office, which license 
shall not require for its issuance any conditions other than those required by F.S. ch. 320. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.193. 


Sec. 74-55. - Prerequisites for issuance of license—Exhibition of state license or registration. 
(a) ?Any person applying for a local occupational license for the first time to practice any profession 
regulated by the state department of business and professional regulation, or any board or 
commission thereof, must exhibit an active state certificate, registration or license, or proof of copy of 
the same, before such local occupational license may be issued. 
(b) ?The city clerk shall not renew such license unless such person can exhibit an active state certificate, 
registration or license. 
(c) ?This section shall not apply to F.S. §§ 489.113, 489.117, 489.119, 489.131, 489.511, 489.513, 
489.521 or 489.537. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.194. 


Sec. 74-56. - Same—State grant of inspection or permit for custom animal slaughtering or animal 
product processing establishment. 
    The city clerk may not issue an occupational license to any business or establishment regulated 
under F.S. §§ 585.70—585.96 until a grant of inspection or a custom slaughtering or processing 
establishment permit has been issued to the applicant for the occupational license by the state 
department of agriculture and consumer services. The business or establishment must present its grant 
of inspection or permit before the occupational license may be issued. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.1951. 


Sec. 74-57. - Same—State permit for pharmacies and pharmacists. 
    The city clerk may not issue an occupational license to operate a pharmacy unless the applicant 
shall first exhibit a current permit issued by the state board of pharmacy. However, no such occupational 
license shall be required in order to practice the profession of pharmacy. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.196. 


Sec. 74-58. - Same—State license for assisted living facilities. 
    The city clerk may not issue an occupational license for the operation of an assisted living facility 
pursuant to F.S. ch. 400, pt. III without first ascertaining that the applicant has been licensed by the state 
department of health and rehabilitative services to operate such facility at the specified location or 
locations. The state department of health and rehabilitative services shall furnish to local agencies 
responsible for issuing occupational licenses sufficient instructions for making the above required 
determinations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.1965. 


Sec. 74-59. - Same—State license for pest control. 
    The city clerk may not issue an occupational license to any pest control business coming under F.S. 
ch. 482, unless a current license has been procured from the state department of agriculture and 
consumer services for each of its business locations in the city. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.1967. 


Sec. 74-60. - Same—State license, registration or letter of exemption for health studios and ballroom 
dance studios. 
    The city clerk may not issue or renew an occupational license for the operation of a health studio 
pursuant to F.S. §§ 501.012—501.019 or ballroom dance studio pursuant to F.S. § 501.143, unless such 
business exhibits a current license, registration or letter of exemption from the state department of 
agriculture and consumer services. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.1969. 


Sec. 74-61. - Same—State registration or letter of exemption for sellers of travel. 
    The city clerk may not issue or renew an occupational license to engage in business as a seller of 
travel pursuant to F.S. ch. 559, pt. XI unless such business exhibits a current registration or letter of 
exemption from the state department of agriculture and consumer services. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.1971. 


Sec. 74-62. - Same—State license, registration or affidavit of exemption for telemarketing businesses. 
    The city clerk may not issue or renew an occupational license for the operation of a telemarketing 
business under F.S. §§ 501.604 and 501.608, unless such business exhibits a current license or 
registration from the state department of agriculture and consumer services or a current affidavit of 
exemption. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.1973. 


Sec. 74-63. - Revocation and cancellation of license. 
    In addition to the other penalties provided in the city's Code of Ordinances or in addition to any other 
remedy provided for the enforcement of this article, any person violating any provision of this article shall 
be subject to license revocation. Upon the conviction of any person, firm or corporation of violation of any 
provision of this article, the city clerk or designee may, in their discretion, revoke and cancel the license of 
the person, firm or corporation so convicted. The renewal or reissuance of the license shall be in the 
discretion of the city commission upon appeal. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 11, 7-5-1983; Ord. No. 358, § 14, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-64. - Conflicts in established license fees. 
    If there is a conflict in this article as to the amount of any license tax applicable to any particular 
classification, then the higher fee will be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 16, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-65. - When license due and payable; prorating fees. 
    The license taxes required by this article shall be due and payable on October 1 of each year unless 
otherwise provided in this article, except that a business that shall begin between April 1 and October 1 
may secure a one-half year license for one-half of the amount. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 17, 3-3-1997; Ord. No. 397, § 17, 10-4-1999) 


Sec. 74-66. - Action by city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall have the authority to bring or cause to be brought all such suits and actions and 
take all such proceedings and steps as may be necessary for the recovery of the license taxes imposed 
by this article. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 18, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-67. - Proceeds to go to general fund. 
    All monies collected from the license taxes and concession licenses imposed in this article shall be 
deposited by the tax collector of the city to the general fund account. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 19, 3-3-1997) 


Sec. 74-68. - Amounts of license taxes. 
    A license tax is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person exercising the privileges 
of carrying on or engaging in businesses, professions, or occupations specifically enumerated in this 
section in the amounts as fixed in this section; each such amounts, unless otherwise specifically stated, 
being the amount payable as a license tax for exercising such privileges or carrying on or engaging in 
such business, profession or occupation mentioned for each, and it shall be unlawful for any person to 
carry on or engage in any business, occupation or profession prescribed and designated in this section 
without having first paid the license tax as provided in this section or complied with the terms of this 
section, as follows: 
A 
ABSTRACT COMPANIES: Persons, firms, corporations or associations preparing abstracts and 
charging a fee therefor, or giving legal advice with such abstracts, per year, $120.00. 
ACCOUNTANTS: See AUDITING. 
ADDING MACHINES: Agents, representatives or dealers, where it is the principal business, 
including repairs and service, per year, $60.00. 
ADVERTISING AGENTS OR AGENCIES: 
Persons, firms or corporations, per year, $60.00. 
Each person, firm or corporation or agent for same, contracting for advertising in streetcars, 
buses and taxicabs, per year, $60.00. 
Signs, electrical or mechanical, billboards, or other structures, advertising other than proprietor's 
business, each sign, per year, $42.00 plus per sign/device, $12.00. 
Solicitors for radio and television, per solicitor, per year, $42.00. 
Automobile, advertising for profit, with or without loudspeaker, per day, $6.00; per year, $84.00. 
AGENCY: 
Commercial or persons, firms or corporations, or associations, giving information as to credit 
rating or standing of individuals or firms, per year, $120.00. 
Collection, per year, $42.00. 
Canvasser or solicitor, alone or in connection with other business, or representing local 
merchant, per year, $42.00. 
Steamship, per year, $120.00. 
Selling stamps to merchants for sales promotion purposes, per year, $120.00. 
AGENTS: 
Soliciting or taking orders for marble or stone quarry or yards, per year, $42.00. 
Or brokers, for sale of stocks and bonds, per year, $42.00. 
Travel, per year, $42.00. 
AIRPLANE TICKET OFFICE: Each, sale of tickets on own or other lines, per year, $42.00. 
AMUSEMENT PARKS AND CARNIVALS: 
Amusement rides and free attractions: 
Scope: No activities or attractions shall be included in the license required by this 
section except that form of amusement known as rides and free attractions. 
License application; approval by city commission: No license shall be issued, as 
provided in this article until the applicant therefor shall file a written 
application to the legislative body, which application shall show the name 
and address of the applicant, and the legal description of the location where 
the amusement park, or carnival, and the like, is expected to be located. 
The license shall not be issued by the city clerk until such written application 
has been approved in writing by the legislative body and endorsed thereon. 
Fee, term: Unless otherwise provided by section 74-51, licenses under this section shall be 
$120.00 per year for the license year from the 30th day of the month preceding the 
month in which this article becomes effective and shall be only on an annual basis. 
Licenses required for concessions, shows: 
Concessions: For attractions commonly known as concessions, there shall be 
paid a license tax of $360.00 per week. Such license shall be required for 
each concession, separately. 
Shows: For attractions commonly, known as shows, there shall be paid a license 
tax of $360.00 per week. Such license tax shall be required for each show, 
separately. 
Application, approved by legislative body: No license required by this section 
may be issued until the applicant has met the requirements of this 
subsection. 
When license tax payable. The annual license herein imposed shall be paid, and the 
license secured before the amusement park, or carnival, and the like, shall be opened 
for business. 
Revocation of licenses. The city, by and through its city commission, shall have the 
authority and right to revoke any such license granted under the provisions of this 
article should it develop that any such amusement park, and the like, is carrying on 
obscene shows, gambling, or permitting such to be carried on, and shall have the right 
to revoke such license if such amusement park permits any unlawful enterprise or 
acts to be carried on in such park and carnival. 
ANIMAL BOARDING: Per year, $60.00. 
APARTMENT HOUSES AND OTHER RENTAL PROPERTIES (Rental/Lease): Multifamily dwellings, 
duplex, triplex, quadraplex, apartments, single family dwellings, houses, townhouses, 
condominiums, and mobile homes, but not hotels and motels, pay per year, $25.00 or $12.00 
per unit, whichever amount is greater. It is the responsibility of all persons or entities that own 
two or more applicable rental properties to pay these fees. 
ARCHITECTS: Each person, firm or member of firm, or their representatives or superintendents, per 
year, $120.00. (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may apply—See 
section 74-43(c).) 
ASPHALT DEALERS AND TERMINALS: Per year, $420.00. 
ATHLETIC CLUBS: Persons, associations or promoters, giving, promoting or arranging boxing, 
wrestling or athletic exhibitions, where admission is charged, per year, $42.00. 
ATTORNEYS: See LAWYERS. (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may 
apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
AUCTIONEERING: No license to be issued to a firm or corporation, but in each case to one person 
named who shall personally do the auctioneering, per year, $90.00. 
AUCTIONS: Per year, $90.00. (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may 
apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
AUDITING COMPANIES: Per year, $60.00. (Compliance with trade and other competency 
requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
AUDITORS, ACCOUNTANTS, BOOKKEEPING, CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS. Per office, 
per year: $60.00. 
Certified public accountant each, per year, $60.00. 
Bookkeeping and tax consulting service, per year, $60.00. 
AUTOMOBILE: (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may apply—See 
section 74-43(c) of this article.) 
Engine repair (including boat motor repair): per year, $42.00). 
Garage, repairs to automobiles, including body and fender repairs and painting and 
lubrication incidental to repairs, per year, $42.00. 
Laundry, washing, polishing and greasing of automobiles, where principal business, per 
year, $42.00. 
Long-term motor vehicle leasing per year, per year, $42.00. 
Paint shop, painting of automobiles, alone or in connection with other business, except as 
otherwise provided, per year, $42.00. 
Trim shops, agents or dealers, other than manufacturers, per year, $42.00. 
Repossession services (on-site impoundment not to exceed 90 days, per year, $42.00). 
Sales, new and/or used, per year, $60.00. 
Salvage, per year, $42.00. 
Storage (auto or boat), per year, $42.00. 
Trucks or airplanes, kept for hire, other than taxi, per vehicle, per year, $42.00. 
Wrecker services, per year, $42.00. 
B 
BANKS: Banking institutions, per year, $420.00. 
BARBERSHOPS: Per year, $42.00, Plus, per operator, per year, $6.00. (Compliance with trade and 
other competency requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c) of this article.) 
BEAUTY PARLORS: Per year, $42.00. Plus, per operator, per year, $6.00. (Compliance with trade 
and other competency requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
BILL POSTING: (Sign tacking prohibited) per year, per board, $12.00. 
BILLIARD: Pool, bagatelle and Jenny Lind tables, when kept and set up for other than private use, 
whether operated or not, per year, $30.00 per table. 
BLUEPRINTING: Alone or in connection with other business, per year, $42.00. 
BOAT BUILDING AND SHIPBUILDING COMPANIES: $60.00 per year. 
BOATHOUSES OR YARDS, INCLUDING MARINAS: For berthing launches and small boats, with 
accommodation for not exceeding five boats, per year, $42.00. All over five boats, for each, an 
additional $9.60. 
BONDING COMPANIES: (Other than guaranty and surety companies) or persons, firms or 
corporations engaged in the business of making bonds for profit, per year, $60.00. (Compliance 
with trade and other competency requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
BOOK AGENTS: Per year, $42.00. Before any license shall be issued to any applicant therefor, such 
applicant shall fill out a written form furnished by the city to the applicant, under the oath of the 
applicant, showing the applicant's name and permanent residence, former occupation during 
the past two years, whether the applicant has ever been convicted for crime, the name and 
address of the company the applicant now represents, whether the applicant is under bond or 
not, the length of time the applicant proposes and intends to carry on and operate under the 
license in the city. Such application shall remain on file with the city for a period of 30 days to 
give the city authorities an opportunity to investigate the moral standing, reputation and integrity 
of the applicant. After such investigation, and at the end of 30 days, the license shall be either 
issued or refused. Any person engaging in the activity of book agent or canvasser selling or 
attempting to sell books, maps, periodicals, magazines, stationery and the like in the city without 
first complying with the provisions of this subsection, or filling out the application and waiting 
until it is approved or denied as provided in this subsection shall be deemed to have violated the 
provisions of this subsection. 
BOOK BINDERY: Per year, $42.00. 
BOOT/SHOE REPAIR: Per year, $42.00. 
BOWLING ALLEYS: For each alley, per year, $42.00. 
BOX AND CRATE FACTORIES: Per year, see MANUFACTURING. 
BRICK OR STONE DEALERS/AGENTS: For the sale of brick or stone, including those soliciting 
orders for, or having an office in the city, and who deliver brick or stone inside or outside of the 
city, per year, $42.00. 
BROADCASTING STATIONS: Radio, television, cable or other mass media distribution system not 
otherwise addressed, per year, $120.00. (Compliance with trade and other competency 
requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
BROKERS: (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may apply—See section 
74-43(c).) 
Or agents or other persons employing, engaging or soliciting within the limits of the city, 
laborers for employment at any place outside of the county, per year, $900.00. 
Dealing in stocks, bonds, and other securities, other than bankers, per year, $90.00. 
Handling or clearing shipments of merchandise on consignment, per year, $90.00. 
Labor, for each person, firm or corporation who shall engage in the business of emigrant agent, 
or who shall personally, or as the agent, servant, or employee of another, or in any 
capacity whatsoever, other than as the duly authorized representative of the federal 
government, employ, influence, solicit, recruit or entice laborers for work at any place 
outside the state, per year, $1,500.00. 
Merchandise, agents or distributors, carrying a stock of goods, whether on consignment or 
refused by the consignee, whether sold from cars or from store or warehouse, per year, 
$90.00. 
Merchandise agents or manufacturers' representatives, carrying no stock, per year, $90.00. 
Dealers in grains or margins, per year, $210.00. 
Shipbrokers, per year, $90.00. 
BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATION OR AGENTS THEREOF: Per year, $240.00. 
BURGLAR ALARM COMPANIES OR AGENTS: Per year, $42.00. 
BUS TERMINALS OR FREIGHT TERMINALS: 
For terminal, per year, $60.00. Also see TRANSFER COMPANIES. 
BUS TICKET OFFICE: Per year, $42.00. 
BUSINESS COLLEGE: Per year, $60.00. 
C 
CABINET MAKERS OR WOODWORKING SHOPS: Per year, $42.00. 
CAFETERIAS: See RESTAURANT. 
CAKE AND CRACKERS: Dealers in, or agents for, who make sales from automobiles or other form 
of carrier, having no branch or warehouse in the city, but who receive shipments direct from 
common carriers and complete delivery or sale, each such dealer or agent, or vehicle, per year, 
$42.00. 
CANDY MANUFACTURERS: See MANUFACTURING. 
CANVASSERS: Per year, $42.00. 
CARNIVALS: See chapter 10, article II of this Code. 
CARPET CLEANING COMPANIES: Not connected with laundries, per year, $42.00. 
CASH REGISTERS: Dealers in or agents for, including repairs and service, per year, $60.00. 
CEMENT OR ARTIFICIAL STONE/OR CONCRETE BLOCK MANUFACTURERS: Per year, $60.00. 
CEMETERY COMPANY: Office or agent, except when operated by fraternal, charitable or other 
organization, per year, $120.00. 
CHIROPODIST: Resident. See DOCTORS. 
CHIROPRACTIC PHYSICIANS: See DOCTORS. 
CIRCUSES: 
Showing outside of corporate limits, but advertising within the city on billboards or otherwise, 
including right to parade within the city, per year, $520.00. 
Where less than ten and not more than 15 cars, per day, $210.00. 
Sixteen and not more than 30 cars, per day, $300.00. 
All over 30 cars, per day, $420.00. 
Circus moving by motor vehicle, 20 trucks or less, per day, $210.00. Over 20 trucks, per 
day, $240.00. 
In addition to the above licenses, each circus shall pay: 
Each side show, per day, $42.00. 
Concessions, sale of ice cream, novelties, balloons, souvenirs, cushions, popcorn, soft 
drinks, etc., in tent only, per day, $42.00. 
For each concession or stand on the grounds, per day, $12.00. 
Parades, where the show is outside the city, per year, $240.00. 
CIVIL ENGINEERS AND SURVEYORS: Each, per year, $60.00. (Compliance with trade and other 
competency requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
CLAIMS AND COLLECTING AGENCIES: Other than lawyers, per year, $42.00. 
CLAIRVOYANTS: Fortunetellers, mind readers, faith curists and spirit mediums, giving seances for 
profit, and astrologists, per year, $90.00. 
CLOTHING: Secondhand dealers in, per year, $42.00. 
COIN-OPERATED DEVICES: 
Operating, maintaining a coin-operated machine, for each machine, per year, $12.00. 
Miniature pool table. Same as BILLIARD. 
Machines not covered by this chapter, per year, $12.00. 
Such license shall be attached to and affixed on each machine, and shall not be transferrable. 
COLD STORAGE PLANTS: See FREEZING. 
CONTEST COMPANIES: Persons, firms, associations or corporations, conducting contests by 
offering premiums, or other inducements, for advertising purposes, or for the purpose of 
stimulating or increasing trade, per year, $90.00. 
CONTRACTORS: (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may apply—See 
section 74-43(c).) 
Air conditioning, heating, refrigeration and ventilation, alone, per year, $60.00. 
Dredging, pile driving, per year, $120.00. 
Drywall/Sheetrock, per year, $60.00. 
Electrical, including repair, per year, $60.00. 
Exterminating, termiting, including spraying, treatment, etc., per year, $120.00. A bond or 
insurance as required. 
Floor dressers, or sanding, person, firm or corporation, per year, $90.00. 
General (one who contracts for complete job, including electrical, plumbing, concrete, tile, 
painting, etc.), Class A, per year, $90.00. 
General contractors, Class AA, able to perform electrical, including repair plus additional 
scope of sewer builders and paving, per year, $180.00. 
House wreckers or movers, to furnish bond, per year, $120.00. 
Insulation, per year, $60.00. 
Installation and rental of piped music, per year, $60.00. 
Landscaping, per year, $60.00. 
Painting and decorating, per year, $60.00. 
Paving, asphalt, concrete, or otherwise, per year, $240.00. 
Plastering and stucco, per year, $60.00. 
Plumbers, business only, per year, $90.00. 
Pool (installation or repair), per year, $60.00. 
Roofing, including repairs incidental and necessary to work, per year, $90.00. 
Sub-contractor to include masonry, foundations, and excavation, incidental to building, per 
year, $90.00. 
Sewer builders and layers, including excavating, per year, $240.00. 
Sale of fixtures or other merchandise, see merchants. 
Siding, including repairs incidental to work, per year, $90.00. 
Tree surgery, per year, $60.00. 
Washing or cleaning houses or buildings, mechanically, by steam or otherwise, per year, 
$90.00. 
Well drilling, etc., including repairs, per year, $60.00. 
Welding, electric and/or acetylene or both, when not in connection with other business, per 
year, $42.00. 
Not otherwise provided, per year, $60.00. 
Note:? All general contractors, on jobs whereon such general contractor shall have contracted 
to do and perform labor and furnish materials, are to exhibit an occupational license from 
the city before allowing such subcontractor to proceed on such job. In default of such 
subcontractor so exhibiting and furnishing an occupational license, the general contractor 
shall be liable and responsible for the amount of the license of each subcontractor. 
CRACKERS AND CAKES: Agents for manufacturers, per year, $42.00. 
CREOSOTING PLANTS: See MANUFACTURERS. 
CROCKERY MANUFACTURERS: See MANUFACTURERS. 
D 
DENTAL LABORATORY: Per year, $60.00. 
DENTISTS: Per year, $120.00. (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may 
apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
DETECTIVE AGENCIES: Per year, $60.00. 
DIRECTORIES: City, county or state, each person, firm or corporation making or offering for sale, 
per year, $120.00. 
DIVINE HEALERS: See CLAIRVOYANTS. 
DOCTORS, PHYSICIANS, SURGEONS: (Compliance with trade and other competency 
requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
Doctors, M.D.: Per year $120.00. 
Osteopaths: See Doctors, M.D. 
Chiropractors, electric therapists, naturopaths and pharmacies: See Doctors, M.D. 
Optometrists and oculists: See Doctors, M.D. 
Veterinarians, per year, $90.00. 
Optical dispensary, alone or in connection with other business, where lenses are ground, 
prepared and fitted according to prescription, and glasses repaired, per year, $90.00. 
Pharmacies, alone or in connection with other business, where pharmaceutical and related 
items are prepared, dispensed, or otherwise available, either from bulk stores or 
prepackaged, per year, $90.00. 
Not otherwise provided, per year, $90.00. 
DOG AND ANIMAL EXHIBITION: Per day, $12.00. 
DRAFTSMAN: Per year, $60.00. 
E 
ELECTRIC LIGHT COMPANIES: Or persons, firms or corporations furnishing light or power, per 
year, $420.00. 
EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES: Per year, $42.00. 
ENGINEERS: Consulting, as firm, person or corporation, per year, $90.00. 
EQUIPMENT RENTERS: Per year, $42.00. 
EXPRESS COMPANIES: Per year, $210.00. 
F 
FILM OR PHOTOGRAPH: Developing or finishing, local company, principal business, per year, 
$42.00. 
FINANCE COMPANIES: Firms or corporations liquidating accounts other than their own, whether 
purchased or otherwise, per year, $240.00. (Compliance with trade and other competency 
requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
FLORISTS: Selling cut flowers or making of designs, nursery stock, per year. See MERCHANTS. 
FOUNDRIES: Per year, $120.00. 
FREEZING: Or cold storage service or locker service, per year, $60.00. 
FREIGHT TERMINALS: See BUS TERMINALS. 
FURNITURE: Packers and shippers, per year, $60.00. 
G 
GAS: 
Each agent or dealer, other than manufacturer of carbonic liquid, acetylene, ammonia, 
liquefied, or other chemical gas, alone or in connection with other business, per year, 
$60.00. 
Sale of equipment, merchandise or supplies in connection. See MERCHANTS. 
GASOLINE: 
Selling of gasoline and other motor fuels products to motor vehicles or boats, including all 
license therefore except as otherwise herein provided, per pump and/or dispenser, 
$18.00. 
Wholesale distributor, jobber, or agent, per year, $42.00. 
GLASS DEALERS: Plate glass, alone or in connection with other business, per year, $60.00. 
GOLF COURSE: Miniature, per year, $42.00. 
GRAVEL AND SAND: Agents, dealers or salesmen, per year, $60.00. 
H 
HEALTH OR MEDICAL CENTERS: Individuals or similar groups, clinic, institutions or partnerships; 
For center or clinic, etc., per year, $240.00. Plus $120.00 per year, each doctor. Also see 
DOCTOR. 
HOSPITALS: Per year, $240.00. 
HOTELS/MOTELS: Hotels and motels pay $42.50 for 20 rooms or less, and $60.00 for 21 rooms or 
more. 
HOUSE MOVERS: (See Contractors.) 
I 
INSURANCE: (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may apply—See section 
74-43(c).) 
Agency, Company (separate and apart from insurance agents and solicitors) Companies 
are obligated for the annual occupational tax regardless of whether or not a local 
agent or office is maintained within the city, per year, $60.00. 
Agents, solicitors, per year, $60.00. 
Adjusters, or rate makers, per year, $42.00. 
J 
JOB PRINTERS: See PRINTERS. 
L 
LABORATORY: Clinical, per year, $90.00. 
LAND DEVELOPMENT COMPANIES: Per year, $90.00. 
LAUNDRIES, DRY CLEANERS, DRYERS, STORAGE, UNIFORM RENTAL, LINEN SUPPLY: Per 
year, $60.00. 
LAWYERS: Per year, $120.00. (Compliance with trade and other competency requirements may 
apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
M 
MACHINE SHOP: Per year, $60.00. 
MACHINERY: Dealer or agent for, per year, $60.00. 
MANUFACTURING: Per year, $120.00. 
MERCHANT: 
Retail, per year, $60.00. 
Wholesale, per year, $60.00. 
MOBILE HOME: Repair only, per year, $42.00. 
MOBILE HOME: Sales, service and accessories, per year, $90.00. 
MOTOR WINDING: Per year, $42.00. 
MOTOR BOATS: Dealers and/or agents, per year, $60.00. See BOAT BUILDING. 
MIND READERS: See CLAIRVOYANTS. 
MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in any lawful business, 
profession or occupation, wholly or in part, within the corporate limits of this city, not mentioned 
or covered by this article, shall pay the annual license of $50.00 per year. 
MONEY LENDERS: See FINANCE COMPANY. 
MOTORCYCLES: Agents or dealers, per year, $60.00. 
N 
NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIANS: See DOCTORS. 
NEWSPAPERS: 
Daily, each, per year, $150.00. 
Biweekly, each, per year, $72.00. 
Weekly, each, per year, $42.00. 
Published out of city, distributed in and soliciting advertising for within the city. Same as above. 
NURSERY/DAYCARE FACILITIES: Per year, $42.00. 
P 
PAINTERS AND DECORATORS: See CONTRACTORS. 
PALMISTS: See CLAIRVOYANTS. 
PARADING: See CIRCUSES. 
PAWNSHOP (BROKER): Per year, $120.00. 
PHOTOGRAPHERS: Per year, $42.00. 
PHRENOLOGISTS: See CLAIRVOYANTS. 
PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS: See DOCTORS. 
PIANO TUNERS: Per year, $42.00. 
POOL: See BILLIARDS. 
PORTRAITS: Studios, freelance, and others associated with photographic or other media 
techniques, per year, $42.00. 
PRINTERS JOB: 
Per year, $60.00. 
More than five employees, per year, $120.00. 
PROMOTERS: 
Or managers of entertainments, sports or contests of any kind, per year, $90.00. 
Or persons selling stocks and bonds of nonresident corporations, per year, $42.00. 
Selling stock in nonresident corporations but not licensed stock or bond brokers, per year, 
$90.00. 
PUBLIC STENOGRAPHERS: Per year, $42.00. 
R 
RADIO/TELEVISION REPAIR SHOPS: Or service, company, alone or in connection with other 
business, per year, $42.00. 
RAILROAD COMPANIES: Transporting freight and passengers, per year, $900.00. 
REAL ESTATE: 
Agents of brokers including sales and rentals, for others includes loaning or advancing money 
on real estate mortgages, per year, $120.00. (Compliance with trade and other 
competency requirements may apply—See section 74-43(c).) 
RECORDING STUDIOS: Per year, $42.00. 
REPAIR SHOPS: Per year, $42.00. 
RESIDENT AGENT OF PACKING HOUSE COMPANIES: Whose business is the solicitation and 
sale of packing house products, per year, $90.00. 
RESTAURANTS: And other eating places where meals are served, alone or in connection with other 
business, including all other license, except as may be otherwise provided, per year, $60.00. 
RESTAURANTS OR STORE FIXTURES SUPPLY COMPANY: Per year, $60.00. 
RETREADING: See VULCANIZING. 
ROLLING STORE: Per year, $180.00. 
RUG AND CARPET CLEANING: Per year, $42.00. 
S 
SAW OR PLANING MILLS: Per year, $120.00. 
SCHOOLS OF MUSIC: Where lessons are given, per year, $42.00. 
SEWING MACHINE REPAIRS: Per year, $42.00. 
SEANCES FOR PROFIT: See CLAIRVOYANTS. 
SHIPPING MASTERS: Per year, $60.00. 
SIGNS: See ADVERTISING. 
Manufacturers, neon or others. See MANUFACTURING. 
Painters, See CONTRACTORS. 
Tacking, posting, etc., prohibited. 
SHOOTING GALLERIES: Per year, $90.00. 
SHEET METAL SHOPS: Per year, $180.00. 
SHOWS: Traveling, using own tent. See CIRCUS. 
SHUFFLE BOARDS: When leased or rented to the general public for a consideration, whether 
constructed on pavement or used as tables or as desks, each board, per year, $12.00. 
SIDE SHOWS: 
Exhibitions of paintings, statues, charts, and the like, per year, $18.00. 
With circuses. See CIRCUSES. 
SKATING RINKS: Per year, $60.00. 
SNOW CONE STANDS: And the like shall not be operated within the fire zones of the city, except in 
permanent buildings where other businesses are carried on, per year, $12.00. 
SOFT WATER SERVICE AGENTS: Per year, $42.00. 
STEVEDORE AGENTS: Per year, $60.00. 
STORAGE OR BONDED WAREHOUSES OR MINIWAREHOUSES INCLUDING COMMERCIAL 
PROPERTY RENTALS: Per year, $90.00. 
T 
TAILOR/SEAMSTRESS SHOPS: Or others, alone or in connection with other businesses, making 
new clothing, alterations, repairs, etc., including pressing privileges, per year, $60.00. 
TATTOOING: Each person, per year, $42.00. 
TAXICAB COMPANIES: Per car per year, $30.00. 
TAXIDERMIST: Per year, $42.00. 
TELEGRAPH COMPANIES: Per year, $240.00. 
TELEPHONE ANSWERING SERVICE: Per year, $42.00. 
TELEPHONE COMPANIES: Per year, $1,200.00. 
TERMINALS: See BUS TERMINALS. 
THEATRE: Motion picture, indoor and outdoor, per year, $120.00. 
TILE MANUFACTURERS: With privilege of laying tile. See MANUFACTURING. 
TIN SHOPS: See MANUFACTURING. 
TITLE INSURANCE COMPANIES: Per year, $60.00. 
TOWEL SUPPLY COMPANIES: Whether connected with laundry or not. See LINEN SUPPLY 
COMPANY. 
TRAILER PARKS: Mobile home parks (permanent or RV types), per year, pay the greater of a 
$25.00 minimum or $3.00 per space, whichever is greater. 
TRANSFER COMPANIES: And persons and corporations transferring and hauling baggage, freight 
or other goods and merchandise, per year, $60.00. See BUS TERMINALS. 
TRAVEL BUREAU/AGENCY: Per year, $42.00. 
TREE SURGEONS: Per year, $60.00. 
TYPEWRITERS: 
Sales: See MERCHANTS. 
Service/Repair, per year, $42.00. 
U 
UNDERTAKERS: Per year, $120.00. 
UPHOLSTERERS: 
Of furniture or automobiles, per year, $42.00. 
Traveling/Itinerant, per year, $90.00. 
V 
VAUDEVILLE SHOWS: See THEATRES. 
VETERINARIANS: See DOCTORS. 
VULCANIZERS AND VULCANIZING ESTABLISHMENT: Exclusive of other license, including 
retreading of tires, per year, $42.00. 
W 
WASHETERIAS AND LAUNDERETTES, COIN-OPERATED: 
One to ten machines, per year, $42.00. 
11 to 20 machines, per year, $60.00. 
21 and up, per year, $90.00. 
WHARFINGERS: Collecting on goods or merchandise shipped over wharves or for vessels moored 
at same, per year, $120.00. 
WELDING, ELECTRIC OR ACETYLENE: Per year, $42.00. 
(Ord. No. 255, § 13, 7-5-1983; Ord. No. 280, § 13, 9-8-1987; Ord. No. 306, 6-15-1992; Ord. No. 
326, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 358, § 20, 3-3-1997; Ord. No. 388, § 1, 3-1-1999) 
State Law reference— Limitations on tax levy, F.S. § 205.043. 


Secs. 74-69—74-90. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82; franchises, app. A. 
State Law reference— Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231 et seq. 


Sec. 74-91. - Levy; collection from purchaser; payment to city; delinquency penalty. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed, there is levied by the city on each purchase 
in the city of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and 
local telephone service, a tax equal to ten percent of the payments received by the seller of such utility 
service. In every case, the tax shall be collected from the purchaser of such utility service and paid by 
such purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of such utility service at the time of the purchaser 
paying the charge therefor to the seller, and not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1972, § 16-115; Ord. No. 252, § 1, 9-28-1982; Ord. No. 294, 6-4-1990) 


Sec. 74-92. - Duties of seller as collector. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller of any utility service described in this article, in acting as a tax 
collecting medium or agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax 
imposed and levied by this article and to report and pay over to the city on or before the tenth day of each 
month all such taxes collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to 
collect the price of any sale of such utility service without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied 
in respect of such sale. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale 
shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the tax had been actually paid to 
the seller. The tax collector of the city shall bring all suits and actions and take all proceedings necessary 
for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such 
tax upon unpaid bills. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the seller the tax hereby imposed 
and as hereby required, the seller shall have, and is hereby vested with, the right to discontinue 
immediately further service to such purchaser until the tax hereby levied and the seller's bills have been 
paid in full. 
(Code 1972, § 16-116) 


Sec. 74-93. - Records and reports. 
    Each seller of any utility service on which a tax is hereby levied shall keep complete records showing 
all sales in the city of such electricity, gas and telephone service, which records shall show the price 
charged upon each sale, the date, and the date of payment. The records shall, at all reasonable times, be 
open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, 
and such agents shall have authority to make such transcripts thereof as they may desire. It shall be the 
duty of each such seller of utility service each month in paying over to the city the tax collected to make 
such reports as may be reasonably required on forms to be furnished by the city commission for that 
purpose. Any such seller of utility service failing to make the required reports and to pay over to the city 
the tax collected during the previous month on or before the tenth day of each month immediately 
following the month in which the tax is collected shall be liable for and, in addition to the tax collected, 
shall pay a penalty at the time of paying the tax and making the report equal to five percent of the tax, for 
each month or part of a month that the report and tax is past due. The penalty provided in this section 
shall be in addition to punishment as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1972, § 16-117) 


Sec. 74-94. - Applicability to telephone service. 
    The tax levied in section 74-91 on the sale of telephone service shall apply to monthly recurring 
customer service charges, excluding public telephone charges collected on the site, access charges, and 
any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. 
(Code 1972, § 16-118) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 166.231(9)(a)1. 


Sec. 74-95. - Exemptions. 
(a) ?The United States of America, the state, and the political subdivisions and agencies, boards, 
commissions and authorities of both are hereby exempt from payment of the tax levied by this article. 
(b) ?Purchases by any recognized church in this state for use exclusively for church purposes are 
exempt from the tax levied by this article. 
(c) ?The purchase of natural gas or fuel oil by a public or private utility, either for resale or for use as fuel 
in the generation of electricity, or the purchase of fuel oil or kerosene for use as an aircraft engine 
fuel or propellant or for use in internal combustion engines is exempt from taxation under this article. 
(Code 1972, § 16-119) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 166.231(4), (5). 


Sec. 74-96. - Use of proceeds. 
    The funds accruing to the city from the tax hereby levied shall be used for such proper municipal 
purposes as may be determined by the city commission. 
(Code 1972, § 16-120) 


Secs. 74-97—74-120. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Secs. 74-121—74-150. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY INSURANCE PREMIUM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Tax levy authorized, F.S. § 175.101. 


Sec. 74-151. - Levy; rate. 
    There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other 
insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereinafter engage in or carry on the business of 
property insurance, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise tax in 
addition to any lawful license or excise tax now levied by the city which tax shall be in the amount of 1.85 
percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on 
property insurance policies, covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-11-1996) 


Sec. 74-152. - Due date of tax. 
    The excise tax levied in section 74-151 shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year 
hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 11, 1-11-1996) 


Secs. 74-153—74-170. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - CASUALTY INSURANCE PREMIUM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Tax levy authorized, F.S. § 185.08. 


Sec. 74-171. - Levy; rate. 
    There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other 
insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of 
insuring with respect to casualty risks, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an 
excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise tax now levied by the city which tax shall be in 
the amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all 
premiums collected on casualty insurance policies, covering property within the corporate limits of the 
city. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 1-11-1996) 


Sec. 74-172. - Due date of tax. 
    The license or excise tax levied in section 74-171 shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of 
each year hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 11, 1-11-1996) 


Secs. 74-173—74-200. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - FUNDING OF FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES, FACILITIES, AND PROGRAMS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 511, adopted Mar. 4, 2013, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify 
manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as Art. 
V, §§ 74-201—74-249. 


DIVISION 1. - INTRODUCTION 


Sec. 74-201. - Introduction. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to F.S. § 166.021, including particularly F.S. §§ 166.021(4) and 
166.021(5) thereof, F.S. § 166.041, and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 1.01, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-202. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the 
context clearly otherwise requires: 
    Annual assessment resolution means the resolution described in article II hereof, establishing the 
rate at which an assessment for a specific fiscal year will be computed; and the adoption of which, after a 
duly noticed public hearing, shall be the final proceeding for the imposition of assessments related to the 
provision and funding of fire protection services, facilities and programs. 
    Assessed property means all tax parcels of land included in the fire service assessment roll that 
receive a special benefit from the continual availability of fire protection services and facilities. 
    Assessment or fire service assessment means a special assessment imposed by the commission 
pursuant to this article, after a public hearing, to fund the fire service assessed cost. The term 
"assessment" and the reference to special assessments or non-ad valorem assessments herein means 
those assessments which can become a lien against a homestead as permitted by article X, section 4 of 
the Florida Constitution, as amended. 
    Assessment coordinator means the mayor, or such person's designee, responsible for coordinating 
calculation and collection of assessments as provided herein. 
    Assessment ordinance or ordinance means this article. 
    Assessment roll or fire service assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to an 
assessment confirmed by the city commission after a public hearing required in article II hereof. 
    City means the City of Springfield, Florida. 
    City clerk means the clerk to the city commission, or such person's designee. 
    City commission means the governing body of the City of Springfield, Florida. 
    Fire service assessed cost means that portion of the annual budget for any fiscal year representing 
all or some portion of the cost of maintaining continual readiness to provide fire protection to tax parcels 
within the city which will be funded through the imposition of fire service assessments. In the event the 
city also imposes an impact fee upon new growth or development for capital improvements related to fire 
protection, the fire service assessed cost shall not include costs attributable to capital improvements 
necessitated by new growth or development which were included in the computation of such impact fee 
or which are otherwise funded by such impact fee. 
    Fiscal year means that period commencing October 1 of each year and continuing through the next 
succeeding September 30, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the 
city. 
    Government property means property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, 
a sovereign state or nation, the State of Florida or any agency thereof, a county, a special district or a 
municipal corporation. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the city. 
    Obligations means bonds or other evidence of indebtedness including, but not limited to, notes, 
commercial paper, capital leases or any other obligation issued or incurred to finance fire protection 
facilities and equipment and secured, in whole or in part, by proceeds of the assessments. 
    Pledged revenue means, as to any series of obligations, (a) the proceeds of such obligations, 
including investment earnings, (b) proceeds of the assessments pledged to secure the payment of such 
obligations, and (c) any other legally available non-ad valorem revenue pledged, at the city commission's 
sole option, to secure the payment of such obligations, as specified by this article and any ordinance or 
resolution authorizing such obligations. 
    Property appraiser means the Property Appraiser of Bay County, Florida. 
    Tax collector means the Tax Collector of Bay County, Florida. 
    Tax parcel means a parcel of property to which the property appraiser has assigned a distinct ad 
valorem property tax identification number. 
    Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll and data base maintained by the 
property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
    Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor 
statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, 
and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 1.02, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-203. - Interpretation. 
    Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural 
number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms 
refer to this article; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the 
effective date of this article. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other genders, 
unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 1.03, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-204. - Findings. 
    It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(1) ?Pursuant to article VIII, section 2(b) of the Florida Constitution, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 
166.041, the city commission has all powers of local self-government to perform municipal 
functions and render municipal services except when prohibited by law and such power may be 
exercised by the enactment of city ordinances. 
(2) ?The city commission may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a 
municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the city commission may 
legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects 
described in (a), (b), (c), and (d) of F.S. § 166.021(3). The subject matter of paragraphs (a), (b), 
(c), and (d) of F.S. § 166.021(3), are not relevant to the imposition of assessments related to fire 
protection services, facilities or programs. 
(3) ?The special benefits to affected lands provided as a result of an assessment include by way of 
example and not limitation, the continual availability of fire protection services to each tax parcel 
within the city, protection of public safety, stable or decreasing insurance costs, a potential 
increase in value to property, and an assured level of service to landowners and tenants. 
(4) ?The constant and continued preparedness to provide fire protection services, facilities and 
programs possess a logical relationship to the value, use and enjoyment of real property by: (1) 
protecting the value of the improvements and structures through the continual availability of fire 
control and provision of fire protection and associated rescue services; (2) protecting the life 
and safety of intended occupants in the use and enjoyment of real property; (3) lowering the 
cost of casualty or liability insurance by the presence of a professional fire protection and 
associated rescue program within the city; (4) providing protection for uninsured or 
underinsured property and property owners; and (5) containing the spread of fire incidents, 
sometimes occurring on vacant or undeveloped property, with the potential to spread and 
endanger the structures and occupants of nearby improved property, thereby limiting liability. 
(5) ?The combined fire control and associated basic life support emergency medical services of the 
city under its existing fire protection program enhances and strengthens the relationship of such 
services to the value, use and enjoyment of the parcels of property within the city. 
(F) ?The assessment imposed pursuant to this article is imposed by the city commission, not the 
property appraiser or tax collector. Any activity of the property appraiser or tax collector under 
the provisions of this article shall be construed as ministerial. 
(6) ?The annual assessments to be imposed pursuant to this article are special assessments and 
may also constitute and be described as non-ad valorem assessments within the meaning and 
intent of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(7) ?The purpose of this article is to: (1) provide procedures and standards for the imposition of city-
wide assessments under the home rule powers of a municipality to impose special 
assessments, (2) authorize procedures for the funding and financing of fire protection services, 
facilities, or programs providing special benefits to property within the city, and (3) establish a 
revenue or tax equity tool for funding fire protection services, facilities and programs, reduce 
demand on other legally available funds, allow for local policy discretion as difficult overall 
budget choices are made by the city commission each year, and give the community a more 
equitable, balanced, sustainable and dedicated means of funding essential fire protection 
related services and capital improvements. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 1.04, 3-4-2013) 


Secs. 74-205—74-210. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - ANNUAL FIRE SERVICE ASSESSMENTS 


Sec. 74-211. - General authority. 
(a) ?The city commission is hereby authorized to impose an annual assessment to fund all or any portion 
of the fire service assessed cost upon benefitted property at a rate of assessment based on the 
special benefit accruing to such property from the city's provision of fire protection services, facilities, 
or programs. For purposes of this article, references to "benefit," "special benefit," "benefited 
property" or the like also include the relief of a burden to continually stand in readiness created by 
real property as well as improvements thereon. All assessments shall be imposed in conformity with 
the procedures set forth in this article II. 
(b) ?The amount of the annual assessment imposed each fiscal year against each parcel of assessed 
property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a fair and 
reasonable apportionment of the fire service assessed cost among properties on a basis reasonably 
related to the special benefit provided by the availability of fire protection services, facilities, or 
programs funded with assessment proceeds. The amount of the annual assessment imposed each 
fiscal year shall include administration and collection costs associated with the annual assessment. 
In the event the assessments are collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the 
amount of the annual assessment will also include fees imposed by the property appraiser and tax 
collector and will be adjusted as necessary to account for any statutory discounts which are 
necessitated when employing the efficiencies of collecting the assessments annually on the same bill 
as property taxes. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to require the imposition of 
assessments against government property. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.01, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-212. - Proceedings. 
    The proceedings for the imposition of an assessment shall include a public hearing noticed in the 
manner set forth in section 74-214 hereof, and the adoption at or anytime thereafter of an annual 
assessment resolution which shall (a) contain a brief and general description of the fire protection 
services, facilities or programs to be provided or made available, (b) describe the method or methods of 
apportioning the fire service assessed cost among affected tax parcels, (c) describe the tax parcels, if 
any, to be exempted from the fire service assessment for legal or public policy purposes, (d) identify the 
rate or rates of assessment and approve and adopt the annual assessment roll, consistent with the 
requirements of section 74-213 hereof, and (e) determine the method of collecting the fire service 
assessment. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.02, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-213. - Assessment roll. 
(a) ?The assessment coordinator shall prepare, or direct the preparation of, the assessment roll, which 
shall contain the following: 
(1) ?A summary description of all assessed property by tax parcel conforming to the description 
contained on the tax roll. 
(2) ?The name of the owner of the assessed property. 
(3) ?The extension or application of the rates of the proposed assessment to be imposed against 
each such tax parcel of assessed property. 
(b) ?The assessment roll shall be retained by the assessment coordinator and shall be open to public 
inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed 
form if the amount of the assessment for each tax parcel of property can be determined by use of the 
internet, a computer terminal available to the public or similar technology available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.03, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-214. - Notice. 
    At least 20 days prior to the public hearing, the city shall notice the public hearing by publication in a 
newspaper generally circulated within the boundaries of the city. The notice shall provide the date, time 
and place of the hearing. The notice shall contain a general statement that the city commission will 
consider imposing a special assessment throughout the city on the various parcels of property within the 
city to fund all or a portion of the cost to continually be available and stand ready to provide fire protection 
services, facilities and programs, the proposed rates or explanation of the schedule of assessments and 
include general information pertaining to the proposed apportionment methodology, the method of 
collection and a statement that all affected property owners have a right to appear at the public hearing 
and the right to file written objections within 20 days of the publication of the notice. The notice shall direct 
all interested persons to the assessment roll and information concerning the amount of the proposed 
assessment applicable to each parcel of property; provided, however, that such assessment roll need not 
be in printed form if the amount of the assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use 
of the internet, a computer terminal available to the public, or similar technology available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.04, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-215. - Annual assessment resolution. 
    At the time named in such notice, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the 
city commission, the city commission shall receive any written comments or objections of interested 
persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city commission, adopt the annual 
assessment resolution which shall (a) establish the rate or rates of assessment to be imposed in the 
designated fiscal year; (b) approve and adopt the assessment roll, with such amendments and directions 
as it deems just and right; and (c) provide direction as to the method of collection. All parcels assessed 
shall derive a special benefit from the fire protection services, facilities, or programs to be provided or 
constructed and the assessment shall be fairly and reasonably apportioned between the properties that 
receive the special benefit. All objections to the annual assessment resolution shall be made in writing, 
and filed with the assessment coordinator at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. The 
annual assessment resolution as confirmed shall constitute the final action necessary annually to impose 
or re-impose assessments hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.05, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-216. - Effect of annual assessment resolution. 
    The assessments for the initial fiscal year and each subsequent fiscal year shall be established upon 
adoption and confirmation of the annual assessment resolution. The adoption and confirmation of the 
annual assessment resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not 
limited to, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate or rates of assessment, the 
assessment roll, and the levy and lien of the assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a 
court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city commission action 
adopting and confirming on the annual assessment resolution. The initial assessment roll, as approved by 
the annual assessment resolution, shall be delivered for collection using the traditional direct billing 
method of collection described in section 74-232 hereof to collect the assessments, or such other method 
as the city commission by resolution shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.06, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-217. - Adoption of subsequent annual assessment resolutions. 
    The city commission may adopt subsequent annual assessment resolutions as a part of and during 
its budget adoption process for each fiscal year following the initial fiscal year for which an assessment is 
imposed hereunder. The annual assessment resolution shall approve the assessment roll for the 
upcoming fiscal year. The assessment roll may be prepared in accordance with the methods of 
apportionment set forth in the prior assessment resolution but may include modifications as a matter of 
policy as to what, if any, portion or portions of the city's budget is paid for from legally available funds 
other than assessment revenues. Failure to adopt an annual assessment resolution during the budget 
adoption process may be cured at any time. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.07, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-218. - Alternative use of Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(a) ?The city may determine to use the uniform method of collection provided for in the Uniform 
Assessment Collection Act; provided, however that all of the extraordinary procedures required by 
the Uniform Assessment Collection Act can be and are timely complied with. 
(b) ?In the event the uniform method of collection provided for in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act 
is determined to be used, the assessment coordinator shall publish notice which shall conform to the 
requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and, in addition to the requirements 
set forth in this article, the assessment coordinator shall provide notice of the proposed assessment 
by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the assessment which shall 
conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such mailed notice 
may be provided by including the assessment in the property appraiser's notice of proposed property 
taxes and proposed or adopted non-ad valorem assessments under F.S. § 200.069, or its successor 
in function. The assessment coordinator may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the 
owner to receive notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall nevertheless not affect the validity of 
the assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of an assessment imposed 
by the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(c) ?The city commission may also establish by resolution or directive such reasonable procedures or 
directions to confirm and comply with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act as may be practicable 
and necessary. 
(d) ?Nothing herein shall preclude the city commission from establishing by resolution a maximum rate of 
assessment provided that notice of such maximum assessment rate is provided pursuant to the 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act. In the event that the uniform method of collection provided for in 
the Uniform Assessment Collection Act is used and (1) the proposed assessment for any fiscal year 
exceeds the maximum rate of assessment adopted by the city commission and included in notice 
previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to the Uniform Assessment 
Collection Act, (2) the method of apportionment is changed or the purpose for which the assessment 
is imposed is substantially changed from that represented by notice previously provided to the 
owners of assessed property pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, (3) assessed 
property is reclassified in a manner which results in an increased assessment from that represented 
by notice previously provided to the owners of assessed property pursuant to the Uniform 
Assessment Collection Act, or (4) an assessment roll contains assessed property that was not 
included on the assessment roll approved for the prior fiscal year, notice and opportunity to be heard 
shall be provided to the owners of such assessed property. Such notice shall substantially conform 
to the notice requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and inform the owner 
of the time, date and place for adoption of the annual assessment resolution. The failure of the 
owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the 
assessment roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of an assessment imposed by 
the city commission pursuant to this article. 
(e) ?The assessment roll, as approved by the annual assessment resolution, shall be certified and 
delivered to the tax collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.08, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-219. - Lien of fire service assessments. 
    Upon the adoption of the assessment roll, all assessments shall constitute a lien against such 
property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special 
assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, until paid such lien shall be superior in dignity to all 
other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims. The lien for an assessment shall be deemed perfected 
upon adoption by the city commission of the annual assessment resolution. The lien for an assessment 
collected under the uniform assessment collection method shall attach to the property included on the 
assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the tax roll. 
The lien for an assessment collected under the traditional method of collection provided in section 74-232 
hereof shall be deemed perfected upon adoption and confirmation by the city commission of the annual 
assessment resolution, after a public hearing, and shall attach to the property on such date of each such 
annual assessment resolution. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.09, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-220. - Revisions to fire service assessments. 
    If any assessment made under the provisions of this article is either in whole or in part annulled, 
vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the city commission is satisfied that any such 
assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city 
commission has omitted any property on the assessment roll which property should have been so 
included, the city commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new assessment against any 
property benefited by the fire service assessed costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the 
provisions of this article and in case such second assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the city 
commission may obtain and impose other assessments until a valid assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.10, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-221. - Procedural irregularities. 
    Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any assessment under 
the provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any 
assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such assessment was 
duly levied, that the assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to 
such assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this article; and no variance from 
the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was 
materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any party objecting to an 
assessment imposed pursuant to this article must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction 
within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.11, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-222. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a) ?No act of error or omission on the part of the property appraiser, tax collector, assessment 
coordinator, city commission, or their deputies, employees, or agents shall operate to release or 
discharge any obligation for payment of an assessment imposed by the city commission under the 
provision of this article. 
(b) ?When it shall appear that any assessment should have been imposed under this article against a 
parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of fire protection services, facilities, or 
programs, but that such property was omitted from the assessment roll, the city commission may, 
upon provision of notice to the owner by first class mail, impose the applicable assessment for the 
fiscal year in which such error is discovered, in addition to the applicable assessment due for the 
prior two fiscal years. Such total assessment shall become delinquent if not fully paid upon the 
expiration of 60 days from the date of the adoption of said resolution. The assessment so imposed 
shall constitute a lien against such property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, 
county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all 
other prior liens, mortgages, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and may 
be collected as provided in article III hereof. 
(c) ?The assessment coordinator shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in 
response to a timely filed petition from the owner of any property subject to an assessment, based 
upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, to correct any error in annually applying 
the assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring 
the provision of mailed notice pursuant to this article or the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
Additionally, because the size and nature of the tax roll may yield anomalies, the assessment 
coordinator is authorized to apply sound public administration judgment and delete or remove 
individual tax parcels from the assessment roll that due to specific circumstances do not receive a 
special benefit, are not developable (e.g., subsurface rights, submerged, slivers, right-of-way, 
common elements) or are reasonably determined to be inappropriate, infeasible or impracticable to 
assess, and do not merit the expenditure of public funds and resources to impose or collect such 
assessments. Unless the assessment coordinator determines that a tax parcel does receive benefit, 
for any tax parcel with a just value of less than $1,000.00 (as determined solely by the property 
appraiser), such value may be used as a prima facie determination that the tax parcel need not be 
included on the assessment roll. Any such corrections shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in 
no way affect the enforcement of the assessment imposed under the provisions of this article. All 
requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be 
referred to, and processed by, the assessment coordinator and not the property appraiser or tax 
collector. 
(d) ?After the assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform 
Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in 
accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the tax roll upon 
timely written request and direction of the assessment coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.12, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-223. - Interim assessments. 
(a) ?An interim assessment shall be imposed against all property for which a certificate of occupancy is 
issued after adoption and confirmation of the annual assessment resolution. The amount of the 
interim assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual 
rate for such property computed in accordance with the annual assessment resolution for the fiscal 
year in which the certificate of occupancy is issued. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full 
calendar month remaining in the fiscal year. In addition to the monthly rate, the interim assessment 
shall also include an estimate of the subsequent year's assessment. No certificate of occupancy 
shall be issued until full payment of the interim assessment is received by the city. Issuance of the 
certificate of occupancy by mistake or inadvertence, and without the payment in full of the interim 
assessment, shall not relieve the owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. For the 
purpose of this provision, such interim assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the 
certificate of occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. 
Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal 
taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, 
titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved. 
(b) ?Exclusive of property for which an interim assessment was paid pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, 
an interim assessment shall also be imposed against any property which for any reason was omitted 
from the fire service assessment roll or was not listed on the tax roll as an individual tax parcel as of 
the effective date of the assessment roll approved by the annual assessment resolution for any 
upcoming fiscal year. For the purpose of this provision, such interim assessment shall be deemed 
due and payable and shall constitute a lien against such property for which it is imposed. Said lien 
shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and 
special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and 
claims in and to or against the real property involved. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.13, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-224. - Administrative hardship deferment. 
(a) ?Annually upon application of the owner of a tax parcel subject to the assessments contemplated 
herein, the assessment coordinator may grant a hardship deferment, in which case the tax parcel in 
question will receive a deferral. The owner shall be required to execute a binding agreement 
encumbering the tax parcel and otherwise assure the city that payment in full of the assessment and 
any recording cost, plus interest at an estimated cost of city funds compounded annually, shall be 
due over a period of time or upon sale or transfer of the property. Such agreement or a 
memorandum thereof shall be recorded in the official records of Bay County, Florida. Dependent 
upon the volume or demand for such deferment, the city commission may determine to release such 
deferments in the future. However, all funding for such hardship deferment, or the consequences of 
the deferment or any future release, shall be from legally available funds other than direct proceeds 
of other assessments. The assessment coordinator is authorized to use sound public administration 
judgment in applying this authority and considering such applications. 
(b) ?This provision serves to promote a public purpose and the general welfare, morals and contentment 
of the inhabitants and residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 2.14, 3-4-2013) 


Secs. 74-225—74-230. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION OF FIRE SERVICE ASSESSMENTS 


Sec. 74-231. - Collection. 
(a) ?The process of collection is driven by many equitable, practical and economic factors. The 
traditional direct billing method is initially far less expensive and provides fair and adequate notice 
and opportunity to be heard through publication in a newspaper of general circulation. The uniform 
method of collection additionally provides extraordinary notice by individual mailing, but such notice 
is many times more expensive than published notice. The individually mailed notice required by the 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act is extraordinary and unique to collection of an assessment 
occurring along with and included on the same bill as for ad valorem taxes. 
(b) ?Unless otherwise directed by the city commission, the assessments shall be collected pursuant to 
the traditional direct billing method provided in section 74-232 hereof. Any hearing or notice required 
by this article may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by this article or the 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 3.01, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-232. - Traditional method of collection. 
    The city may elect to collect the assessments by any other method which is authorized by law or 
provided by this section as follows: 
(a) ?The city shall provide assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of 
property, other than government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall 
include (1) a brief explanation of the assessment, (2) a description of the unit of measurement or 
method used to determine the amount of the assessment, (3) the number of units contained within 
the tax parcel, (4) the rate or rates applied to the units of measurement or method and the total 
amount of the assessment imposed against the tax parcel for the appropriate period, (5) the location 
at which payment will be accepted, (6) the date on which the assessment is due, and (7) a statement 
that the assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the 
liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(b) ?A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the assessments throughout the city may be 
recorded in the official records of the county. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that 
individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(c) ?The city shall have the right to appoint or retain an agent to foreclose and collect all delinquent 
assessments in any manner provided by law. 
(d) ?An assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment 
is due. The city or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her 
assessment within 90 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect 
that the city or its agent may either (1) initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the 
foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent assessment in a method now or hereafter 
provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property; or (2) cause an amount equivalent to 
the delinquent assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(e) ?All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related 
to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered 
therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same 
extent as an individual person or corporation. The city may join in one foreclosure action the 
collection of assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions 
hereof. All delinquent owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount 
of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney 
fees, in collection of such delinquent assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a 
result of such delinquent assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, 
the costs of the action. 
(f) ?In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent assessment and the costs, fees and expenses otherwise 
reasonably attributable thereto, may be collected subsequently pursuant to the Uniform Assessment 
Collection Act; provided however, that (1) notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by 
the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this article, and (2) any existing lien of record on the 
affected parcel for the delinquent assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of 
the assessment roll, as applicable, to the tax collector. 
(g) ?Any city commission action required in the collection of assessments may be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 3.02, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-233. - Uniform method of collection. 
(a) ?In lieu of utilizing any other method of collection available to the city, the city may elect to collect 
assessments using the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; and, for 
any specific parcel of benefitted property may include an amount equivalent to the payment 
delinquency, delinquency fees and expenses and recording costs for a prior year's assessment for a 
comparable service, facility, or program provided, (1) the collection method used in connection with 
the prior year's assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by 
the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, (2) notice is provided to the owner, and (3) any lien on the 
affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred to such assessment 
upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to the tax collector by the city. 
(b) ?If the city commission determines the assessments are to be collected on the same bill as for ad 
valorem taxes, then the assessment coordinator shall comply and conform to the extraordinary 
requirements of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 3.03, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-234. - Government property. 
(a) ?To the extent permitted by law, the city reserves the right to impose a charge or fee comparable in 
amount to assessments on governmental property. As used in this section, the context of the term 
"assessment" shall refer to such a charge or fee. If assessments are imposed against government 
property, the city shall provide assessment bills by first class mail to the owner or agent of each 
affected parcel of government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include 
(1) a brief explanation of the assessment, (2) a description of the unit of measurement used to 
determine the amount of the assessment, (3) the number of units contained within the tax parcel, (4) 
the rate or rates applicable to the units of measurement or method and the total amount of the 
assessment imposed against the tax parcel for the appropriate period, (5) the location at which 
payment will be accepted, and (6) the date on which the assessment is due. 
(b) ?Assessments imposed against government property shall be due on the same date as all other 
assessments and, if applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment. 
(c) ?An assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date any installment 
is due. The city shall notify the owner of any government property that is delinquent in payment of its 
assessment within 90 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state that the 
city will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(d) ?All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related 
to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree 
rendered therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a mandamus or other 
appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and 
expenses incurred by the city, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent 
assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent assessments 
and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e) ?As an alternative to the foregoing, an assessment imposed against government property may be 
collected as a surcharge on a utility bill provided to such government property in 12 installments with 
a remedy of a mandamus action in the event of non-payment. The city commission may also 
contract for such billing services with any utility not otherwise owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 3.04, 3-4-2013) 


Secs. 74-235—74-240. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 4. - ISSUANCE OF OBLIGATIONS 


Sec. 74-241. - General authority. 
(a) ?The city commission shall have the power and is hereby authorized to provide by ordinance or 
resolution, at one time or from time to time in series, for the issuance of obligations to fund and 
finance fire protection facilities and equipment and any amounts to be paid or accrued in connection 
with issuance of such obligations including, but not limited to, capitalized interest, transaction costs 
and reserve account deposits. 
(b) ?The principal of and interest on each series of obligations shall be payable from pledged revenue. 
The city commission may agree, by ordinance or resolution, to budget and appropriate funds to 
make up any deficiency in the reserve account established for the obligations or in the payment of 
the obligations, from other non-ad valorem revenue sources. The city commission may also provide, 
by ordinance or resolution, for a pledge of or lien upon proceeds of such non-ad valorem revenue 
sources for the benefit of the holders of the obligations. Any such ordinance or resolution shall 
determine the nature and extent of any pledge of or lien upon proceeds of such non-ad valorem 
revenue sources. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.01, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-242. - Terms of the obligations. 
    The obligations shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates, shall mature at such times as 
may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city commission, and may be made redeemable 
before maturity, at the option of the city, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions, all 
as may be fixed by the city commission. Said obligations shall mature not later than 40 years after their 
issuance. The city commission shall determine by ordinance or resolution the form of the obligations, the 
manner of executing such obligations, and shall fix the denominations of such obligations, the place or 
places of payment of the principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company within or 
outside of the State of Florida, and such other terms and provisions of the obligations as it deems 
appropriate. The obligations may be sold at public or private sale for such price or prices as the city 
commission shall determine by ordinance or resolution. The obligations may be delivered to any 
contractor to pay for the provision of fire protection facilities and equipment or may be sold in such 
manner and for such price as the city commission may determine by ordinance or resolution to be for the 
best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.02, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-243. - Variable rate obligations. 
    At the option of the city commission, obligations may bear interest at a variable rate. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.03, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-244. - Temporary obligations. 
    Prior to the preparation of definitive obligations of any series, the city commission may, under like 
restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary obligations, exchangeable for 
definitive obligations when such obligations have been executed and are available for delivery. the city 
commission may also provide for the replacement of any obligations which shall become mutilated, 
destroyed or lost. Obligations may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other 
conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by 
this article. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.04, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-245. - Anticipation notes. 
    In anticipation of the sale of obligations, the city commission may, by ordinance or resolution, issue 
notes and may renew the same from time to time. Such notes may be paid from the proceeds of the 
obligations, the proceeds of the assessments, the proceeds of the notes and such other legally available 
moneys as the city commission deems appropriate by ordinance or resolution. Said notes shall mature 
within five years of their issuance and shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate 
provided by law. The city commission may issue obligations or renewal notes to repay the notes. The 
notes shall be issued in the same manner as the obligations. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.05, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-246. - Taxing power not pledged. 
    Obligations issued under the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute a general 
obligation or pledge of the full faith and credit of the city within the meaning of the Constitution of the 
State of Florida, but such obligations shall be payable only from pledged revenue and, if applicable, 
proceeds of the assessments, in the manner provided herein and by the ordinance or resolution 
authorizing the obligations. The issuance of obligations under the provisions of this article shall not 
directly or indirectly obligate the city to levy or to pledge any form of ad valorem taxation whatsoever. No 
holder of any such obligations shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the ad valorem taxing 
power on the part of the city to pay any such obligations or the interest thereon or to enforce payment of 
such obligations or the interest thereon against any property of the city, nor shall such obligations 
constitute a charge, lien or encumbrance, legal or equitable, upon any property of the city, except the 
pledged revenue. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.06, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-247. - Trust funds. 
    The pledged revenue received pursuant to the authority of this article shall be deemed to be trust 
funds, to be held and applied solely as provided in this article and in the ordinance or resolution 
authorizing issuance of the obligations. Such pledged revenue may be invested by the city, or its 
designee, in the manner provided by the ordinance or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations. 
The pledged revenue upon receipt thereof by the city shall be subject to the lien and pledge of the holders 
of any obligations or any entity other than the city providing credit enhancement on the obligations. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.07, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-248. - Remedies of holders. 
    Any holder of obligations, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by the 
ordinance or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations, may, whether at law or in equity, by suit, 
action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the state 
or granted hereunder or under such ordinance or resolution, and may enforce and compel the 
performance of all duties required by this part, or by such ordinance or resolution, to be performed by the 
city. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.08, 3-4-2013) 


Sec. 74-249. - Refunding obligations. 
    The city may, by ordinance or resolution of the city commission, issue obligations to refund any 
obligations issued pursuant to this article, or any other obligations of the city issued to finance fire 
protection facilities and equipment, and provide for the rights of the holders hereof. Such refunding 
obligations may be issued in an amount sufficient to provide for the payment of the principal of, 
redemption premium, if any, and interest on the outstanding obligations to be refunded. If the issuance of 
such refunding obligations results in an annual assessment that exceeds the estimated maximum annual 
assessments set forth in an annual assessment resolution or other resolution, the city commission shall 
provide notice to the affected property owners and conduct a public hearing in the manner required by 
this article. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 4.09, 3-4-2013) 


Chapter 78 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations saved from repeal, 
§ 1-7(14); law enforcement, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous 
provisions, ch. 50; planning, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— State uniform traffic control, F.S. ch. 316. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 78-1. - Parades; permit required. 
    No person shall participate in any procession or parade containing ten or more persons or ten or 
more vehicles, except the armed forces of the United States, the military forces of the state, the forces of 
the police and fire departments of the city, and funeral processions, which occupies or proceeds along 
any street in the city, except in accordance with a permit therefor issued by the chief of police and in 
accordance with such other regulations as are herein set forth in this Code which may apply. 
(Code 1972, § 17-4) 


Sec. 78-2. - Blocking crossings by railroad train. 
(a) ?Maximum time. No railroad train shall be operated so as to close or obstruct any street or crossing 
in the city by stopping, backing, switching, making up or breaking up trains or otherwise for a longer 
time than five minutes in any period of 15 minutes. 
(b) ?Clearing crossing for passage. Any train obstructing any crossing in the city, either stopped or 
proceeding at a speed of less than five miles per hour, upon having notice or knowledge that an 
ambulance or fire truck is being delayed at a crossing, shall immediately stop and break the train or 
otherwise clear the crossing for passage of such emergency vehicle. 
(c) ?Penalty for violation of section. Any railroad company or any of its officers, agents or employees 
who shall violate any of the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be punished as 
provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1972, § 17-9) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate blocking of streets, F.S. § 335.141(4). 


Sec. 78-3. - Vehicle weight limits; streets not covered; permit required; fee. 
(a) ?No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any hard-surfaced street or highway in the city without a 
permit as provided in this section, if the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds 20,000 pounds. 
(b) ?This section shall not be applicable to the streets of this city that are subject to and maintained by 
the state. 
(c) ?The mayor or, upon his refusal or inability to act, the city commission shall have the right to grant a 
special permit allowing vehicles with maximum weights in excess of the maximum established by this 
section to be driven or moved on the streets of this city. However, the permit shall be limited as to 
time and as to particular streets or portions of streets to be utilized by the overweight vehicle, and 
each permit must state the equities upon which the permit is granted. No such permit shall be issued 
for any period in excess of 30 days; however, the permit may be extended from time to time within 
the discretion of the mayor or the city commission. 
(d) ?The mayor, or the city commission in the absence of action on the part of the mayor, shall set a 
permit fee based upon a reasonable estimate of the additional wear and tear contemplated by the 
use of the streets as authorized by the permit. In addition, the mayor or, in the absence of action on 
the part of the mayor, the city commission may require a bond with acceptable sureties in an amount 
to be determined within the discretion of the mayor or the city commission to cover any unforeseen 
damages which may accrue as a result of the use authorized by the permit. 
(Code 1972, § 17-12) 
State Law reference— Maximum weights, F.S. § 316.535; weight limits may be lowered, F.S. § 
316.555. 


Secs. 78-4—78-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 


Sec. 78-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire and safety lane means a fire apparatus or emergency vehicle accessway to or beside a 
commercial building, having an all-weather driving surface of not less than ten feet of unobstructed width 
and required by governmental authority. 
    Marked fire and safety lane means a fire and safety lane marked by a pavement stripe and posted at 
intervals of 50 feet or less by signs which state: "Fire and safety lane. Parking of a motor vehicle 
prohibited at all times." 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or 
may be transported or driven upon a highway. 
    Park or parking means the standing or halting of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise 
than momentarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or 
passengers. 
    Registered owner means the person that is registered by state law as the title holder of a motor 
vehicle on the date that a violation of this article occurs. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 3, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 357, § 3, 1-6-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 78-32. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a) ?Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions 
of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall: 
(1) ?Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a. ?On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
b. ?On a sidewalk; 
c. ?Within an intersection; 
d. ?On a crosswalk; 
e. ?Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb 
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the department of transportation 
indicates a different length by signs or markings; 
f. ?Alongside or opposite any street, excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or 
parking would obstruct traffic; 
g. ?Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway; 
h. ?On any railroad tracks; 
i. ?On a bicycle path; or 
j. ?At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit stopping. 
(2) ?Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge 
passengers: 
a. ?In front of a public or private driveway; 
b. ?Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
c. ?Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
d. ?Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic control signal 
located at the side of a roadway; 
e. ?Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street 
opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when property 
signposted); 
f. ?On an exclusive bicycle lane; or 
g. ?At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit standing. 
(3) ?Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while 
actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a. ?Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing unless the department of 
transportation establishes a different distance due to unusual circumstances; or 
b. ?At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(b) ?No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away 
from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 1, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 357, § 1, 1-6-1997) 


Sec. 78-33. - Parking of vehicles or trailers in public ways for more than 48 hours; permit required; 
restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful to leave any motor vehicle or trailer parked upon the right-of-way of any street, 
alley or other public way within the city for over 48 hours without having a written, current and valid permit 
from the chief of police, which permit shall be issued by the chief of police for periods of not to exceed 
seven days upon the payment to the city of a permit fee as established by resolution of the city 
commission; provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued if, in the opinion of the chief of police, 
the parked vehicle will constitute a hazard to the traveling public; and provided further, no such permit 
shall give the holder thereof the right to park in such a manner as to obstruct traffic. The chief of police 
shall have the right to designate on any such permit the particular location upon the side of any such 
street or alley or other public way where any such vehicle or trailer may park during the permitted period. 
(Code 1972, § 17-6) 


Sec. 78-34. - Impounding of vehicle violating parking provisions. 
    Members of the police department shall be vested with the authority, and it shall be their duty, to 
impound any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of any of the parking regulations of the city and to 
release any such vehicle to the duly identified owner of such vehicle, subject, however, to the payment of 
a court fine and to the payment of storage, towing and other impounding charges. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 2, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 357, § 2, 1-6-1997) 


Sec. 78-35. - Parking prohibited in marked fire and safety lanes. 
    No person shall park a motor vehicle within any marked fire and safety lane. Violation of this section 
shall be punishable as provided in section 78-36. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 3, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 357, § 3, 1-6-1997) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 26. 


Sec. 78-36. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a) ?Citations, tickets or notices of violation. If a law enforcement officer discovers a motor vehicle 
parked in a no parking zone established by state or local authority or in a marked fire and safety 
lane, he may: 
(1) ?Issue a ticket or notice of violation to the driver on a uniform traffic citation, or similar form; or 
(2) ?If the motor vehicle is unattended, issue a ticket or notice of violation, on a form to be provided 
by the city, to the registered owner of the motor vehicle and attach such ticket or notice of 
violation to the motor vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
(b) ?Ticket and notice of violation procedures. A copy of the notice shall then be filed with the county 
clerk of the county circuit court's traffic violations bureau who shall process it in accordance with F.S. 
§ 316.1967(1)—(4). The ticket or notice of violation shall identify the motor vehicle, license plate 
number, time, date, location and violation charged. Additionally, the ticket or notice of violation shall 
inform the violator that he has been charged with a noncriminal infraction and that he may within 30 
days elect to either: 
(1) ?Pay the appropriate fine in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; or 
(2) ?Waive the scheduled fine and request a hearing with the clerk of the circuit court, traffic 
violations bureau. At such hearing the presiding judge shall, upon a finding that the violator 
committed the infraction charged, impose a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00, plus court 
costs. 
(c) ?Fine. Each individual act of parking a motor vehicle in a marked fire and safety lane, or any violation 
as stated in section 78-32 shall constitute a separate noncriminal, civil infraction punishable by a fine 
in the amount of $32.00. 
(d) ?Registered owner presumed to be violator. The registered owner of a motor vehicle is responsible 
and liable for payment of any parking ticket or notice of violation unless the registered owner can 
furnish evidence that the motor vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody 
or control of another person. In such instances, the registered owner of the vehicle is required, within 
a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the appropriate law 
enforcement authorities an affidavit setting forth the name, address, and driver's license number of 
the person who leased, rented or otherwise had the care, custody or control of the motor vehicle. 
The affidavit submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be admissible in a proceeding charging a 
parking ticket violation and shall raise the rebuttable presumption that the person identified in the 
affidavit is responsible for payment of the parking ticket violation. The registered owner of a motor 
vehicle is not responsible for a parking ticket violation if the motor vehicle involved was, at the time, 
stolen or in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have permission of the 
registered owner to use the motor vehicle. 
(e) ?Towing. When the towing of a motor vehicle is necessary to provide access for emergency vehicles 
including, but not limited to, law enforcement, firefighting, rescue squad, ambulance or other 
emergency vehicles which are marked as such, the city fire department or the city police department 
shall have the right to have any motor vehicle parked in violation of law removed at the expense of 
the registered owner, regardless of whether tow-away signs as required elsewhere in this Code are 
posted. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 4, 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 357, § 4, 1-6-1997) 


Sec. 78-37. - Article cumulative. 
    The provisions, prohibitions, penalties and procedures of this article are cumulative and in addition to 
all others not or hereafter provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 4(5), 7-1-1996; Ord. No. 357, § 4(5), 1-6-1997) 


Secs. 78-38—78-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, JUNKED OR DISABLED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 34; secondhand goods, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Abandoning vehicles on highways, F.S. § 316.194; procedure for abandoned or 
lost personal property on public property, F.S. § 705.103. 


Sec. 78-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed 
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique or collectable vehicle means any vehicle which, under Florida Statutes, qualifies for antique 
or collectable tags. 
    Derelict, junk, discarded, unregistered vehicle means the following: 
(1) ?Derelict vehicle means any temporarily or permanently abandoned vehicle, regardless of its 
condition, age or registration, left on any public or private property. 
(2) ?Junk vehicle means any vehicle, partially or fully dismantled, that is not operational under its 
own power, does not display a current Florida tag which is properly registered to that vehicle, 
any vehicle, regardless of condition or age from which the VIN number has been removed from 
viewable locations; any vehicle from which the engine, transmission, two or more wheels, 
windshield, side or rear windows or any doors have been removed. A junk vehicle shall also 
include a vehicle which is being kept for use of its parts and is being periodically or regularly 
stripped of its body or mechanical parts for whatever use. 
(3) ?Discarded or abandoned vehicle means any vehicle, regardless of condition, age or 
registration, which has been abandoned, discarded or placed aside from its intended use onto 
any public right-of-way or public or private land, in view or out of view of the public. 
(4) ?Unregistered vehicle means any vehicle, regardless of its condition, age or location which is 
not displaying a current, legal tag when required by law to do so. 
(5) ?Partially dismantled means any doors, trunk lid, hood, or tires removed, (except tires removed 
temporarily for repair), all side windows removed, rear window or windshield removed, engine or 
transmission removed. 
(6) ?Nonoperative or inoperative means the vehicle cannot be operated under its own power, 
without push or tow, excluding reasons of an empty fuel tank, or that the vehicle cannot be 
operated on the highways or streets under state, county or city laws or ordinances. 
    Nuisance means the violation of any provision of this article, in part or in whole. Such violations are 
hereby declared to be public nuisances and subject to abatement in accordance with the provisions of 
this article or any other city ordinance. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Roadway means the portion of a highway improved, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive 
of the berm or shoulder. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly 
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, and vehicles, streetcars, and other 
conveyances, either singly or together while using any street or highway for purpose of travel. 
    Vehicle means any machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel on water 
or along the ground; on or off highways, roads or streets, by the use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides 
and transport people or property or pull machinery or trailers and shall include, but not be limited to, 
automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies, wagons, boats and other watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 264A, § 1, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 382, § I, 12-7-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 78-62. - Prohibited acts; application of section. 
    It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any vehicle of any kind in an abandoned, wrecked, junked, 
discarded, or nonoperational condition, whether attended or not, on public rights-of-way or other public or 
private property or for any person to permit or suffer the same to be left upon any private property unless 
such vehicle is immediately undergoing repairs which will enable it to be legally operated on the streets or 
highways of the state and such repairs will be completed within ten days. 
(1) ?Antique or collectable vehicles under restoration must be stored inside a garage or other 
structure or out of view of the public. Repairs and restoration will not be performed on any 
portion of private property which is in view of the general public. Any vehicle covered with a tarp 
or similar material must be completely covered, with a single, one piece tarp or covering, 
including the front and rear bumpers or bumper areas and the cover must conceal the vehicles 
on the sides extending to no less than the bottom of the wheel rims on all tires or the area of the 
wheel rims on all tires. The tarp or cover must be secured so that wind shall not displace the 
cover at any point. Vehicles covered by a tarp or other covers shall be parked so as not to be 
visible to the general public, except those covered vehicles which are regularly used by the 
owners. 
(2) ?This section shall not apply to commercial establishments being lawfully operated as garages, 
repair shops or storage facilities, except as follows: 
a. ?Businesses shall make every effort to prevent such keeping or storage of vehicles from 
presenting a cluttered or unkept appearance to the surrounding area. 
b. ?Business owners shall consider the intent of this article in the appearance of their 
establishment and maintain it in a manner that is not detractive from the overall 
appearance of the community; this based on the opinion of an ordinary, reasonable 
person. 
(Ord. No. 264A, § 2, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 382, § II(A), 12-7-1998) 


Sec. 78-63. - Vehicles offered for sale upon private or public property. 
(a) ?It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place any vehicle for sale for any purpose, 
including for parts, upon any public property. 
(b) ?Any vehicle placed upon any private property for sale may be placed there for a duration of, not 
more than, two weeks. If such vehicle has not sold within the two week period it must be removed. 
(1) ?Any vehicle placed for sale upon any private property must be clearly posted that it is for sale. 
Such posting shall include the telephone number or address of the person selling the vehicle. 
Any sign posted shall be restricted to a sign not more than 18 inches by 18 inches placed upon 
the vehicle. Any person placing a vehicle for sale on private property other than his own private 
property must have written permission from the owner or occupant of such property and a copy 
of the letter of permission must be displayed, in sight, in or on the vehicle or immediately 
available upon the code inspector's request. Any person having given their written permission 
for such placement shall be fully responsible for compliance with this section as will be the 
owner of the vehicle placed for sale. 
(2) ?No person shall place, cause or allow more than one vehicle for sale upon his private or 
commercial property simultaneously. Placement of more than one vehicle for sale upon any 
property shall be deemed a commercial business requiring an occupational license from the 
city. Issuance of such an occupational license shall be based upon the same requirements as 
any other occupational license, including city zoning regulations. Having placed such vehicles 
for sale without an occupational license shall be a violation of this article as well as the city 
occupational license ordinance. 
(3) ?The code inspector, finding a violation of this section shall, at his discretion issue a first notice 
warning requiring compliance within a prescribed time or issue a notice of civil violation which 
requires compliance and payment of a penalty as set forth in the schedule of civil penalties. 
(Ord. No. 264A, § 2, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 382, § II(B), 12-7-1998) 


Sec. 78-64. - Remedies. 
(a) ?If the code inspector finds any violation of this article he shall either: 
(1) ?Serve written first notice to the violator by posting such notice on the vehicle and/or on the 
residence of the violator in a conspicuous manner or by any other appropriate manner. 
(2) ?Serve the violator with a notice of civil violation, as set forth in chapter 42, article III, division 3. 
(3) ?Upon the expiration of the time of compliance, and upon the violator's failure to comply, and in 
the absence of a timely appeal to the code enforcement hearing officer, the code inspector is 
hereby given the authority to enter upon any private property whereon is located any vehicle in 
violation of this article and cause such vehicle to be towed by a private towing service to a 
secured storage facility at the owner's expense. The procedure shall be the same as in 
subsection (c) of this section. 
(b) ?If the violation is upon private property the notice shall inform the violator of the violation and shall 
afford the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation, in no case more than ten days. 
(1) ?If the violation involves a vehicle parked, stored or otherwise left on the city right-of-way the 
notice shall not afford the violator more than 48 hours to remove the vehicle. 
(2) ?If the violation involves a vehicle which is obstructing traffic in any manner the notice shall not 
afford the violator more than 24 hours to remove the vehicle. If the vehicle is obstructing traffic 
in such a manner as to be an immediate danger to the public the notice to the violator shall 
require an immediate removal of the vehicle. 
(c) ?If a violation continues beyond the prescribed time of compliance stated in the notice it shall 
constitute a continuing violation. If, within the prescribed time of the notice the violation has not been 
corrected the amount of the original penalty shall be accessed daily for each day the violation 
continues as prescribed in chapter 42, article III, division 3. In addition the code enforcement officer 
has the authority to have vehicles in violation of this article towed and stored at the owner's expense 
at the end of the time of compliance. If the city abates the nuisance by having the vehicle towed at 
the owner's expense and the owner has not paid the penalty prescribed in the notice the penalty 
assessment shall continue as set forth in chapter 42, article III, division 3. 
(1) ?The code inspector shall have the power to immediately cause the vehicle involved to be towed 
and stored at the owner's expense by a private towing service and this action shall be in 
addition to the issuance of a notice of civil violation. 
a. ?The vehicle will be photographed and inventoried as completely as circumstances will allow 
prior to removal by the towing service. 
b. ?The vehicle will be stored, at the owner's expense, at a secured facility provided by the 
towing service. 
1. ?The violator or owner of the vehicle may negotiate terms for the recovery of the 
vehicle with the tow service involved. The city shall not participate in this negotiation. 
2. ?Charges at the owner's expense shall commence as soon as the private tow service is 
legally entitled to a service or tow charge. 
(2) ?If after negotiating with the tow service involved, the violator or owner replaces the vehicle back 
upon the public right-of-way or upon private property in violation of this article the action will be 
deemed a repeat violation and the code inspector shall proceed as in section 42-121(d) and in 
addition to towing of said vehicle the code inspector may issue a notice of civil violation for a 
repeat violation wherein the penalty is double that of the first penalty as prescribed in chapter 
42, article III, division 3. 
(Ord. No. 264A, § 3, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 382, § III, 12-7-1998) 


Sec. 78-65. - Adoption of F.S. ch. 162; creation and adoption of a code enforcement hearing officer 
system as authorized in F.S. § 162.22. 
(a) ?In the case of a violation of this article wherein a vehicle is towed from a city right-of-way the code 
enforcement officer's decision in the notice of civil violation may be appealed to the hearing officer as 
set forth in chapter 42, article III. However, the code enforcement officer's decision to tow the vehicle 
cannot be appealed to the hearing officer. If the hearing officer finds in favor of the violator the towing 
of the vehicle shall not be overturned by the decision. 
(b) ?The city has adopted F.S. ch. 162 and it's provisions and powers in the enforcement of city 
ordinances. F.S. § 162.22 authorizes the city to create and adopt it's own policies, procedures and 
methods in the enforcement of it's codes and ordinances. 
(c) ?The city by the adoption of chapter 42, article III has established a code enforcement hearing officer 
system utilizing a one person hearing officer through which the decision of the code inspector may 
be appealed. The system sets forth the entire procedure for appointment of the hearing officer, 
length of term, removal, duties, responsibilities and powers. It also sets forth the code enforcement 
procedures, penalties for violations, rights of the violator to appeal, schedule and conduct of the 
hearings and the city's method of recovering unpaid penalties. 
(Ord. No. 264A, § 3, 5-4-1987; Ord. No. 382, § IV, 12-7-1998) 


Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, 
ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 46; planning, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks 
and other public places, ch. 70; public service tax, § 74-91 et seq.; franchises, app. A. 


ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 


Sec. 82-1. - Unpaid utility bills. 
(a) ?Late fees. There will be a ten percent late fee assessed on any utility bill that remains unpaid after 
the tenth day of each month until the bill is fully paid. 
(b) ?Disconnection of service. All utility services provided by the city shall be disconnected without 
further notice if the utility bill remains unpaid past the 23rd day of the month. Utility services shall 
include water, sewer and sanitation. 
(c) ?Restoration of service. Utility services will not be restored until all monies due and owing to the city 
have been fully paid. These amounts include, but are not limited to, all current charges, arrears, late 
fees, penalties, reconnection charges, tap fees and any other amount that the city determines from 
time to time that relate to the discontinuance and reconnection of city utilities. 
(Ord. No. 331, §§ 1—3, 6-5-1995) 


Secs. 82-2—82-30. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION 


Sec. 82-31. - Connection required upon availability. 
    Any new construction whether single, multifamily or commercial, whether in a subdivision or not shall 
connect to the municipal water and sewer system when and where it is available. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 1, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 82-32. - Developers to provide water and sewer lines. 
    Developers shall provide water distribution lines and sewage collection lines, consistent with the 
city's, county's and state's comprehensive land plans and standards. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 2, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 82-33. - Connections, disconnections and reconnections to be according to city regulations. 
    All connections, disconnections and reconnections, whether new or existing to the municipal water 
and sewer system, shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations that shall be adopted from 
time to time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 3, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 82-34. - Sewer connection requirements. 
    There will be no sewer connections without a request for water connection. If water distribution lines 
are not available, then the sewer request may be allowed, pending a determination of flow requirements 
and other rules adopted by the city including, but not limited to, a flat fee for sewer service, together with 
connect, disconnect and reconnect fees. However, when water is available, then the customer must 
abandon his present water system and connect to the city's water distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 4, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 82-35. - Water connection requirements. 
    There will be no water connections without a request for sewer connection. If a sewer is not 
available, then the request may be granted pending a determination of compliance with the city, county 
and state health codes. However, when the sewer is made available the customer must abandon his 
present sewer system and connect to the city's sewer collection system. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 5, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 82-36. - Fee delinquency; disconnection. 
    If a person becomes delinquent in fees to the city, whether water or sewer, or both, then the city shall 
cause the water and sewer to be disconnected from the city's system. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 6, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 82-37. - Failure to connect with city system; payment of base charges for potential connections. 
    Any person that fails or refuses to connect with and use the city's water and sewer system, then in 
addition to all remedies provided by law, such person shall pay the base charge for each potential 
connection that the person is required to, but has not, utilized. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 7, 5-1-1995) 


Sec. 82-38. - Conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances not in conflict with this article shall remain in full force and effect. Nothing in this article 
is intended to modify the requirement that any private sewer or water system must be in compliance with 
all state department of environmental regulation standards. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 8, 5-1-1995) 


Secs. 82-39—82-60. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE III. - WATER 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 82-61. - Connections to city water mains—Required. 
    All persons owning or occupying dwellings, businesses or other buildings located in the city which 
are accessible to the city water mains or lines when established and placed in operation, shall connect 
thereto unless their present water supply meets the state department of health specifications for purity. 
(Code 1972, § 18-16) 


Sec. 82-62. - Same—Point at which made. 
    Connection to the city water mains or lines shall be made at or near the property line where it joins 
the street or alley along which the mains or lines run but shall not be more than five feet inside the 
property line. 
(Code 1972, § 18-17) 


Sec. 82-63. - Same—Fees. 
    A connection fee shall be charged by the city for each connection to the city water mains or lines to 
help defray the cost of connection. Such fees shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1972, § 18-18; Ord. No. 262, 1-2-1984) 


Sec. 82-64. - Same—Service charge. 
    In addition to the connection fee charged by the city for each connection to the city water mains or 
lines, the city shall charge a service charge to be set by resolution of the city commission for each 
connection to the city water mains or lines. 
(Code 1972, § 18-18.1) 


Sec. 82-65. - Same—Permission; payment of fees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to the city water mains or lines without the specific 
permission of the city clerk, and without making the required deposit and paying the required fees. 
(Code 1972, § 18-19) 


Sec. 82-66. - Same—Separate water service. 
    The water service pipe for any building, lot or premises shall not be laid over or through any other 
building, lot or premises, and no person shall connect or cause to be connected any building, lot or 
premises with the water service pipe belonging to or supplying any other building, lot or premises, except 
that other structures in the rear of the buildings, used in connection with such buildings, or tourist courts, 
trailer parks and the like, may be supplied from the same service pipe. For any violation of this section, 
the water may be cut off, until the violation is corrected. 
(Code 1972, § 18-20) 


Sec. 82-67. - Water service charges—Schedule. 
    The rate of charge for water service shall be as set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1972, § 18-21) 


Sec. 82-68. - Prohibited reconnection after disconnection for nonpayment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on or reconnect water after it has been turned off or 
disconnected for nonpayment of the water bill. 
(Code 1972, § 18-24) 


Sec. 82-69. - Private water supply—Purity required in rented premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of any real property to rent, lease or let such property 
unless such property is connected to the city water mains or lines, or when the water supply system of the 
city is not accessible unless the water supply therefor meets state department of health specifications for 
purity. 
(Code 1972, § 18-25) 


Sec. 82-70. - Same—Maintenance prohibited when impure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or use for drinking purposes any well, pump or other 
source of water supply which does not meet state department of health specifications for drinking water. 
(Code 1972, § 18-26) 


Secs. 82-71—82-90. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION PROGRAM 


Sec. 82-91. - Purpose of division. 
    The city commission adopts and establishes this division for the control of backflow and cross 
connection within the city to protect the city water supply from pollution. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 1, 1-4-191993) 


Sec. 82-92. - Adoption of cross connection program; amendment. 
    The city commission approves and adopts as part of this division the city cross connection program 
dated January 4, 1993, and any amendments hereafter approved by the city commission. The cross 
connection program may be amended by the city commission from time to time to protect the health and 
welfare of the residents, and any amendments shall automatically become part of this division and be 
enforced in accordance with the enforcement provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 2, 1-4-1993) 


Sec. 82-93. - Responsibilities of the superintendent of the water and sewer department. 
    The superintendent of the water and sewer department, or his designated agent, shall inspect the 
plumbing in every building or premises in this city as frequently as in his judgement may be necessary to 
ensure that such plumbing has been installed in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of 
the water supply of the city by the plumbing. The superintendent shall notify or cause to be notified in 
writing the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises, to correct, within a 
reasonable time set by the superintendent, any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of 
this division, and which in his judgement, may, therefore, permit the pollution of the city water supply, or 
otherwise adversely affect the public health. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 3, 1-4-1993) 


Sec. 82-94. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The superintendent, or his designated agent, shall have the right of entry into any building, during 
reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspection of the plumbing systems installed in such building 
or premises, provided that with respect to the inspection of any single-family dwelling, consent to such 
inspection shall first be obtained from a person of suitable age and discretion therein or in control thereof. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 4, 1-4-1993) 


Sec. 82-95. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a) ?General requirements. It shall be the responsibility of building and premises owners to maintain all 
backflow preventers and vacuum breakers within the building or on the premises in good working 
order and to make no piping or other arrangements for the purpose of bypassing backflow devices. 
(b) ?Backflow preventers. Periodic testing and inspection schedules shall be established by the 
superintendent for all backflow preventers, and the interval between such testing and inspections 
and overhauls of each device shall be established in accordance with the age and condition of the 
device. Inspection intervals should not exceed one year, and overhaul intervals should not exceed 
five years. These devices should be inspected frequently after the initial installation to ensure that 
they have been installed properly and that debris resulting from the installation has not interfered 
with the functioning of the device. The testing procedures shall be in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions when approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 5, 1-4-1993) 


Sec. 82-96. - Enforcement; penalties for violation of division. 
(a) ?Notification of violation. The superintendent shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, 
of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this division, of such violation. The 
superintendent shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. 
Upon the failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of the specified time interval 
the superintendent may, if in his judgement an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water 
service to the building or premises to be terminated, and/or recommend such additional fines or 
penalties to be invoked as may be provided in this section. 
(b) ?Fines. The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing 
systems in the building who knowingly permits a violation to remain uncorrected after the expiration 
of time set by the superintendent shall, upon conviction by the court, be required to pay a fine of not 
more than $100.00 for each violation. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements of this 
division, after the specified time provided under subsection (a) of this section, shall constitute a 
separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 6, 1-4-1993) 


Sec. 82-97. - Appeals; board established; hearings. 
(a) ?Members of board; chairman. The city commission shall be designated as the backflow and cross 
connection program appeals board to decide appeals from any decision, ruling or determination of 
the inspection by the superintendent or his designated agent. The mayor shall serve as chairman of 
the appeals board. 
(b) ?Appeals. Any person seeking a variance from the provisions of this division or any person taking 
exception to and who is uniquely affected by any decision, ruling, requirement, rule, regulation or 
order of the inspection agency may appeal to the board, as established by this section. Such appeals 
shall be made within 15 days after receiving notice of such decision, ruling, requirement, rule, 
regulation or order by filing a written notice of appeal directly to the appeals board specifying the 
grounds of the appeal and the relief requested. Such an appeal shall act as a stay of the decision, 
ruling, requirement, rule, regulation or order in question until the board has taken final action on the 
appeal, except when the inspection agency has deemed that a high-hazard risk is involved. The 
board, not less than 30 days after the date of filing an appeal, shall set a date for the hearing and 
shall give notice of the hearing by mail to the interested parties. 
(c) ?Hearings. Hearings before the board shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1) ?The chairman of the board shall act as the hearing examiner to conduct such hearings. 
(2) ?Any person making an appeal who is uniquely affected by the action of the inspection agency 
may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present evidence, both written or oral, 
pertinent to the questions and issues involved and may examine and cross examine witnesses. 
(3) ?All testimony shall be under oath and recorded. The board is authorized to have all the 
testimony transcribed, and a transcript of such testimony, if transcribed, shall be available to the 
respondents or any party to the hearing upon payment of the currently required fee, which shall 
not exceed the cost of transcribing such testimony. 
(4) ?After due consideration of the written and oral statements, the testimony and arguments 
submitted at the hearing upon such complaint, or upon default in appearance of the respondent 
on the return date specified in the formal notice of complaint, the board shall issue and enter 
such final order or make such final determination as it shall deem appropriate, and shall 
immediately notify the respondent, in writing, by certified mail. Such order or determination shall 
be approved by at least a majority of members of the board. The chairman shall vote only in 
cases of ties. 
(5) ?Upon failure of the board to enter a final order or determination within 60 days after the final 
argument of any such hearing, the respondent shall be entitled to treat for all purposes such 
failure to act as a finding favorable to the respondent. 
(6) ?Any person aggrieved by any final order or determination of the board under this division may 
seek judicial review thereof by common law writ of certiorari. No judicial review shall be 
available until and after all administrative remedies have been exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 7, 1-4-1993) 


Secs. 82-98—82-130. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE IV. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 


DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 


Sec. 82-131. - Sewer connections and septic tanks; tanks required when sewer unavailable; making 
connections. 
    When a sewer is not available, a septic tank must be used. Such septic tank shall be approved by 
the state department of health. Such septic tank and drainlines must be inspected by the state 
department of health before being covered up. All house connections with this tank must be installed by a 
licensed plumber; provided, however, that any person may do his own work on his own property. 
(Code 1972, § 18-38) 


Sec. 82-132. - Discharge or storage of effluent material. 
(a) ?No person shall in any way discharge any type of effluent material into the public sewer system 
except in accordance with the regulations of the state department of environmental protection or the 
federal Environmental Protection Agency and county ordinances, and must possess written 
permission from the city. 
(b) ?No storage of discharged or effluent material shall be allowed within the corporate limits of the city 
without written permission from the city. 
(Ord. No. 265, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-1985) 


Secs. 82-133—82-150. - Reserved. 


DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 


Subdivision I. - In General 


Sec. 82-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical 
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, 
expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives 
the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to 
the building sewer, and extending five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of 
disposal. 
    Bulk customer means any existing private sewer system utility that is not a septic tank and that 
provides wastewater or sewer collection or treatment services to real estate developments such as 
subdivisions, apartments, trailer parks, residences, whether multiple-family or single-family, or places of 
business or assembly. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Establishment means any place of industry, business, assembly, or residence, whether multiple-
family or single-family, including all buildings, structures, trailers, mobile homes, vehicles or tents, and the 
land appertaining thereto. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and 
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business 
as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water 
or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Private sewer system utility means any facility, except a septic tank, that provides wastewater or 
sewer treatment service and that is not owned and controlled by a public authority. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food 
that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions 
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any 
dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which 
is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and 
groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank means a tank or receptacle used as a reservoir for receiving or disposing sewage wastes 
at a total estimated daily waste flow of less than or equal to 2,000 gallons for any one establishment. The 
city may be guided by the table of flows, in Fla. Admin. Code Rule § 10D-6.26(2)(b), and any amendment 
thereto, when determining the total estimated daily waste flow of one establishment. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, 
institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater 
as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given 
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five 
times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, 
but excludes sewage and industrial waters, other than unpolluted cooling waters. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, 
sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    User means each connection by a person to the public sewer. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. I, § 1-26, 8-25-1981) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 


Sec. 82-152. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a) ?No agreement for sewage discharge into the city's system shall become effective until all 
requirements of this division or related ordinances are met to the satisfaction of the city and in 
accordance with standard city specifications. 
(b) ?Any person found to be violating any provisions of this division except subdivision IV of this division 
shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a 
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of 
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(c) ?Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (b) of 
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by 
section 1-12. 
(d) ?Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be liable to the city for any expense, 
loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation, including attorney's fees. 
(e) ?Any unpaid charges for sewer services imposed under this division and any unpaid fines or other 
assessments imposed under this division shall constitute a lien on the property served by the sewer. 
Such lien shall be perfected by filing of a notice of claim by the city in the office of the clerk of the 
county circuit court setting forth the description of the property, the name of the owner according to 
the last completed tax roll and the amount of the claim. Such lien shall continue in force for a period 
of five years from the date of filing. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. VI, § 5, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-153. - Construction of private sewer system. 
    Except as hereinafter provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain a septic 
tank, private sewer system utility, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. II, § 1, 8-25-1981; Ord. No. 248-A, § 1, 7-5-1982) 


Sec. 82-154. - Owners required to install suitable toilet facilities; connection with public sewer. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation 
or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is 
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby 
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with 
the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within the time period specified 
by written notice from the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. II, § 2, 8-25-1981; Ord. No. 248-A, § 2, 7-5-1982) 


Sec. 82-155. - Connection regulations; fee. 
    All connections to the public sewer shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations that 
shall be adopted from time to time by the city, which rules and regulations may provide for a charge for 
making any connections. Such charge shall be termed a "connection fee," and such connection fee shall 
be in such reasonable amount as the city may fix and determine. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. II, § 3, 8-25-1981; Ord. No. 248-A, § 3, 7-5-1982) 


Sec. 82-156. - Construction and design of new sewers and connections. 
    All new sewers and connections to the sewer system must be properly designed and constructed 
according to the standards established by the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 248-A, § 4, 7-5-1982) 


Sec. 82-157. - Exceptions to mandatory connection requirements of section 82-154. 
    There shall be the following exceptions to the mandatory connection requirements set forth in section 
82-154: 
(1) ?No connections shall be required where the public sewer is more than 100 feet from the 
property line of an owner utilizing a septic tank. Before commencement of construction of a 
septic tank, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city that finds that the use of a 
septic tank is within this exception and is permissible. 
(2) ?No connections shall be required of a person who owns or operates a private sewer system 
utility that provides wastewater or sewer treatment services to real estate developments, such 
as subdivisions, apartments, trailer parks, residences, whether multiple-family or single-family, 
or places of industry, business or assembly, and that is existing and operating on the effective 
date of the ordinance from which this division was derived if such person can show that the 
operation of the private sewer system utility does not endanger the public health, safety and 
welfare. A valid state department of environmental regulation permit and evidence that the 
operation of the private sewer system utility is in compliance with all state department of 
environmental regulation standards, shall be prima facie evidence that such private sewer 
system utility is operating in a manner that does not endanger the public health, safety and 
welfare. Any persons who owns or operates a private sewer system utility shall allow the city to 
inspect the utility at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner and shall furnish such 
information as may be requested by the city sufficient to show that the utility is operating in a 
manner so as to not endanger the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. II, § 4, 8-25-1981; Ord. No. 248-A, § 5, 7-5-1982) 


Sec. 82-158. - Failure to connect with and use public sewer; payment of base charge for potential 
connections. 
    If any owner described in section 82-154, who does not fall within an exception to the connection 
requirement as outlined in section 82-157, shall fail and refuse to connect with and use the facilities of the 
public sewer after notification by the city, as provided in this subdivision, then, in addition to all remedies 
provided by law, such owner shall pay the base charge as defined in section 82-241(1) and (2) for each 
potential connection that the owner is required to, but has not, utilized. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. II, § 5, 8-25-1981; Ord. No. 248-A, § 6, 7-5-1982) 


Secs. 82-159—82-180. - Reserved. 


Subdivision II. - Building Sewer Construction and Connections 


Sec. 82-181. - Permit—Required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or 
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 1, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-182. - Same—Classes. 
    There shall be three classes of building sewer permits: 
(1) ?For residential service; 
(2) ?For commercial service; and 
(3) ?For service to businesses producing industrial wastes. 
In each case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The 
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered 
pertinent in the judgment of the city. A reasonable permit and inspection fee may be established by the 
city for each class of building sewer permit. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 2, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-183. - Costs and expenses to be borne by owner; indemnification of city from loss or damage; 
connection fee. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be 
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or 
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The city may charge a reasonable 
connection fee. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 3, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-184. - Separate and independent sewer for each building to be provided; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; provided, however, 
that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or 
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building 
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one 
building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 4, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-185. - Use of old sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on 
examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 5, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-186. - Size, slope, alignment, materials and methods. 
    The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be 
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the 
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 6, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-187. - Lifting of sewage. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the 
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public 
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and 
discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 7, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-188. - Connection to sources of groundwater or surface runoff. 
    No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, 
swimming pools, air conditioning or heating systems or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to 
a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary 
sewer. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 8, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-189. - Connection requirements. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the 
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections 
shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must 
be approved by the city before installation. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 9, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-190. - Permit applicant to notify city of readiness for inspection and connection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for 
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the 
city. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 10, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-191. - Guarding of excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights 
so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed 
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. III, § 11, 8-25-1981) 


Secs. 82-192—82-210. - Reserved. 


Subdivision III. - Discharges Into Sewers 


Sec. 82-211. - Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, 
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, unpolluted industrial process waters, air 
conditioning condensate, any discharge from any air conditioning or heating system including heat 
pumps, or swimming pools into any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 1, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-212. - Use of storm sewers and natural outlets. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically 
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or natural outlets approved by the city. Industrial 
cooling water or unpolluted process waters shall be discharged to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or 
natural outlet approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 2, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-213. - Prohibited waters or wastes. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes 
to any public sewers: 
(1) ?Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2) ?Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, gases in sufficient quantity, 
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment 
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any 
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including, but not limited to, 
cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3) ?Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property 
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage 
works. 
(4) ?Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the 
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but 
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, 
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails 
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5) ?Any industrial waste or septic tank pump-out unless approved for discharge by the city. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 3, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-214. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, 
waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, 
sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can 
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming the opinion as to the 
acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject 
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers; nature of 
the sewage treatment process; capacity of the sewage treatment plant; degree of treatability of wastes in 
the sewage treatment plant; and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1) ?Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees 
Celsius). 
(2) ?Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 
100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures 
between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius). 
(3) ?Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any 
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. 
(4) ?Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating 
solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5) ?Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or 
toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such a degree that 
any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds 
the limits established by the city for such materials. 
(6) ?Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-producing or odor-producing 
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as 
necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, 
federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7) ?Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits 
established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8) ?Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9) ?Materials which exert or cause: 
a. ?Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, 
lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium 
chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b. ?Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning 
solutions. 
c. ?Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to 
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d. ?Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(10) ?Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by 
the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree 
that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having 
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 4, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-215. - Enforcement procedures. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which 
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 82-214, and which in 
the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or 
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1) ?Reject the wastes; 
(2) ?Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3) ?Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4) ?Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by 
existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 82-220. 
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants 
and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of 
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 5, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-216. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are 
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any 
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required 
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the 
city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 6, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-217. - Maintenance of pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they 
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 7, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-218. - Installation of control manhole. 
    When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial 
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other 
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. 
Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in 
accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, 
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 8, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-219. - Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference 
is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for 
the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and 
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control 
manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the 
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon 
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular 
analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate 
or whether grab samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solid analyses 
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab 
samples. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 9, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-220. - Special arrangements between city and industrial users. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or 
arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength 
or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial 
concern. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 10, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-221. - Right of entry by city inspection agents. 
    Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be 
permitted to enter all properties at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purposes of 
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this 
division. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. IV, § 11, 8-25-1981) 


Secs. 82-222—82-240. - Reserved. 


Subdivision IV. - Charges and Rates 


Sec. 82-241. - Levy and assessment; collection; enumeration. 
    Charges and assessments are hereby levied and assessed by the city to be collected by the city, 
payable to the city for services to resident and nonresident users of the municipal sewer lines, mains and 
laterals for the disposal of wastewater provided by the city to those residences and commercial and 
industrial establishments which are connected with the sewer system, which charges are designated in 
this section. The users shall pay for such services the sums so designated at the same time as the 
payment for water services shall be made, as provided by the ordinances of the city, and which charges 
shall be assessed upon the water bill of all users. The user shall pay such charges as set forth in this 
section as follows: 
(1) ?Each residential user shall pay a base charge independent of volume of water consumed, of at 
least $5.20 per month and an additive charge based on metered volume of water consumed of 
at least $1.20 per 1,000 gallons, subject to a maximum residential billing for 15,000 gallons and 
minimum of 4,000 gallons monthly. Actual rates shall be established by resolution. 
(2) ?For purposes of determining residential sewer charges in the winter months of December 
through February, each user's water consumption shall be taken as that metered water volume 
properly billed during the current month. 
(3) ?For purposes of determining residential sewer charges in the nonwinter months of March 
through November, each user's water consumption shall be taken as the average metered 
volume properly billed in the preceding winter months (December through February). 
(4) ?For those residential users initially served during nonwinter months (March through November) 
for whom no prior winter consumption figures are available, charges during the initial nonwinter 
period of service shall be determined based on an estimated volume of 75 percent of the 
metered volume properly billed for the current month. Residential users are those defined as 
generating only domestic waste. 
(5) ?Multiple residential units that have individual meters for each unit are considered as residential 
users and are limited to the maximum residential billing of 15,000 gallons per month per meter. 
However, if served by a master meter, they are not subject to the maximum billing of 15,000 
gallons per month. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 1, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-242. - Base and additive charges for commercial and industrial users; exceptions; surcharge 
calculation. 
(a) ?Each commercial and industrial user, which shall include all establishments classified in the United 
States, Office of Management and Budget, Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, and 
which are not residential users, shall pay a base charge independent of water volume consumed of 
$5.20 per month. The additive charge based on metered volume of water consumed by each class 
per 1,000 gallons per month is $1.20 per 1,000 gallons, per month. These users are also subject to 
additional charges to be determined by the city for pollutants in excess of normal wastewater. 
Governmental buildings (other than hospitals), schools, churches or other eleemosynary institutions 
are excluded as commercial or industrial users and shall be treated as residential users, but shall not 
be subject to the 15,000 gallons per month maximum. 
(b) ?For the purpose of ensuring a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance cost to each 
user, commercial and industrial users shall be subject to a surcharge for discharging wastewater 
which is defined as having the following concentrations (milligrams per liter - mg/l): 
(1) ?Biochemical oxygen demand at five days at 20 degrees Celsius, abbreviated BOD 5 - 250 mg/l; 
and 
(2) ?Total suspended solids, abbreviated TSS - 220 mg/l. 
(c) ?Each commercial and industrial user that is determined to discharge wastewater having pollutants in 
excess of normal wastewater shall pay a charge dependent on water volume consumed or 
wastewater discharged and measured by a wastewater flow meter. These pollutant surcharges are 
as follows: 
(1) ?BOD 5 $0.228 per pound/month 
(2) ?TSS $0.341 per pound/month 
(d) ?Pollutants in excess of normal wastewater shall be determined from periodic laboratory analysis of 
the user's wastewater. Laboratory analysis of the wastewater shall be conducted as outlined in the 
latest publication of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, or 
American Society for Testing and Materials, part 31, Water, or the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency Methods. 
(e) ?If a commercial or industrial user discharges certain wastes containing inordinate oxygen 
demanding substances, the city reserves the right to substitute a chemical oxygen demand (COD) or 
total organic carbon (TOC) test instead of BOD 5 . An evaluation of the user's discharge and the cost 
of treatment will be established for such substances. If an industrial user chooses or elects to use 
COD, the equivalent domestic waste level is 583 mg/l. If an industrial user requests to use TOC, then 
his proposed methodology shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to it being used as a basis 
for charging for this particular pollutant. It shall be the responsibility of all industrials and any 
commercial customer to notify the city of changes in the pollutant and contribution of their 
wastewater. 
(f) ?For purposes of determining commercial and industrial sewer charges, each user's water 
consumption or wastewater discharged and measured by a wastewater flow meter shall be taken as 
that metered water volume consumed during the current month. 
(g) ?If commercial or industrial users can prove to the satisfaction of the city that substantial amounts of 
metered water do not enter the wastewater collection system, the sewer bill will be reduced 
accordingly. 
(h) ?Commercial and industrial users may be served by separate agreement with the city for wastewater 
services. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 2, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-243. - Measurement or estimate of wastewater rates. 
    If the city does not furnish water to the users described in sections 82-241 and 82-242, the water 
meter used for such unit shall be the measuring instrument unless it shall be found to be faulty or 
inaccurate by the city. If the meter is found to be faulty or inaccurate, or if there is no meter, then the city 
shall estimate the wastewater rates in accord with the rate schedules described in sections 82-241 and 
82-242; the city may install a meter at its option and at the expense of the user; or the user, at his option, 
may install a meter acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 3, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-244. - User responsibility for cost increases due to toxic pollutant discharges. 
    Each user that discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the 
effluent or the sludge treatment works shall pay for such increased cost. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 4, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-245. - Annual review and adjustment. 
    Rates are to be adjusted annually, based on the adopted budget for the wastewater system. This 
annual review and adjustment shall be the result of studies that reflect any change in the proportionate 
contribution of wastewater flow or pollutant by any class of user. The adjusted rates, whether an increase 
or decrease, shall be reflected in each subsequent billing period by the amount of such change. This 
annual review will ensure a proportional distribution of operation, maintenance, renewal and replacement, 
and other costs to each user including major and minor industrials, commercials and residential users. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 5, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-246. - Delinquent bills; remedies. 
    The city may charge a reasonable late charge if the sewer bill is not paid within ten days from the 
date the bill is due. A sewer bill that has not been paid within 30 days from the date same was due is 
delinquent. The city shall have the right to use all legal remedies to collect such delinquent bill including, 
but not limited to, cutting off water service and sewer service to the customer whose bill is delinquent. 
Delinquent charges shall bear interest at the rate of 15 percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 6, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-247. - Sewer security deposit. 
    The city may charge a reasonable sewer security deposit. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 7, 8-25-1981) 


Sec. 82-248. - Bulk customer rates. 
    Bulk customers as defined herein may discharge sewage into the public system only on approval of 
the city and on such terms and at such rates as the city shall establish for each bulk customer. 
(Ord. No. 248, art. V, § 8, 8-25-1981) 


Secs. 82-249—82-260. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE V. - URBAN SERVICE AREA[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 528, §§ 1—5, adopted July 5, 2016, added provisions to the Code, but did not 
specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included 
as Art. V, §§ 82-261—82-265. 


Sec. 82-261. - Recognition and creation of district. 
    The city hereby declares there to have existed and hereby creates an urban service area in which 
the city has in the past and intends to continue engage in all of the activities authorized by F.S. § 180.06, 
less those activities dealing with collection and disposal of garbage and the construction of airports, 
hospitals, jails and golf courses. This urban service area is declared to be a logical area expected to be 
annexed by the city as growth occurs. By declaring the existence of this urban service area, the city 
proposes and intends to be the governing body regarding the services to be provided through the 
enactment of this article to the exclusion of the control of any other governing body. This declaration is 
necessary for promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 1, 7-5-2016) 


Sec. 82-262. - District boundaries. 
    The boundary of the urban service area shall consist of the area as more specifically described and 
depicted in the map attached hereto and incorporated herein as exhibit A. It is further recognized that 
future conditions may exist from time to time which would necessitate amending the boundary to include 
more or less area. Any such amendments shall be made by the city in accordance with F.S. § 180.02. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 2, 7-5-2016) 


Sec. 82-263. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the creation of the urban service area for the city and the surrounding areas are as 
follows: 
(1) ?To provide for long-range capital improvements for the betterment of the health, safety, and 
welfare of the public as part of the long-range planning activities within the city; 
(2) ?To clearly identify an area for long-range capital improvements of the services defined herein; 
(3) ?To provide for the efficient extension of municipal or urban services as the capabilities of the 
city permit and as the need for such services are apparent; 
(4) ?To identify an area that the city may eventually consider annexing into its corporate either by 
referendum or voluntary annexation procedures as set out in F.S. ch. 171; 
(5) ?To clearly identify an area to the exclusion of other governmental entities for the provision of 
municipal or urban services in order to prevent duplication of services and to promote efficient 
service delivery; 
(6) ?To reaffirm the city's recognition as an urban growth center and as a supplier of sewer and 
water and other services; 
(7) ?To authorize the city to charge the full costs of extension or construction fees, rates or other 
charges as may be applicable under federal, state, or city laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 3, 7-5-2016) 


Sec. 82-264. - Connection regulation. 
(a) ?All persons or corporations living or doing business within the urban service area are required to 
connect to the city sewer and water system within 365 days of such services becoming available. 
(b) ?All such connections to the city's utility systems shall be governed by chapter 82 of the Code of 
Ordinances of the City of Springfield and all other laws, rules, or regulations which may apply. 
(c) ?The city is authorized to prescribe further reasonable regulations regarding all persons or 
corporations living or doing business within the urban service area regarding their connection, when 
available, with any service or utility constructed, provided, operated, or to be constructed, provided, 
and operated under the provisions of F.S. ch. 180. 
(d) ?The city expresses its intention to continue to work with the Board of County Commissioners of Bay 
County, Florida, to assure the maximum benefit of said services to the persons or corporations living 
or doing business within the urban service area. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 4, 7-5-2016) 


Sec. 82-265. - Reservation. 
    The city reserves the right to determine the manner, location, degree, and extent of any service utility 
extension within the urban service area by subsequent ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance 
with the procedures set forth in F.S. ch. 180. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 5, 7-5-2016) 
 
(Ord. No. 528, Exh. A, 7-5-2016) 


Secs. 82-266—82-280. - Reserved. 


ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 537, §§ 1—12, adopted May 1, 2017, added provisions to the Code, but did not 
specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included 
as Art. VI, §§ 82-281—82-292. 


Sec. 82-281. - Authority. 
    The City of Springfield is authorized by the Florida Constitution and the provisions of F.S. ch. 166 
and F.S. § 403.0893 to construct, reconstruct, improve, and extend stormwater utility systems and to 
issue revenue bonds and other debts if needed to finance in whole or part the cost of such system and to 
establish just and equitable rates, fees, and charges for the services and facilities provided by the system. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-282. - Findings and determinations. 
    It is hereby found, determined, and declared as follows: 
(1) ?Those elements of the system which provide for the collection of and disposal of stormwater 
and regulation of groundwater are of benefit and provide services to all property within the City 
of Springfield, including property not presently served by the storm water system. 
(2) ?The costs of operating and maintaining the city stormwater management system and financing 
necessary repairs, replacement, improvements, and extension thereof should, to the extent 
practicable, be allocated in relationship to the benefits enjoyed and services received therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 2, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-283. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply; words used in the singular shall 
include the plural, and the plural, the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future 
tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not 
defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in 
the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary. 
    Availability charge means a charge to a developer or individual resident to recover the debt service 
and extension and replacement costs paid on a stormwater management system facility that had been 
previously constructed, but which serves such developer or individual resident. 
    Bonds means revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt obligations issued or incurred to 
finance the costs of construction. 
    Costs of construction means costs reasonably incurred in connection with providing capital 
improvements to the system or any portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the costs of (1) 
acquisition of all property, real or personal, and all interests in connection therewith including all rights-of-
way and easements therefor, (2) physical construction, installation and testing, including the costs of 
labor, services, materials, supplies and utility services used in connection therewith, (3) architectural, 
engineering, legal and other professional services, (4) insurance premiums taken out and maintained 
during construction, to the extent not paid for by a contractor for construction and installation, (5) any 
taxes or other charges which become due during construction, (6) expenses incurred by the city or on its 
behalf with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor or sub-contractor in 
respect of any default under a contract relating to construction, (7) principal of and interest of any bonds, 
and (8) miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto. 
    Debt service means, with respect to any particular fiscal year and any particular series of bonds, an 
amount equal to the sum of (1) all interest payable on such bonds during such fiscal year, plus (2) any 
principal installments of such bonds during such fiscal year. 
    Developed property means real property which has been altered from "natural" state by the addition 
of any improvements such as a building, structure, or impervious surface. For new construction, property 
shall be considered developed pursuant to this article: (1) upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or 
upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued; or (2) if construction is 
at least 50 percent complete and construction is halted for a period of three months. 
    Director means the public works director or his designee. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for 
one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Equivalent residential unit or ERU means the average impervious area of residential developed 
property per dwelling unit located within the city and as established by commission resolution as provided 
herein. 
    ERU rate means a utility fee charged on each ERU as established by commission resolution as 
provided herein. 
    Extension and replacement means costs of extensions, additions and capital improvements to, or the 
renewal and replacement of capital assets of, or purchasing and installing new equipment for, the system, 
or land acquisition for the system and any related costs thereto, or paying extraordinary maintenance and 
repair, including the costs of construction, or any other expenses which are not costs of operation and 
maintenance or debt service. 
    Fee-in-lieu-of charge means a charge to a developer or individual resident to recover (1) the costs of 
construction and debt service on a new stormwater management system facility which serves such 
developer or individual resident, or (2) the extension and replacement costs necessitated by development 
undertaken by such developer or individual resident. 
    Fiscal year means a 12-month period commencing on the first day of October of any year, or such 
other 12-month period adopted as the fiscal year of the utility. 
    Impervious area means metal roofed and paved areas, including, but not limited to, areas covered by 
roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and athletic courts. 
    Non-residential developed property means developed property that is classified by the property 
appraiser as land use types 10 through 99 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as 
amended or supplemented, excluding land use types 50 through 69. 
    Operating budget means the annual utility operating budget adopted by the city for the succeeding 
fiscal year. 
    Operations and maintenance means the current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, 
maintenance and current repair of the system, as calculated in accordance with sound accounting 
practice, and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative 
expenses, labor, executive compensation, the cost of materials and supplies used for current operations, 
and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves for current expenses not annually incurred, but 
which are such as may reasonably be expected to be incurred in accordance with sound accounting 
practice. 
    Property appraiser means the office of the county property appraiser. 
    Residential developed property means developed property that is classified by the property appraiser 
as land use types 00 through 09 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as amended 
or supplemented. 
    Revenues mean all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by 
the utility, in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received 
from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by all as 
calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
    Stormwater management system or system means the existing stormwater management of the city 
and all improvements thereto which by this article are constituted as the property and responsibility of the 
utility, to be operated as an enterprise fund to, among other things, conserve water, control discharges 
necessitated by rainfall events, incorporate methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or 
reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation and water pollution 
or otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system. 
    Undeveloped property means property which is not developed property. For the purposes of this 
article, undeveloped property includes, but is not limited to, parcels identified by the property appraiser as 
agricultural with land use types 50 through 69 using the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, 
as amended or supplemented. 
    Undisturbed area means all or a portion of a parcel which has not been altered from its natural state 
by dredging, filling, removal of trees and vegetation or other activities which have disturbed or altered the 
topography or soils on the property. 
    Utility fee means a utility fee authorized by Florida law and this article which is established to pay 
operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service. 
    Stormwater management utility or utility means the enterprise fund utility created by this article to 
operate, maintain and improve the system. 
    Vacant ERU or VERU means the stormwater runoff potential of an undeveloped property relative to 
a single-family parcel of the same size. For the purposes of this article, there shall be 0.36 VERU per acre 
of undeveloped property. 
    Vacant ERU rate or VERU rate means the utility fee charged to each VERU as established by the 
commission by resolution as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 3, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-284. - Establishment of stormwater management utility. 
(a) ?The stormwater management utility is hereby established by the commission to provide for the 
general welfare of the city and its residents. 
(b) ?The director shall be the chief staff member of the utility. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 4, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-285. - Operating budget. 
    The city shall adopt an operating budget not later than the first day of each fiscal year. The operating 
budget shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated costs for operations 
and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt service. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 5, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-286. - Required levels of rates for utility fees. 
    The commission shall require that adequate revenues are generated to provide for a balanced 
operating budget by at least annually setting sufficient levels of utility fees. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 6, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-287. - Imposition of utility fees and rate schedule. 
    The commission hereby authorizes the imposition of utility fees on all property within the city. 
(a) ?Property classification. For the purposes of determining the utility fee, all property within the city 
shall be classified, into one of the following classes: 
(1) ?Residential developed property; 
(2) ?Non-residential developed property; or 
(3) ?Undeveloped property. 
(b) ?Computation of utility fee for non-residential developed property. The utility fee for residential 
developed property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units 
existing on the property. 
(c) ?Computation of utility fee for non-residential developed property. The utility fee for non-residential 
developed property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the 
total impervious area of a non-residential developed property by one ERU. The minimum utility fee 
for any non-residential developed property shall be equal to one ERU rate. 
(d) ?Computation of utility fee for undeveloped property. The utility fee for undeveloped property shall be 
equal to the VERU rate times a numerical factor determined by multiplying the total acreage of the 
parcel excluding undisturbed areas by 0.36 VERU per acre. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 7, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-288. - Billing and payment; penalties. 
(a) ?The method of collection of the stormwater management utility fee shall be established before 
October 1, 2017, at which time the commission shall hold a public hearing to consider adopting a 
resolution of intent to place the fee on the tax bill as a non-ad valorem assessment (fee) pursuant to 
F.S. § 197.3632. 
(b) ?In the event the commission adopts the resolution of intent to place the fee on the tax bill, the 
commission shall further hold a public hearing between June 1 and September 15, 2017, to adopt a 
non-ad valorem assessment roll as provided by F.S. § 197.3632(4), and give all statutory notices for 
the hearing. The commission shall adopt a rate resolution prior to adopting the non-ad valorem 
assessment roll. The rate resolution may be considered at the same public hearing set to adopting 
the roll. 
(c) ?In the event the annual stormwater management utility fee is collected pursuant to F.S. § 197.3632, 
it shall be subject to all collection provisions of F.S. ch. 197, including provisions relating to discount 
for early payment, prepayment by installment method, deferred payment, penalty for delinquent 
payment, and issuance and sale of tax certificates and tax deeds for nonpayment, as provided by 
law. Such assessment (fee) is subject to becoming a lien against homestead, as provided in section 
4, article X, Florida Constitution. 
(d) ?In the event the commission does not adopt the resolution of intent to place the assessment (fee) on 
the tax bill, it shall establish an alternative method of collection. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 8, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-289. - Adjustment of fees. 
(a) ?Request for adjustment of the utility fee shall be submitted to the director who is hereby given the 
authority to develop and administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of fees as 
established herein. All requests shall be judged on the basis of the amount of impervious area on the 
site. No credit shall be given for the installation of facilities required by city development codes or 
state stormwater rules. The following procedures shall apply to all adjustment requests of the 
stormwater fee: 
(1) ?Any owner who has paid his utility fees and who believes his utility fee to be incorrect may, 
subject to the limitations set forth in this article, submit an adjustment request to the director. 
(2) ?Adjustment requests for the utility fees shall be in writing and must set forth, in detail, the 
grounds upon which relief is sought. 
(3) ?Adjustment requests made during the first calendar year that the utility fee is imposed will be 
reviewed by the director within a two-month period from the date of filing of the adjustment 
request. Adjustments resulting from such request shall be retroactive to the beginning of 
billings, but retroactive adjustment shall not exceed one year. 
(4) ?The owner requesting the adjustment may be required, at his own cost, to provide 
supplemental information to the director including, but not limited to, survey data approved by 
either a registered professional land surveyor (R.P.L.S.) and engineering reports approved by a 
professional engineer (P.E.). Failure to provide such information may result in the denial of the 
adjustment request. 
(5) ?Adjustments to the utility fee will be made upon the granting of the adjustment request, in 
writing, by the director. Denials of adjustment requests shall be made, in writing, by the director. 
(6) ?If the assessment (fee) is placed on the tax bill, the adjustment request must be made within 60 
days after opening of the tax roll collection. If the assessment (fee) is not placed on the tax bill, 
the adjustment request must be made during the year the assessment (fee) is imposed. The 
adjustment request will be reviewed by the director within a four-month period from the date of 
filing of the adjustment request. Consideration by the director of the owner's request for 
adjustment shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to make timely payment of the 
assessment (fee). In the event an adjustment is granted by the director which decreased the 
assessment (fee), the owner shall be entitled to a refund of excess assessments (fees) paid. If 
the assessment (fee) is placed on the tax bill, the refund shall be mailed by the tax collector. 
(b) ?If the assessment (fee) is placed on the tax bill, any errors in the assessment (fee) or failure to 
charge an assessment (fee) may be corrected by the director within 60 days after opening of the tax 
roll for collection. If the assessment (fee) is not placed on the tax bill, any errors in the assessment 
(fee) or failure to charge an assessment (fee) may be corrected by the director during the year in 
which the assessment (fee) is imposed. Corrections which result in an increase in the assessment 
(fee) cannot be imposed until the owner has consented in writing to the increase or has been given 
at least ten days' notice by certified mail and an opportunity to be heard by the commission. Once 
the fee is finalized, the director shall send documentation reflecting the adjustment to the owner and, 
if the assessment (fee) is placed on the tax bill, the documentation will also be sent to the tax 
collector. 
(1) ?The commission, shall complete their review within 30 days of receipt of said request for 
review. The city commission's determination on the review shall be in writing and set forth in 
detail, the reasons for their decision. 
(2) ?In reviewing denials of adjustment requests, the city commission shall apply the standards and 
review criteria contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 9, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-290. - Capital contributions. 
(a) ?Where the city has constructed or plans to construct stormwater facilities which are proposed to be 
used by a developer in lieu of a facility usually required to be constructed by him, the city may accept 
a capital contribution from the developer and waive certain construction requirements. 
(b) ?Procedures and standards developed by the city shall define appropriate means to optimize the 
developer's capital contributions in the construction or refunding of stormwater systems. These 
capital contributions shall take the form of fee-in-lieu-of or availability charges. Each situation will be 
analyzed by the city and a specific written decision will be developed. The application of each is 
defined as follows: 
(1) ?Fee-in-lieu-of is applied to a site specific negotiated procedure, wherein a development's 
stormwater contribution (quantity and quality) is assessed its share of the capital needs of the 
facilities required to serve the development in question. This capital contribution would be used 
for the construction or refunding of city-owned stormwater facilities. The process does not apply 
wherein the stormwater facilities are privately held. Each application is evaluated against the 
city's master plan, or where the master plan is incomplete, against the cumulative impacts from 
the development. 
(2) ?Availability charge is administered on a site specific basis identical to the fee-in-lieu-of 
procedure noted above. The only difference is that the capital investment advanced by the city 
in implementing a stormwater facility is now recovered through an availability charge. The 
capital charge is determined on a pro-rata share of the capacity used by the new applicant as 
measured by the cumulative impact from the development upon all impacted facilities applied to 
the present worth of the original capital expenditure. In the case of a developer constructing 
stormwater management facilities in excess of the site needs, the city may enter an agreement 
with that developer to rebate fee-in-lieu-of charges paid to the city by other developers utilizing 
those facilities over a period of time not exceeding seven years from the date of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 10, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-291. - Program responsibility. 
    It shall be the duty of the public works director to administer the stormwater management utility. The 
public works director shall keep an accurate record of all persons using the services and facilities of said 
stormwater management system of the city and to make changes in accordance with the rates and 
changes established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 11, 5-1-2017) 


Sec. 82-292. - Stormwater management utility funds. 
    There shall be established a stormwater management utility fund for the deposit of all fees and 
charges collected by the stormwater utility. These funds shall be for the exclusive use of the city's 
stormwater management utility, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1) ?Administrative costs associated with the management of the stormwater management utility; 
(2) ?Planning and engineering; 
(3) ?Operation and maintenance of the system; 
(4) ?Funding of pollution abatement devices constructed on stormwater systems discharging to the 
surface water of the city; or 
(5) ?Debt service financing. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 12, 5-1-2017) 


APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
    The following is a list of franchises granted by the city and currently in force and effect: 

Fra
nch
isee 
Ord
. 
No. 
Effe
ctiv
e  
Dat
e 
Ter
m 
(1) 
Gul
f 
Po
wer 
Co
mp
any 
276  
(A
md. 
by 
335
)  
(A
md. 
by 
415
) 
?2-
27-
198
7  
?4-
15-
200
2 
15 
yea
rs 
(2) 
We
st 
Flor
ida 
Nat
ural 
Gas 
Co
mp
any 
290 

15 
yea
rs 
(3) 
Co
mc
ast 
Cab
levi
sio
n of  
Pan
am
a 
City
, 
Inc. 
403 
?4-
25-
200
0 
7 
yea
rs 
(4) 
Sou
the
rn 
Bell 
Tel
eph
one 
and 
Tel
egr
aph 
Co
mp
any 
303 
?3-?
3-
199
2 
15 
yea
rs 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any right or franchise or easement granted by any ordinance or resolution saved from 
repeal, § 1-7(3); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 58; solid 
waste, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; public service tax, § 74-91 et seq.; 
utilities, ch. 82. 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1972 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972 Code, as updated 
through August 3, 1981 which are included herein. Sections of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, 
not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and 
permanent nature. For the location of Laws of Florida and ordinances adopted subsequent 
thereto, see the tables immediately following this table. 
197
2 
Cod
e  
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
1-
1—
1-3 
1-
1—
1-3 
1-4, 
1-5 
1-8, 
1-9 
1-6 
1-
11 
1-8 
1-
12 
2-1 
2-
30 
2-2 
42-
1 
2-3 
2-
32 
3-1 
6-1 
3-2 
6-3 
3-3 
6-2 
7-3 
42-
2 
8-3, 
8-4 
22-
2, 
22-
3 
8-6, 
8-7 
22-
8, 
22-
9 
8-9, 
8-
10 
22-
10 
8-
12 
22-
11 
8-
29, 
8-
30 
22-
12 
8-
31
—
8-
35 
22-
13
—
22-
17 
8-
39 
22-
7 
9-
1—
9-5 
26-
31
—
26-
35 
10-
1 
66-
1 
10-
5 
66-
5 
13-
1, 
13-
2 
50-
1, 
50-
2 
13-
15 
62-
62 
13-
17, 
13-
18 
50-
3 
13-
29 
50-
4 
13-
33 
6-5 
13-
36, 
13-
37 
50-
5, 
50-
6 
14-
16
—
14-
23 
54-
31
—
54-
38 
15-
1 
70-
1 
16-
115
—
16-
120 
74-
91
—
74-
96 
17-
4 
78-
1 
17-
6 
78-
33 
17-
9 
78-
2 
17-
12 
78-
3 
18-
16
—
18-
18 
82-
61
—
82-
63 
18-
18.
1 
82-
64 
18-
19
—
18-
21 
82-
65
—
82-
67 
18-
24
—
18-
26 
82-
68
—
82-
70 
18-
38 
82-
131 
 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE LAWS OF FLORIDA 
This table gives the location within this Code of Laws of Florida which are included herein. 
Law
s of 
Flor
ida  
Cha
pte
r 
Sec
tion 
?
Sec
tion  
this 
Cod
e 
279
00(
195
1) 
11 
2-
33 

12 
22-
1 


22-
6 
57-
187
0 
2 
2-
33 
59-
188
9 
2 
22-
1 


22-
6 
63-
194
7 
1 
22-
1 


22-
6 
67-
209
1 
2 
22-
1 


22-
6 
67-
209
2 
1 
2-
33 
69-
162
2 
1 
2-
33 
73-
624 
1 
22-
1 


22-
6 
 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1972 Code, 
as updated through August 3, 1981, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such 
date were incorporated into the 1972 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since August 
3, 1981, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and 
permanent nature. 
Ord
ina
nce  
Nu
mb
er 
?
Dat
e 
Sec
tion 
?
Sec
tion  
this 
Cod
e 
176 
?1-?
3-
197
2 
3 
1-7 
248 
?8-
25-
198
1 
art. 
I, § 
1-
26 
82-
151 


art. 
II, § 
1— 
82-
153
—
82-
155 


art. 
II, § 
3 



art. 
II, § 
4, 
82-
157
, 
82-
158 


art. 
II, § 
5 



art. 
III, 
§ 
1— 
82-
181
—
82-
191 


art. 
III, 
§ 
11 



art. 
IV, 
§ 
1— 
82-
211
—
82-
221 


art. 
IV, 
§ 
11 



art. 
V, § 
1— 
82-
241
—
82-
248 


art. 
V, § 
8 



art. 
VI, 
§ 5 
82-
152 
248
-A 
?7-?
5-
198
2 
1—
6 
82-
153
—
82-
158 
252 
?9-
28-
198
2 
1 
74-
91 
255 
?7-?
5-
198
3 
11 
74-
63 


13 
74-
68 


14(I
)—
14(
VI) 
10-
31
—
10-
36 
256 
?7-?
5-
198
3 
I, II 
66-
6 
262 
?1-?
2-
198
4 

82-
63 
264
A 
?5-?
4-
198
7 
1 
78-
61 


2 
78-
62, 
78-
63 


3 
78-
64, 
78-
65 
265 
?3-?
4-
198
5 
1, 2 
82-
132 
269 
?8-?
5-
198
5 
1—
3 
26-
61
—
26-
63 
272 
?5-?
5-
198
6 
1, 2 
54-
91, 
54-
92 
277 
?4-?
6-
198
7 
art. 
1, § 
A— 
30-
31
—
30-
34 


art. 
1, § 
D 



art. 
2 
30-
35 


art. 
3, § 
A, 
30-
36, 
30-
37 


art. 
3, § 
B 



art. 
3, § 
C 
30-
62 


art. 
3, § 
D— 
30-
38
—
30-
42 


art. 
3, § 
H 



art. 
4, § 
A 
30-
61 


art. 
4, § 
B— 
30-
63
—
30-
65 


art. 
4, § 
D 



art. 
5, § 
A— 
30-
91
—
30-
95 


art. 
5, § 
E 

279 
?9-?
8-
198
7 
1 
62-
62 


2 
62-
61 
280 
?9-?
8-
198
7 
13 
74-
68 
282 
?3-?
7-
198
8 
1, 2 
54-
91, 
54-
92 
293 
?5-
14-
199
0 
2—
5 
58-
61
—
58-
64 
294 
?6-?
4-
199
0 

74-
91 
296 
12-?
3-
199
0 
1 
58-
91 
297 
?3-?
4-
199
1 
1, 2 
2-
32 
298 
?3-?
1-
199
3 
2 
14-
1 


3 
14-
31
—
14-
35 


4 
14-
36 


5 
14-
61 


6(a) 
14-
62 


7—
13 
14-
63
—
14-
69 


14, 
15 
14-
103
, 
14-
104 


16
—
18 
14-
131
—
14-
133 
304 
?2-
10-
199
2 
1—
10 
38-
31
—
38-
40 
305 
?3-
16-
199
2 
1 
2-
31 
306 
?6-
15-
199
2 

74-
68 
308 
12-?
7-
199
2 
1 
2-
31 
309 
?1-?
4-
199
3 
1—
7 
82-
91
—
82-
97 
311 
?5-?
3-
199
3 
1, 2 
54-
91, 
54-
92 
315 
?3-?
7-
199
4 
1 
6-2 


3, 4 
6-2 
316 
?3-?
7-
199
4 
1, 2 
6-5 
317 
12-?
6-
199
3 
1—
10 
34-
61
—
34-
70 


11(
a) 
34-
71 


12(
a) 
34-
72 


13(
a) 
34-
73 
320 
?6-?
6-
199
4 
1—
4 
6-2 
323 
?8-
15-
199
4 
1—
3 
54-
91
—
54-
93 
326 
?3-?
6-
199
5 

74-
68 
327 
?3-?
6-
199
5 
1—
4 
6-2 
328 
?5-?
1-
199
5 
1 
6-4 
329 
?5-?
1-
199
5 
1—
8 
82-
31
—
82-
38 
330 
?5-?
1-
199
5 
1—
4 
34-
31
—
34-
34 
331 
?6-?
5-
199
5 
1—
3 
82-
1 
332 
?8-?
7-
199
5 
1, 2 
62-
31, 
62-
32 
334 
11-?
6-
199
5 
1—
7 
58-
31
—
58-
37 
336 
12-
13-
199
5 
1—
4 
54-
61
—
54-
64 
337 
?1-
11-
199
6 
1 
74-
171 


11 
74-
172 
338 
?1-
11-
199
6 
1 
74-
151 


11 
74-
152 
340 
?5-?
6-
199
6 
1—
7 
42-
31
—
42-
37 


8 
42-
38, 
42-
39 
341 
?6-?
3-
199
6 
2 
14-
1 


3(a)
—
3(e) 
14-
31
—
14-
35 


4 
14-
36 


5(a) 
14-
61 


6 
14-
62 


7(a) 
14-
63 


8—
11 
14-
64
—
14-
67 


12(
a) 
14-
68 


13 
14-
69 


14(
a)
—
14(
c) 
14-
101
—
14-
103 


15 
14-
104 


16
—
18 
14-
131
—
14-
133 
347 
?7-?
1-
199
6 
1 
78-
32 


2 
78-
34 


3 
78-
31  
78-
35 


4 
78-
36 


4(5) 
78-
37 
348 
?7-?
1-
199
6 
2 
46-
32 


3 
46-
31 


5, 6 
46-
34, 
46-
35 


7 
46-
33 
351 
?8-?
5-
199
6 
1—
3 
54-
91
—
54-
93 
357 
?1-?
6-
199
7 
1 
78-
32 


2 
78-
34 


3 
78-
31  
78-
35 


4 
78-
36 


4(5) 
78-
37 
358 
?3-?
3-
199
7 
1—
3 
74-
33
—
74-
35 


4—
12 
74-
37
—
74-
45 


14 
74-
63 


15 
74-
32 


16
—
20 
74-
64
—
74-
68 
359 
?4-?
7-
199
9 
1, 2 
2-
32 
361 
?5-?
5-
199
7 
1 
58-
91 
362 
?7-
22-
199
7 
1, 2 
46-
1 
363 
?7-
22-
199
7 
2 
46-
32 


3 
46-
31 


5, 6 
46-
34, 
46-
35 
365 
?9-?
2-
199
7 
1—
7 
66-
7 
371 
?3-?
2-
199
8 
2—
11 
38-
31
—
38-
40 
377 
11-?
2-
199
8 
I—
IV 
66-
1—
66-
4 
380 
12-?
7-
199
8 
II 
34-
102 


III 
34-
103 


IIIa 
34-
104 
381 
?1-?
4-
199
9 
art. 
I, § 
1 
42-
61 


art. 
II, § 
1, 
42-
91, 
42-
92 


art. 
II, § 
2 



art. 
III, 
§ 
1— 
42-
121
—
42-
125 


art. 
III, 
§ 5 



art. 
III, 
§ 8 
42-
128 
382 
12-?
7-
199
8 
I 
78-
61 


II(A
), 
II(B
) 
78-
62, 
78-
63 


III, 
IV 
78-
64, 
78-
65 
388 
?3-?
1-
199
9 
1 
74-
68 
390 
?4-?
5-
199
9 
2, 3 
52-
1, 
52-
2 


5 
52-
3  
52-
5 


6 
52-
6 


8—
19 
52-
8—
52-
19 


20 
52-
4 
393 
?8-?
2-
199
9 
2, 3 
70-
61, 
70-
62 


4, 5 
70-
64, 
70-
65 


6 
70-
63 
396 
10-?
4-
199
9 
1—
3 
58-
31
—
58-
33 


5—
7 
58-
35
—
58-
37 
397 
10-?
4-
199
9 
9, 
10 
74-
42, 
74-
43 


17 
74-
65 
398 
?1-?
4-
200
0 
2 
14-
1 


3(b
)—
3(e) 
14-
32
—
14-
35 


4 
14-
36 


5(a) 
14-
61 


6(a) 
14-
62 


7(a) 
14-
63 


8—
11 
14-
64
—
14-
67 


12(
a) 
14-
68 


13 
14-
69 


14(
a)
—
14(
c) 
14-
101
—
14-
103 


15 
14-
104 


16
—
18 
14-
131
—
14-
133 
404 
?7-?
3-
200
0 
A—
C 
70-
31
—
70-
33 
405 
12-?
4-
200
0 
I, II 
46-
61, 
46-
62 


IV 
46-
63 
407 
12-?
4-
200
0 
1 
54-
65 
410 
?6-?
4-
200
1 
1—
6     
  
Add
ed 
Ado
pt. 
Ord
, p. 
xi 
416 
?4-
15-
200
2 
      
Rpl
d 
38-
31
—
38-
40 


1—
13   
    
Add
ed 
38-
31
—
38-
43 
417 
?4-
15-
200
2 
1 
6-
2(a) 
419 
?9-?
3-
200
2 
I, II 
      
Add
ed 
49-
1, 
49-
2 
420 
?9-?
3-
200
2 
1—
8     
  
Add
ed 
49-
21
—
49-
28 
423 
12-?
2-
200
2 
1—
6     
  
Add
ed 
50-
31
—
50-
37 
433 
?4-
19-
200
4 

42-
61
—
42-
128 
435 
?8-
18-
200
4 
1—
7 
30-
31
—
30-
128 
437 
10-?
4-
200
4 
1—
3 
49-
3 
448 
?4-?
3-
200
6 
1     
  
Add
ed 
50-
38
—
50-
41 
449 
?5-?
1-
200
6 
2 
14-
1—
14-
96 
457 
?1-?
4-
200
7 
1 
50-
38
—
50-
41 
479 
12-?
1-
200
8 
2     
  
Add
ed 
68-
1—
68-
14 
481 
?7-?
6-
200
9 

30-
31
—
30-
128 
497 
?9-?
6-
201
1 
1     
  
Rpl
d 
50-
4 
502 
?1-?
3-
201
2 
1, 2 
      
Add
ed 
22-
18, 
22-
19 
508 
?7-?
2-
201
2 
2 
52-
1 


3     
  
Add
ed 
52-
20 
511 
?3-?
4-
201
3 
1.0
1—
4.0
9     
  
Add
ed 
74-
201
—
74-
249 
516 
?1-
21-
201
4 
1 
22-
6 


2 
22-
7 
517 
?4-?
1-
201
4 
2     
  
Add
ed 
50-
50
—
50-
56 
522 
11-?
3-
201
4 
1—
6     
  
Add
ed 
74-
1 
523 
11-?
3-
201
4 
1—
10   
    
Add
ed 
49-
41
—
49-
50 
525 
12-?
2-
201
5 
1 
34-
61
—
34-
74 


      
Rpl
d 
34-
101
—
34-
104 
526 
?7-
20-
201
5 
1—
6     
  
Add
ed 
49-
61
—
49-
66 
528 
?7-?
5-
201
6 
1—
5     
  
Add
ed 
82-
261
—
82-
265 


Exh
. A 
82-
261
—
82-
265 
Ma
p 
535 
11-?
7-
201
6 
1 
66-
1—
66-
11 
537 
?5-?
1-
201
7 
1—
12   
    
Add
ed 
82-
281
—
82-
292 
541 
?8-?
7-
201
7 
2     
  
Add
ed 
49-
4 
 


STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Related Laws and Code, either in the text or 
notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S.  
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
1.0
1 et 
seq
. 
1-2 
7.0
3 
1-2 
ch. 
48 
14-
71 
ch. 
50 
42-
93 
50.
051 
42-
93(
b)(
1) 
50.
054
1 
42-
93(
b)(
1) 
ch. 
75 
34-
67 
ch. 
97 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
22 
chs. 
97
—
106 
22-
1 
100
.15
1 
22-
11 
100
.34
2 
22-
11 
ch. 
106 
22-
4 
112
.53
1 
52-
1 
ch. 
119 
Ch. 
2 
ch. 
121 
Ch. 
54, 
Art. 
III 
ch. 
162 
14-
92 

34-
101 

42-
126 

49-
3 

50-
36 

78-
65 
ch. 
162
, pt. 
II 
42-
31 
162
.06(
4) 
66-
2 
162
.21 
42-
34 
162
.21 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
42, 
Art. 
II 
162
.22 
1-
12 

42-
126 

78-
65 
163
.31
61 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
58 

58-
91 
163
.31
61
—
163
.32
43 
58-
61 
163
.31
74 
Ch. 
58, 
Art. 
II 
163
.31
91 
58-
35 
ch. 
166 
Ch. 
2 

30-
31 

82-
281 
166
.02
1 
74-
201 

74-
204 

74-
259 
166
.04
1 
74-
201 

74-
204 
166
.10
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
74 
166
.23
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
74, 
Art. 
III 
166
.23
1(4)
, (5) 
74-
95 
166
.23
1(9)
(a)1 
74-
94 
ch. 
170 
Ch. 
70 
ch. 
171 
82-
263 
ch. 
173 
34-
69 
175
.10
1 
Ch. 
74, 
Art. 
IV,  
Div. 
2 
ch. 
177 
58-
35 
ch. 
180 
Ch. 
70 

82-
264 

82-
265 
180
.02 
82-
262 
180
.06 
82-
261 
185
.08 
Ch. 
74, 
Art. 
IV,  
Div. 
3 
ch. 
186
, 
ch. 
187 
Ch. 
58 
ch. 
192 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
74 
196
.07
5 
74-
1 
196
.13
1 
74-
1 
196
.16
1 
74-
1 
ch. 
197 
82-
288 
197
.36
32 
82-
288 

74-
202 
197
.36
35 
74-
202 
ch. 
205 
Ch. 
74, 
Art. 
II 

74-
32 
205
.02
2 
74-
31 
205
.02
3 
74-
36 
205
.04
3 
74-
68 
205
.05
37 
74-
46 
205
.06
3—
205
.06
5 
74-
47
—
74-
49 
205
.16
2 
74-
50 
205
.17
1 
74-
51 
205
.19
1—
205
.19
4 
74-
52
—
74-
55 
205
.19
51 
74-
56 
205
.19
6 
74-
57 
205
.19
65 
74-
58 
205
.19
67 
74-
59 
205
.19
69 
74-
60 
205
.19
71 
74-
61 
205
.19
73 
74-
62 
286
.01
1 
Ch. 
2 
298
.66 
50-
5 
ch. 
316 
50-
3 

Ch. 
78 
316
.19
06 
52-
1 
316
.19
4 
Ch. 
78, 
Art. 
III 
316
.19
67(
1)
—
(4) 
78-
36 
316
.29
3 
50-
3 
316
.53
5 
78-
3 
316
.55
5 
78-
3 
ch. 
320 
74-
54 
320
.82
2 
Ch. 
46 

74-
54 
320
.82
85 
Ch. 
46, 
Art. 
II 
335
.14
1(4) 
78-
2 
336
.04
5 
Ch. 
70 
364
.33
75 
74-
46 
ch. 
373 
Ch. 
30 
ch. 
381 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
34 
391
.98
6(1
1)(
b) 
49-
4 
393
.06
3 
38-
32 
ch. 
400
, pt. 
III 
74-
58 
403
.08
93 
82-
281 
403
.41
3 
Ch. 
66 
403
.41
5 
50-
3 
403
.70
2 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
66 
403
.71
7 
Ch. 
34, 
Art. 
II 
413
.08 
14-
14 
ch. 
482 
74-
59 
489
.11
3 
74-
55 
489
.11
7 
74-
55 
489
.11
9 
74-
55 
489
.13
1 
74-
55 
489
.51
1 
74-
55 
489
.51
3 
74-
55 
489
.52
1 
74-
55 
489
.53
7 
74-
55 
501
.01
2—
501
.01
9 
74-
60 
501
.06
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
26, 
Art. 
III 
501
.14
3 
74-
60 
501
.60
4 
74-
62 
501
.60
8 
74-
62 
ch. 
538 
Ch. 
62 
ch. 
552 
Ch. 
26, 
Art. 
III 
ch. 
553 
Ch. 
18 

46-
61 
553
.35 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
46 
ch. 
559
, pt. 
IX 
49-
3 
ch. 
559
, pt. 
XI 
74-
61 
ch. 
561 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
6 
561
.01 
6-1 
562
.14(
1) 
6-3 
562
.45(
2)(a
) 
6-2, 
6-3 
562
.45(
2)(
b) 
6-4 
ch. 
569 
50-
32 

50-
33 
569
.12 
50-
33 
585
.70
—
585
.96 
74-
56 
ch. 
588 
14-
46 
ch. 
590
, pt. 
IX 
49-
3 
ch. 
633 
Ch. 
26 
ch. 
650 
Ch. 
54, 
Art. 
II 

54-
31 
650
.02 
54-
31 
655
.00
5 
52-
1 
ch. 
705 
50-
2 
705
.10
3 
Ch. 
78, 
Art. 
III 
ch. 
760 
Ch. 
38 
760
.20 
et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
38, 
Art. 
II 
760
.34 
38-
36 
767
.10 
14-
86 
767
.10
—
767
.12 
14-
71 
767
.10 
et 
seq
. 
14-
17 
767
.12 
14-
67 
775
.08
2 
42-
37 

50-
1 

42-
37 

50-
1 
775
.21 
50-
40 
790
.15 
50-
4 
794
.01
1 
50-
40 
ch. 
800 
10-
36 
800
.04 
50-
40 
823
.15 
14-
95 
827
.07
1 
50-
40 
ch. 
828 
14-
2 

14-
95 
828
.08 
14-
7 
828
.12 
14-
6 

14-
8 
828
.27(
1) 
14-
1 
828
.12
2 
14-
7 
ch. 
847 
10-
36 
847
.01
45 
50-
40 
877
.04 
49-
2(a) 
ch. 
901 
Ch. 
42 

42-
39 
932
.70
1 et 
seq
. 
Ch. 
42 
ch. 
943 
Ch. 
42 
943
.04
35 
50-
40 
943
.10 

943
.14 
42-
2 
943
.25 
42-
2 
943
.25(
13) 
42-
2 
944
.60
7 
50-
40 

CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
1
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS........................................................................ 5
Sec. 1-1. TITLE. ........................................................................................................ 5
Sec. 1-2. AUTHORITY. ............................................................................................ 5
Sec. 1-3. INTERPRETATION................................................................................... 5
Sec. 1-4. DEFINITIONS............................................................................................ 6
Sec. 1-5. PURPOSE AND INTENT........................................................................ 20
1-5.2 Comprehensive Plan .................................................................................21
Sec. 1-6. APPLICABILITY..................................................................................... 21
1-6.1 EXCEPTIONS..........................................................................................21
Sec. 1-7. REPEAL OF PRIOR PROVISIONS........................................................ 22
Sec. 1-8. ABROGATION. ....................................................................................... 22
Sec. 1-9. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS..................................................... 23
Sec. 1-10. SEVERABILITY...................................................................................... 23
Sec. 1-11. PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT. ............................................................ 23
Sec. 1-12. EFFECTIVE DATE.................................................................................. 23
ARTICLE II ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES................................................. 24
Sec. 2-1. PURPOSE................................................................................................ 24
Sec. 2-2. LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY............................................................. 24
Sec. 2-3. POWERS AND DUTIES. ....................................................................... 24
Sec. 2-4. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES. ........................................ 25
2-4.1 Purpose and Intent.................................................................................... 25
2-4.2 Development Review Process.................................................................. 25
2-4.3 Site Plan and Approval Required............................................................. 27
2-4.4 Review Period.......................................................................................... 30
2-4.5 Withdrawal of Applications..................................................................... 30
2-4.6 Fees and Charges. .................................................................................... 30
2-4.7 Certifications............................................................................................30
Sec. 2-5. PERMITS.................................................................................................. 30
2-5.1 Generally..................................................................................................30
2-5.2 Development Permit Approval. ................................................................ 30
2-5.4 Construction Permits.................................................................................31
2-5.5 Validity .....................................................................................................31
2-5.6 Development Agreement ..........................................................................31
Sec. 2-6 PROTECTION OF LANDOWNER’S RIGHTS...................................... 32
2-6.2 Existing Non-Conforming Development.................................................. 32
2-6.3 Vested Rights ............................................................................................33
2-6.4 Hardship Relief; Variances ....................................................................... 33
2-6.5 Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. ................................................ 34
2-6.6 Public Notice and Participation ................................................................ 36
2-6.7 Appeals .....................................................................................................37
ARTICLE III DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS....................................................... 39
Sec. 3-1. PUBLIC PURPOSE.................................................................................. 39
Sec. 3-2. ACCOUNTABILITY ............................................................................... 39
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
2
Sec.3-3. RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS; COMPLIANCE............. 39
Sec. 3-4. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS............................................................ 39
3-4.1 Purpose......................................................................................................39
3-4.2 Applicability .............................................................................................40
3-4.3 Conformance with Code ........................................................................... 40
3-4.4 Procedure. .................................................................................................40
3-4.5 Subdivision and Street Names .................................................................. 40
3-4.6 Preliminary Plat and Plans ........................................................................ 40
3-4.7 Final Plans.................................................................................................41
3-4.8 Final Plat for Recording............................................................................ 41
3-4.9 General Conditions ...................................................................................42
3-4.10 Review of Plat and Plans .......................................................................... 44
3-4.11 Variations and Exceptions ........................................................................ 44
3-4.12 Monuments and Lot Corners .................................................................... 45
3-4.13 Rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves......................................... 45
3-4.14 Recordings; Sales; and Disclosures .......................................................... 45
Sec. 3-5 LAND USE REGULATIONS.................................................................. 46
3-5.1 Purpose......................................................................................................46
3-5.2 Applicability .............................................................................................46
3-5.3 Land Use Districts..................................................................................... 46
3-5.4 Official Land Use Map ............................................................................ 47
3-5.5 District Purposes and Allowable Uses...................................................... 48
3-5.6 Density/Intensity Standards ......................................................................55
3-5.7 Performance Standards ............................................................................ 57
3-5.8 Accessory Uses and Structures ................................................................. 59
3-5.9 Design Standards for Manufactured Homes ............................................. 62
Sec 3-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION, DRAINAGE AND
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS............................................ 68
Sec. 3-7 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION REGULATIONS............................... 69
3-7.1 Public Purpose ..........................................................................................69
3-7.2 Applicability .............................................................................................70
3-7.3 Compliance when subdividing land.......................................................... 70
3-7.4 Wetlands ...................................................................................................70
3-7.5 Martin Lake .............................................................................................. 71
3-7.6 Soils...........................................................................................................72
3-7.7 Wildlife Habitat ........................................................................................73
3-7.8 Flood Zones ..............................................................................................73
3-7.9 Stormwater Management ..........................................................................74
3-7.10 Trees.......................................................................................................... 74
Sec. 3-8. UTILITIES REGULATIONS................................................................... 82
3-8.1 Applicability .............................................................................................82
Sec. 3-9. CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT ...................................................... 83
3-9.1 Generally...................................................................................................83
3-9.2 Applicability ............................................................................................83
3-9.3 Minimum Requirements for Concurrency ............................................... 84
3-9.4 Level of Service Standards ...................................................................... 84
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
3
3-9.5 Levels of Service to be Maintained ......................................................... 86
3-9.6 Revisions or Adjustments ........................................................................ 86
3-9.7 Adequate Capacity of Facilities ............................................................... 87
3-9.8 Concurrency Management System .......................................................... 89
3-9.9 Annual Concurrency Report ..................................................................... 92
3-9.10 Guarantee of Adequate Capacity .............................................................. 93
Sec. 3-10. TRAFFIC CIRCULATION AND PARKING ......................................... 94
3-10.1 Generally................................................................................................... 94
3-10.2 Technical Construction Standards ............................................................ 94
3-10.3 Functional Classifications of Roadways................................................... 94
3-10.4 General Design Standards......................................................................... 95
3-10.5 Rights-of-Way........................................................................................... 96
3-10.6 Access Control .......................................................................................... 97
3-10.7 Bicycle and Pedestrian Ways.................................................................... 97
3-10.8 Off-Street Parking and Loading................................................................ 98
ARTICLE IV SIGN REGULATIONS...................................................................... 101
Sec. 4-1. PURPOSE............................................................................................... 101
Sec. 4-2. SCOPE.................................................................................................... 102
Sec. 4-3. DEFINITIONS........................................................................................ 102
Sec. 4-4 APPLICABILITY................................................................................... 106
Sec. 4-5. PROHIBITED SIGNS ............................................................................ 106
Sec. 4-6. PERMITS REQUIRED .......................................................................... 107
Sec. 4-7. SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS................................................... 107
Sec. 4-8. MAINTENANCE ................................................................................... 107
Sec. 4-9. CHANGEABLE COPY.......................................................................... 108
Sec. 4-10. LIGHTING/ILLUMINATION............................................................... 108
Sec. 4-11. LICENSE ................................................................................................ 108
Sec. 4-12. INEDMINFICATION AND INSURNANCE........................................ 108
Sec. 4-13. ALLOWABLE SIGNS-LAND USE DISTRICTS................................. 108
4-13.1 The following signs are allowed in all districts. ..................................... 108
4-13.2 Permitted Signs in RLD Districts .......................................................... 109
4-13.3 Permitted Signs in MU Districts............................................................. 110
4-13.4 Permitted Signs in GC and IND Districts ............................................... 110
4-13.5 Permit in P/I Districts.............................................................................. 112
Sec. 4-14. SIGNS..................................................................................................... 112
Sec. 4-15. OFF-PREMISES SIGN (Billboards) ...................................................... 113
4-15.1 Location ................................................................................................. 113
4-15.2 Development Standards ......................................................................... 113
Sec. 4-16. NONCONFORMING SIGNS ............................................................... 114
4-16.1 Loss of Legally Nonconforming Status ................................................. 114
4-16.2 Maintenance and Repair of Nonconforming Signs................................ 114
Sec. 4-17. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ....................................................... 114
4-17.1 Anchoring .............................................................................................. 115
4-17.2 Wind Loads............................................................................................. 115
4-17.3 Additional Construction Specifications .................................................. 115
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
4
Sec. 4-18 ADMINISTRATION and ENFORCEMENT ........................................ 116
4-18.1 Administration ........................................................................................ 116
4-18.2 Application for Permits........................................................................... 116
4-18.3 Issuance and Denial ................................................................................ 116
4-18.4 Permit Conditions ................................................................................... 116
4-18.5 Removal of Signs.................................................................................... 117
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
5
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. TITLE.
This code shall be entitled the “Comprehensive Planning and Land Development
Regulation Code” and my be hereinafter referred to as “the Code” or “this Code”
Sec. 1-2. AUTHORITY.
This Code is enacted pursuant to §163.3202, Florida Statutes ( Local Government
Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act), Chapter 27900, Laws
of Florida (City Charter), and the general powers granted under Chapter 166, Florida
Statutes.
Sec. 1-3. INTERPRETATION.
All words used in the present tense include the future; all words in the single number
include the plural and the plural the singular; the words “person,” “developer,”
“occupant,” “lessee,” “builder,” and “owner” include a firm, corporation, or other
corporate entity as well as a natural person. The word “used” shall be deemed to include
the words “arranged,” “designated,” or “intended to be used,” and the word “occupied”
shall be deemed to include the words “arranged,” “designed,” or “intended to be
occupied.”
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code the day of the act,
event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be
included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday or Legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the
next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time
prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
In the interpretation an application of this Code all provisions shall be liberally construed
in favor of the objectives and purposes of the City and deemed neither to limit nor repeal
other powers granted under state statutes.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
6
Sec. 1-4. DEFINITIONS.
ACCESSORY USE OF BUILDING. A subordinate or ancillary use of land or structure
or portion thereof customarily used in connection with the occupation of a primary
structure upon the same lot or premises.
ADULT CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY (ACLF). A type of residential facility
care facility defined in Chapter 400, Part II, Florida Statutes. See residential care facility.
ALLEY. A roadway dedicated to public use affording only a secondary means of access
to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
APARTMENT. A group of three (3) or more renter-occupied dwelling units within one
building.
AREA OR AREA OF JURISDICTION. The total area of jurisdiction for the City of
Springfield as established by its municipal charter and any subsequent annexations.
ARTERIAL ROAD. A roadway providing service which is relatively continuous and of
relatively high traffic volume, long trip length, and high operating speed. In addition,
every United States numbered highway is an arterial road.
AUTO STORAGE. A facility for long-term parking of motor vehicles but not the repair
or demolition or dismantling of vehicles.
AUTO WRECKING YARD. A facility for demolition or dismantling of vehicles for
the purpose of recycling parts and materials.
BEACH. The zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the mean
lower water line to the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic
form, or to the line of permanent vegetation, usually the effective limit of storm waves.
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS. Any road, path or way which is open to
bicycle travel and traffic afoot and from which motor vehicles are excluded.
BOARDING (LODGING HOUSE). A building other than a hotel, where lodging or
meals or both are served for compensation.
BUFFER. A specified land area, together with the planting and landscaping required on
the land, used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield block noise, lights, or
other nuisances.
BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The duly authorized building official of the City of
Springfield, Florida.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
7
CITY. The City of Springfield, Florida extending to and including its officers, agents,
and employees.
CITY CLERK. The duly authorized clerk of the City of Springfield, Florida.
CITY COMMISSION. The elected legislative body of the City of Springfield, Florida.
CLINIC. An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted
for examination and treatment by one person or group of persons practicing any form of
healing or health services to individuals, whether such persons be medical doctors,
chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists, or any other
professions licenses by the State of Florida for such purposes.
CLUBS, NEIGHBORHOOD RECREATION OR SOCIAL. Buildings or facilities
owned and operated by a corporation or association for neighborhood social or
recreational purposes but not operated primarily for profit or the rendering of services
which are customarily carried on as a business and not limited to special interests.
COASTAL AREA. The land area subject to evacuation in the event of a Category 3
hurricane and all included coastal resources. Coastal resources are considered to be
estuarine shorelines, marine wetlands, water dependent land uses, public waterfront
access points, and waterfront recreation areas, estuarine and oceanic waters, and
submerged lands.
COASTAL OR SHOR PROTECTION STRUCTURES. Shore-hardening structures,
such as seawalls, bulkheads, revetments, rubblemound structures, groins, breakwaters,
and aggregates of materials other than natural beach sand used for beach or shore
protection and other structures which are intended to prevent erosion or protect other
structures from wave and hydrodynamic forces including beach and dune restoration.
COLLECTOR ROAD. A roadway providing service which is of relatively moderate
traffic volume, moderate trip length, and moderate operating speed. Collector roads
collect and distribute traffic between local roads and arterial roads.
COMMERCIAL USES. Activities within land areas which are predominately
connected with the sale, rental and distribution of products, or performance of services.
COMMUNITY PARKS, A park located near major roadways, and designed to serve
the needs of more than one neighborhood.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The adopted Comprehensive Plan for the City of
Springfield.
COMDOMINIUM. A building or group of buildings in which units are owned
individually and common areas and facilities are owned by all owners proportionately.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
8
CONTIGUOUS. Next to, abutting, or having a common boundary.
CONSERVATION FEES. Activities within land areas designated for the purpose of
conserving and protecting natural resources or environmental quality and includes areas
designated for such purposes as flood control, protection of quality of ground water and
surface water, floodplain management, fisheries management, or protection of vegetative
communities or wildlife habitats.
COUNTY. Bay County, Florida.
DCA. Florida Department of Community Affairs.
DENSITY, GROSS. The total number of dwelling units divided by the total site area,
less public right-of-way.
DEVELOPER. Any person, including a governmental agency, undertaking any
development.
DEVELOPMENT. The carrying out of any building activity or mining operation, the
making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, or the
dividing of land into three or more parcels.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES, LARGE SCALE. Residential development
involving more than five (5) acres of land and a density of more than five (5) dwelling
units per acre, or involves other development, singularly or in combination with
residential development, of more than three (3) acres of land.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES, SMALL SCALE. Residential development
involving five (5) acres of land or less and a density of five (5) dwelling units per acre or
less or involves other development, singularly or in combination with residential
development, of three (3) acres or less of land.
DEVELOPMENT ORDER. Any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions
an application for development permit.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Includes any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision
approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance, or any other official action
of the City Council having the effect of permitting the development of land.
DISTRICT. A portion of the City within certain regulations of this Code apply.
DOUBLE WIDE. An obsolete term used to describe a mobile home having a width of,
generally, between twenty (20) and twenty-eight (28) feet.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
9
DRAINAGE BASIN. The area defined by topographic boundaries which contributes
storm water to a drainage system, estuarine waters, or oceanic waters, including all areas
artificially added to the basin.
DRAINAGE DETENTION STRUCTURE. A structure which collects and temporarily
stores storm water for the purpose of treatment through physical, chemical, or biological
processes with subsequent gradual release of the storm water.
DRAINAGE FACILITIES. A system of man-made structures designed to collect,
convey, hold, divert or discharge storm water, and includes storm water sewers, canals,
detention structures, and retention structures.
DRAINAGE RETENTION STRUCTURE. A structure designed to collect and
prevent the release of a given volume of storm water by complete on-site storage.
DUPLEX. A residential building containing two separate dwelling units.
DWELLING. A building or a portion thereof designed, arranged or used principally for
residential occupancy, not including motels, hotels, boarding houses or rooming houses.
DWELLING UNIT, A single housing unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, COMMERCIAL APARTMENT. Apartments that are built as a part of
a commercial or office use.
DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY. A building containing one dwelling
unit not attached to any other dwelling unit.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A residential building containing two or more
separate dwelling units, including duplexes, triplexes, and quadraplexes.
EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of a specified portion of his land
to another party for a specific purpose.
EDUCATIONAL USES. Activities and facilities of public or private primary or
secondary schools, vocational and technical schools, and colleges and universities
licensed by the Florida Department of Education, including the areas of buildings,
campus open space, dormitories, recreational facilities or parking.
FAMILY. Any number of related individuals living together as a single housekeeping or
household unit.
FENCE. A man-made barrier erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
10
FILLING (SERVICE) STATION. Any building, structure, or land used for the
dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories,
and which may offer in conjunction therewith a general automotive repair service as
distinguished from specialized automotive repairs.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special areas and the
at risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOODPLAINS OR FLOOD ZONES. Areas inundated during a 100-year flood event
or identified by the National Flood Insurance Program as an A-Zone or a V-Zone on
Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The total gross horizontal area of all floors as measured to
the outside surface of exterior walls, excluding crawl spaces, garages, carports,
breezeways, open porches, balconies, and terraces.
FLOOR AREA RATIO. A mathematical expression determined by dividing the gross
floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located.
FOSTER CARE FACILITY. A facility which houses foster residents and provides a
family living environment for the residents, including such supervision and care of the
residents and serving either children or adult foster residents.
GARAGE APARTMENT. An accessory building with storage capacity for not less
than two (2) automobiles, the second floor of which is designed as a residence for not
more than one family.
GROUP HOME. A facility which provides a living environment for unrelated residents
who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care
as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the residents.
Adult Congregate Living Facilities comparable in size to group homes are included in
this definition. It shall not include rooming or boarding homes, clubs, fraternities,
sororities, monasteries or convents, hotels, residential treatment facilities, nursing homes,
or emergency shelters.
HARD SURFACE. This includes compacted shell, limestone, asphalt, concrete, or other
similar shelters.
HAZARDOUS WASTE. Solid waste, or a combination of solid waste, which, because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may
cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported,
disposed of, stored, treated or otherwise managed.
11
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the highest point on a structure, expecting any
chimney or antenna on a building, to the average ground level where the walls or other
structural elements intersect the ground.
HISTORIC RESOURCES. All areas, districts or sites containing properties listed on
the Florida Master Site File, the National Register of Historic Places, or designated by the
City as historically, architecturally, or archaeologically significant.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation which is operated by a member of the family
residing upon the premises, except retail sales, business which generates objectionable
traffic, business which requires objectionable material storage or mechanical equipment.
HOME OFFICE OF CONVENIENCE. A quasi-office use where the occupant
conducts no business other than by phone or mail, where no persons are employed by the
applicant, where an office is needed for the purpose of sending and receiving mail and
telephone calls, maintaining records, and other similar functions.
HOTEL. A building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised, or held out to
the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are provided for compensation to
transient or permanent guests or tenants, having ten (10) or more rooms; whether or not
food service is offered.
HUD. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
IMPERVIOUS SERVICE. Any surface or material which prevents absorption of water
into land.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO. A mathematical expression determined by
dividing the total impervious surface of a site by the gross area of the site.
INDUSTRIAL USES. Activities within land areas predominantly connected with
manufacturing, assembly, processing, or storage of products.
INFRASTRUCTURE. Man-made structures which serve the common needs of the
population, such as: sewage disposal systems; potable water systems; potable water wells
serving a system, solid waste disposal sites or retention areas; stormwater systems;
utilities; piers; docks; wharves; breakwaters; bulkheads; sea walls; bulwarks; revetments;
causeways; marinas; navigation channels; bridges; and roadways.
INTINSITY. The degree to which land is occupied and/or the density of development.
(There is no single measure of the intensity of land use. Rather, a land use is relatively
more or less intense than another use. A particular use may be more or less intense due
to one or more characteristics, such as traffic generated, amount of impervious surface,
bulk of the structures, number of employees, density, or nuisance such as pollution,
noise, lights, etc.
12
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
JUNKYARD. An open area where waste and used or secondhand materials are
salvaged, recycled, bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, dissembled, or
handled, including, but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, cloths, paper, rags,
pluming, fixtures, rubber tires and bottles, but excluding automobile wrecking yards.
KENNELS. A place where animals or pets are boarded for profit.
LAND. The earth, water, and air, above, below, or on the surface, and includes any
improvements or structures customarily regarded as land.
LANDSCAPING. The improvement of appearance or beautification of an area by the
planting of trees, grass, shrubs, or plant materials, or by the alteration of ground contours.
LAND USE. The development, activity, or use that has occurred on or is proposed for
the land.
LAND USE DISTRICT. A categorization or grouping of activities (land uses)
according to common characteristics. (For the purposes of this Code, land use districts
are those described in the Land Use Element of the adopted Comprehensive Plan and
shown on the Official Land Use Map.)
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE (LAUNDROMAT). A business renting to the
individual customers equipment for the washing, drying and otherwise processing of
laundry, and where the equipment is services and its use and operation supervised by the
management.
LEVEL OF SERVICE. An indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by, or
proposed to be provided by a facility based on and related to the operational
characteristics of the facility. Level of service shall indicate the capacity per unit of
demand for each public facility.
LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY. The City Commission of the City of Springfield,
Florida.
LOCAL ROAD. A roadway providing service which is of relatively low traffic
volume, short average trip length or minimal through traffic movements, and high
volume land access for abutting property.
LOT. A parcel tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or otherwise by
law.
LOT, CORNER. Percentage of lot covered by buildings (area of building/area of lot x
100).
LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been
recorded in the official records by Bay County, Florida.
13
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
LOT DEPTH. The depth of lot is the distance measured from the midpoint of the front
lot line to the midpoint of the opposite rear lot line.
LOT, SUBATANDARD. Any lot that does not conform in area or width to the
minimum requirements of this Code.
LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between the side of lot lines, measured at
right angles to the depth.
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME FAMILIES. “Lower income families” as
defined under Section 8 Assisted Housing Program, or families whose annual income
does not exceed 80 percent of the median income for the area. The term “families”
includes “households.”
MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated after June 15, 1976, in an offsite
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, each section
of which bears a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufacturing Construction and Safety Standards (24CFR3280)HUD Code, OR
inspected by and approved an inspecting agency conforming to the requirements of
DCA, and bearing an insignia of approval.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. An area of land inside a planned manufactured
home subdivision designed to accommodate one (1) manufactured home.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING AS DEFINED BY HUD. A general term used to
describe a type of housing that is produced either completely or partially in a factory. A
structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or forty feet or more in length, which erected in length, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet or more in living area; and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to required utilities. If that fabrication occurs after June 15,
1976, each section must be built to standards prescribed by the U. S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
MIXED USE. Areas intended to provide a functional mix of residential and commercial
activities or land uses.
MOBILE HOME. An obsolete term used herein to describe a home, prefabricated in
whole or in part and not conforming to the definition of a manufactured home.
MOBILE HOME PARK. An obsolete term used herein to describe a parcel of land
where spaces are rented to mobile home owners and which 3 or more lots or spaces are
occupied by mobile homes offered for rent or lease or on which spaces are offered for
rent or lease for the placement of mobile homes, and in which the primary use (s) are
residential. Mobile home parks are no longer authorized for new developments.
14
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
MOTEL, TOURIST COURT, MOTOR LODGE. A group of attached or detached
buildings containing individual sleeping units, with automobile storage or parking space
provided in connection therewith , and designed for use primarily by automobile
transients.
MULTIPLE-RESIDENT DWELLING, A structure designed or used for residential
occupancy by more than two related or unrelated residential groups, with or without
separate kitchen or dining facilities, including apartment houses, apartment hotels,
rooming houses, boarding houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories and similar housing
types, but not including hotels, hospitals, nursing homes or townhouses, patio homes,
zero lot line dwellings or other forms of single-family dwelling units.
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL USE. Commercial facilities which are desirable
and useful in close proximity to residential areas. Undesirable impacts of such uses on
the neighborhoods which they service may be minimized by restrictions on the size and
type of uses permitted as well as other site specific conditions.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK. A park which services the population of a neighborhood
and is generally accessible by bicycles or pedestrians ways.
NEWSPAPER OF GENERAL CIRCULATION. A newspaper published at least on a
weekly basis and printed in the general language most commonly spoken in the area
within which it circulates, but does not include a newspaper intended primarily for
members of a particular profession or occupational group, a newspaper whose primary
function is to carry legal notices, or a newspaper that is given away primarily to distribute
advertising.
NATIONAL MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY
STANDARDS. The national building codes for all manufactured homes built since June
15, 1976, written and administered by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development; also know as “HUD Code”.
NONCONFORMING USE. A lawful land use existing at the time of passage of this
code or amendments thereto, which does not conform with the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
NURSING HOME. A facility for treatment of the ill, infirm, or elderly, as defined in
Chapter 400, Part I, Florida Statutes.
OPEN SPACE. Land in its natural state or essentially unencumbered by either
buildings, structures , or impervious surfaces, not including water or water bodies.
OPEN SPACE RATIO. The percentage of the total gross area of a parcel that is open
space.
15
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
PARCEL OF LAND. A quantity of land capable of being described with such
definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is designated by
its owner or developer as land to be used, or developed as, a unit or which has been used
or developed as a unit.
PARK. A neighborhood, community or regional park.
PARKING LOT. An area or parcel of land used for temporary, off-street parking of
vehicles.
PERSONAL SERVICE. Business providing services which are primarily non-retail
and conducted entirely inside a building including: Professional and business offices,
clinics, laboratories, educational services and beauty salons.
PLAYGROUND. A recreation area with play apparatus.
POLLUTION. The presence in the outdoor atmosphere, ground or water of any
substances, contaminants, noise, or manmade or man— induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water, in quantities or at
levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare,
animal or plant life, or property, or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or
property.
POTABLEWATER FACILITIES. A system of structures designed to collect, treat, or
distribute potable water, and includes water wells, treatment plants, reservoirs, and
distribution mains.
PRE-FABRICATED HOME. A general term used to describe any home constructed in
a factory setting, including manufactured homes, modular homes and industrial structures
PUBLIC ACCESS. The ability of the public to physically reach, enter or use recreation
sites including beaches and shores.
PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL USES. Structures or lands that are owned, leased, or
operated by a government or non—profit entity, such as civic and community centers,
churches, hospitals, libraries, police stations, fire stations, and government administration
buildings.
PUBLIC FACILITIES. Transportation systems or facilities, sewer systems or facilities,
solid waste systems or facilities, drainage systems or facilities, potable water systems or
facilities, educational systems or facilities, parks and recreation systems or facilities and
public health systems or facilities.
QUADRAPLEX. A residential building with four different dwelling units.
RECREATIONAL USES. Activities within areas where recreation occurs.
16
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
RESIDENTIAL DESIGNED MANUFACTURED HOMES (RDMH). Manufactured
homes, also know as “modular homes”, bearing a DCA seal, certifying code compliance,
meeting the following residential design standards which shall be used in determinations
of similar appearance between RDMH structures, with permanent foundations approved
as provided in this subsection, and compatible in appearance and orientation with site
built housing which has been
constructed in adjacent or nearby locations. An RDMH structure is not permitted to be
used as a storage building.
(a) Minimum width of body. Minimum width of the main body of the RDMH as
located on site shall be no less than twenty (20) feet, as measured across the narrowest
portion. This is not intended to prohibit the offsetting of portions of the home.
(b) Minimum pitch; minimum roof overhang; roofing materials. The pitch of the
home’s roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of one (1) foot for each four (4) feet of
horizontal run and minimum roof overhang shall be six (6) inches. The roof shall be
finished with a type of material that is commonly used in conventional residential
dwellings constructed in adjacent or nearby locations. Built-up composition roof may not
be used.
(c) Exterior finish, light reflection. The exterior siding of the home shall consist
of wood, hardboard, masonry or vinyl which is generally acceptable for site built housing
which has been constructed in adjacent or nearby locations; provide however, that the
reflection of such exterior shall not be greater than from siding coated with clean white
gloss exterior enamel.
(d) Foundation. The tongue, axles, transporting lights, towing apparatus and other
transporting shall be removed from the RDMH. The RDMH shall be placed on a
permanent foundation. Permanent foundation shall mean:
(1.) Installation of the home according to Florida Administrative Code.
(2.) Construction of a permanent, no-load bearing perimeter wall curtain wall of
concrete block with a minimum thickness of four inches (4") extending at a minimum
from the ground surface to the bottom starter of the exterior wall surfaces of the home,
unpierced except for the required ventilation and access. Said curtain or wall shall be
coated or covered with a finish or with materials which blends with the rest of the home’s
siding materials. Skirting of the type typically used around manufactured homes or
mobile homes shall not be used as a wall curtain around a DCA home.
(e) Electrical service. Boxes and meters shall be mounted to the exterior wall of
the home unless prohibited by electrical codes.
(f) Site orientation and setbacks of the RDMH. RDMH structures shall be placed
on lots in such a manner as to be compatible with and reasonably similar in orientation to
the site built housing which has been constructed on adjacent or nearby locations.
Building setback minimums must be met as per Springfield’s Land Development
Regulation, Section 3-4.9 as amended herein.
17
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
(g) Garages and carports. Any RDMH structure constructed shall be required to
have a garage or carport if more than fifty-one percent (50%) of other homes in the area
have garages or carports. Such garages and carports shall be constructed according to
requirements to building codes utilized by site built homes.
(h) Certificate of Occupancy. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all
requirements of Springfield Ordinance 402 and the City LDR have been met.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES. Residential care facilities are those facilities
providing both a residence (for varying periods of tine) and a care component. Among
such facilities are adult congregate living facilities, group care homes, recovery homes,
residential treatment facilities, emergency shelters, and nursing homes. In addition,
service, equipment, and safety features required for the safe and adequate care of
residents may be provided. Such services may include: (1) Supervision and assistance in
dressing, bathing, and in the maintenance of good personal hygiene; (2) care in
emergencies or during temporary illness, usually for periods of one week or less; (3)
supervision in the taking of medications; and (4) other services conducive to the residents?
welfare.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of
a wide range of food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state for consumption (1)
within the restaurant building; (2) within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or (3)
off the premises as carry-out orders, and whose principal method of operation includes the
following characteristics: Food and/or beverages are usually served in edible containers or
in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers; this includes all drive in restaurants.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. A contract between two or more people which involves
mutual promises or reciprocal benefits and burdens among the contracting parties
(usually involves additional land restrictions beyond the city requirements).
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land in which the state, a county, or a municipality owns the fee
simple title or has an easement dedicated or required for a transportation or utility use.
ROADWAY FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION. The assignment of roads into
categories according to the character of service they provide in relation to the total road
network. Basic functional categories include limited access facilities, arterial roads, and
collector roads, which may be sub categorized into principal, major or minor levels.
Those levels may be further grouped into urban and rural categories.
SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES. Structures or systems designed for the collection,
transmission, treatment, or disposal of sewage and includes truck mains, interceptors,
treatment plants and disposal systems.
SBCCI. The current edition of Southern Building Code Congress International, adopted
and used by the Bay County Building Department.
18
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
SECTIONAL HOME. A general term used to describe any home constructed in a
factory setting, especially manufactured homes.
SERVICES. The programs and employees determined necessary by local government to
provide adequate operation and maintenance of public facilities and infrastructure as well
as those educational, health care, social and other programs necessary to support the
programs, public facilities and infrastructure set out in the comprehensive plan or
required by local, state or federal law.
SETBACK. The distance between the lot line and the wall line of a building or a
projection thereof, including parking areas.
SINGLE WIDE. A obsolete term used to describe a mobile home or manufactured
home having a width of between eight (8) and sixteen (16) feet.
SHORELINE. The interface of land and water as determined by the mean high tide line.
SIGN. See Article IV of this Code.
SIGN, PORTABLE. See Article IV of this Code.
SITE PLAN. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown existing
and proposed conditions of the lot (s), including all the requirements set forth in this
Code.
SOLID WASTE. Sludge from waste treatment works, water treatment plant, or air
pollution control facility or garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other discarded material,
including soli, liquid, semisolid, or contaminated gaseous material resulting from
domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural, or government operations.
STANDARD DESIGN MANUFACTURED HOME (SDMH). Manufactured homes
certified by HUD Code, but not meeting residential standard design standards (RDMH)
contained herein. An SDMH is not permitted to be used as a storage building.
STORMWATER. The flow of water which results from a rainfall event.
STREET OR ROAD. A public vehicular thoroughfare which affords primary means of
access to abutting property.
STREET LINE. The boundary line or right-of-way line of a street.
STRUCTURE. Any improvement of or upon land.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, except for repairs or replacement, in the
supporting members of a building, such as load bearing walls, columns, beams, girders,
floor joists, or roof joists or any extension of them.
19
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
SUBDIVISION. A division of land into two or more lots or parcels wherein the creation
of new infrastructure is planned by the developer or ruled necessary by the City of
Springfield either at the time of division of the land or in the future as a result of the
division of the land.
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed as part of a group of not less
than two (2) dwelling units with individual entrances, all of which are contiguous,
customarily owner-occupied and share a common wall.
TRAILER. An obsolete term used to describe a mobile home not constructed to HUD
Code or DCA requirements.
TRAILER COURT. An obsolete term, see Mobile Home Park.
TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or
recreational uses, not more than eight (8) feet in width and not more than thirty (30) feet
in length.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK. A lot on which are parked two (2) or more travel trailers
for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
TRIPLEX. A residential building with three separate dwelling units joined by common
walls.
USED CAR LOT. A parcel of land used only for the storage, display and sales of used
automobiles, excluding junk yards and storage of wrecked autos.
VEGETATION (NATURAL). Species of indigenous, naturally occurring plants
normally found in the absence of development or landscaping.
WALL CURTAIN. A non-load bearing perimeter curtain wall of concrete block or
stucco wire mesh, with a minimum thickness of four inches (4") extended, at a minimum,
from the ground surface to the bottom starter of the exterior wall surfaces of the home,
unpierced except for required ventilation and access.
WATER-DEPENDANT USES. Activities which can be carried out only in or adjacent
to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for: waterborne
transportation including ports or marinas; recreation; electrical generating facilities or
water supply.
WETLANDS. Land which is subject to the provisions of Section 403.91, Florida
Statutes, or Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or other improvements permitted
herein.
20
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot, extending from the front line of
the building or any projections thereof (except the roof overhang or uncovered steps), to
the front lot line.
YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and between the rear
lot and rear line of the building, or any projections thereof (except the roof overhang or
uncovered steps)
YARD, SIDE. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building,
situated between the side line of a building, or any projections thereof, and side lot line
(excluding roof overhang)
ZERO LOT LINE HOUSE. An attached single-family housing unit with one or more
common walls designed for owner occupancy. Zero lot line houses include patio houses,
garden homes, townhouses, row houses, duplexes, and the like.
Sec. 1-5. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
1-5.1 Generally
The purpose of this Code is to utilize and strengthen the existing role, processes and
power of the City of Springfield in the establishment and implementation of
comprehensive planning programs and land development regulation to maintain present
advantages as well as guide and control future development.
It is the intent of this Code that its adoption is necessary so that the City can preserve and
enhance present advantages; encourage the most appropriate use of land, water and
resources, consistent with the public interest; overcome present handicaps; and deal
effectively with future problems that may result from the use and development of land
within its area of jurisdiction. Through the process of comprehensive planning and land
development regulation, it is intended that the City can preserve, promote, protect, and
improve the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, law
enforcement and fire prevention, and general welfare; prevent the overcrowding of land
and avoid undue concentration of population; facilitate the adequate and efficient
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks , recreational facilities, housing, and
other requirements and services; and conserve, develop, utilize, and protect natural
resources within the City’s area of jurisdiction.
The provisions of this Code in their interpretation and application are declared to be the
minimum requirements necessary to protect human, environmental, social, and economic
resources; and to maintain, through orderly growth and development, the character and
stability of present and future land use and development in the City.
21
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
1-5.2 Comprehensive Plan
This Code is further intended to provide detailed and specific provisions necessary or
desirable to implement the adopted Comprehensive Plan or amendments thereof
including but not limited to:
1. Regulating the subdivision of land;
2. Regulating the use of land and water for those land use categories included
in the future land use element of the Comprehensive Plan and ensure the
compatibility of adjacent uses and provide for open space;
3. Regulating areas subject to seasonal or periodic flooding and provide for
drainage and stormwater management;
4. Ensuring the protection of environmentally sensitive lands designated in
the Comprehensive Plan;
5. Regulating signage;
6. Providing that public facilities and services meet or exceed the standards
established for public facilities in the Comprehensive Plan, and such
facilities and services are available when necessary to serve proposed
development or development approvals are conditioned upon the
availability of such public facilities and services in an enforceable
development agreement.
7. Ensuring safe and convenient on-site traffic flow considering needed
vehicle parking.
Sec. 1-6. APPLICABILITY.
Except as specifically provided for in this section the provisions of this Code shall apply
to all development undertaken in the City. No development shall be commenced except
in strict accordance with this Code.
1-6.1 EXCEPTIONS
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
22
1. The provisions of this Code or and amendments thereto shall not affect
the validity of any lawfully issued and effective development permit if:
(a) The development activity authorized by the permit has been
commenced prior to the effective date of this Code or any amendment
thereto, or will be commenced after the effective date of this Code but
within six (6) months after issuance of the building permit; and
(b) The development activity continues without interruption (except
because of war, natural disaster or acts of God) until the
development is complete. If the development permit expires, any
further development on that site shall occur only in conformance
with the requirements of this Code or amendment thereto.
2. Previously Approved Development Permits
Projects with development permits that have not expired at the time this
Code or an amendment thereto is adopted, and on which development
activity has commenced or does commence and proceeds according to the
time limits in the regulations under which the development was originally
approved, must meet only the requirements of the regulations in effect
when the development plan was approved. If the development permit
expires or is otherwise invalidated, any further development on that site
shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code or any
amendments thereto.
3. Consistency With Plan
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to authorize development that is
inconsistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
Sec. 1-7. REPEAL OF PRIOR PROVISIONS.
City Ordinances __________________________________________ are hereby
repealed. All provisions contained in such ordinances are superseded by, or incorporated
into this Code.
Sec. 1-8. ABROGATION.
This Code is not intended to repeal, abrogate or interfere with the conditions or
limitations of any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions duly recorded in the
public records of the County.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
23
Sec. 1-9. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
If any subject if this Code is controlled by any other law, statute, ordinance or regulation,
then that which imposes the higher or more stringent shall govern.
Sec. 1-10. SEVERABILITY.
This Code and its various parts, sections, subsections, provisions, and clauses thereof, are
hereby declared to be severable and, if any part is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid,
the remainder of the Code shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 1-11. PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT.
Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offence, or whenever in this Code the doing of any act is required r the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific penalty is provided
therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished be a fine not
exceeding five-hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed sixty
(60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day
any violation of any provision of any provision of this Code shall continue, shall
constitute a new and separate offense.
In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to
exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed to be a public
nuisance and may be, abated as provided by law.
The City Commission shall have final authority for referring action against violations of
this Code. Violations shall be referred to the Building Official for enforcement as
prescribed by law.
Sec. 1-12. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Code shall be effective on _________________________________.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
24
ARTICLE II ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
Sec. 2-1. PURPOSE.
This article is intended to assign responsibilities and procedures for the administration of
this Code.
Sec. 2-2. LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY.
Pursuant to and in accordance with Section 163.3174, Florida Statutes the City
Commission is designated as the Local Planning Agency for the City of Springfield.
Sec. 2-3. POWERS AND DUTIES.
In addition to any authority granted the City Commission under the City Charter, stat law
or City Ordinance, the City Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To have final authority for the approval or denial of development permits,
sign permits or any other city-authorized permits required by this Code;
2. To hear appeals from decisions of the Building Official regarding
development permits or variances;
3. To adopt and amen the Comprehensive Plan including land use districts
shown on the future land use map;
4. To adopt or amend the provisions of this Code;
5. To have final authority for the approval or denial of variances, hardship relief,
or other waivers from the provisions of this Code;
6. To have final authority for determinations of vested rights, availability of
public facilities and services to accommodate development, disposition of
non-conforming uses or other such actions requiring administrative or
legislative action;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
25
7. To have final authority for enforcement actions against violations of this
Code;
8. To take other such actions not delegated to the Building Official or other duly
established board that may be deemed necessary and desirable to implement
the provisions of this Code.
Sec. 2-4. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES.
2-4.1 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform system of procedure for the review of
development or redevelopment activities to be undertaken within the City. Such review
is intended to provide the basis for decisions concerning the approval, denial or
conditional approval of development permits.
2-4.2 Development Review Process
The following process shall be adhered to during the course of development review.
1. Developers wishing to engage in development activities shall first obtain from
the City an application for development approval. Such application shall be in
the form prescribed by the Building Official and shall be completed by the
developer or agent authorized to act on behalf of the developer.
2. Development reviews shall be conducted using only those forms or materials
established and approved by the City including the site plan requirements
specified in subsection 2-4.4 of this Code.
3. Development review shall be undertaken at one of the following three (3)
levels of detail as follows.
(a) Level 1- Minor Development.
Requires review by the Building Official, or other agent authorized by the
City, of applications involving minor development. The Building Official
is authorized to issue development permits without action being taken by
the City Commission when issuance of such permit involves:
i. Construction or renovation of an individual single—family
detached residence on one lot or parcel;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
26
ii. Single-family detached DCA approved manufactured home
designated as a RDMH structure;
iii. Construction or placement of accessory structures which are not
intended for human occupancy or habitation; or,
iv. Remodeling, renovation, expansion, or other similar activity
involving alterations or additions to an existing structure within
the confines of the property lines on which the structure is located.
All recommendations or actions taken by the Building Official
relative to the authority granted under this section shall be in
conformance with the provisions of this Code, the Comprehensive
Plan, and other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, resolutions,
regulations or codes.
(b) Level 2 – Small Scale Development
Unless otherwise provided for in paragraph (a), proposed development shall
be reviewed by the Building Official, or other agent authorized by the City,
with recommendation for approval or denial provided to the City Commission
for final action. Small scale development activities are those involving:
Residential development, or change in land use of 5 acres or less and a density
of 5 units per acre or less, or involves any other development, or change in
any other land use, of 3 acres or less.
The City Commission may approve small scale development activities,
including changes in land without submitting same for review by state
agencies provided that:
- The cumulative effect of the above condition shall not exceed 30
acres annually;
- The proposed amendment does not involve the same property more
than once a year; and
- The proposed amendment does not involve the same owner’s property
within 200 feet of property granted a change within a period of 12
months;
(c) Level 3 – Large Scale Development
Unless otherwise provided for in paragraph (a) and (b), all other proposed
development shall be reviewed by the Building Official or other agent
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
27
authorized by the City, with recommendation for approval or denial to the
City Commission for final action.
Approval or denial shall be made solely by the City Commission by
unanimous vote of members present.
Any large scale development activity which involves a change in the
designation or density/intensity of land use shall be considered a plan
amendment and shall be subject to the state agency review requirements of
Section 163.3187, Florida Statutes and subsection 2-6.5 of this Code.
Level 3 review must be based upon all requirements of Level 2 review plus an
assessment of impact which may be caused by the proposed development. At
a minimum, the impact assessment must address the following general
parameters;
i. Adequacy of public facilities and services available to serve the
proposed development;
ii. Suitability of site conditions including topography and soils, and the
extent to which site modifications will be necessary to accommodate
the proposed development.
iii. Ingress and egress to roadways;
iv. Drainage or stormwater management;
v. Vehicular traffic, including on-site parking;
vi. Required permits from other governmental agencies;
vii. Noise
viii. Lighting;
ix. Public safety and/or potential to create a public nuisance; and
x. Impacts on natural resources.
Additional information or assessment may be required for development activities
in designated conservation zones.
2-4.3 Site Plan and Approval Required
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
28
1. Any application for development approval, including request for land use
amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, shall require a site plan in
accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
2. The developer, or their authorized agent, shall submit three (3) copies of
the proposed site plan drawn to an acceptable scale to the Building
Official. Except for development specified in subsection 2-4.3, paragraph
3. (a), all site plans shall be certified by a registered land surveyor,
landscape architect, architect or professional engineer. Site plans shall
contain and depict the following information.
(a) Level 1- Minor Development.
i. A vicinity sketch showing: the relationship of the site to
adjacent designated land uses and streets; location of the
proposed development on the site (lot or parcel), including
driveways and parking; access to adjacent streets; percent
of the site to be covered by impervious surfaces; flood
zones and base flood elevations, if any; and environmental
features including wetlands, shoreline vegetation or
construction on submerged lands if any.
ii. The boundary lines and dimensions of the area shown in
the site plan including angles, dimensions, and references; a
North directional arrow and map scale, and the proposed
use of the land.
iii. A description of the site (address or legal); the name,
address, and telephone number of the owner, developer,
and designer or contractor (if applicable), and the date of
site plan preparation.
(b) Level 2 and 3 – Small Scale and Major Development
Detailed drawings which show the following.
i. A vicinity sketch showing the relationship of the site in
relation to the surrounding street facilities, land use
districts, and flood zones, with base flood elevations (if
applicable).
ii. A description of the land; the name, address, and telephone
number of the owner, developer, and designer, and the date
of site plan preparation.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
29
iii. The boundary lines and dimensions of the area or lots
included in the site plan, including angles, dimensions and
references; a North directional arrow and map scale; and
the proposed use of the land by areas.
iv. The existing and proposed grades, the drainage plan,
erosion control plan, and the proposed structures with
appropriate topographic contour intervals or spot
elevations.
v. The shape, size, and location of all structures, including the
floor area and elevations thereof; the floor area and ground
coverage ratios and the relative finished ground and
basement floor grades.
vi. Natural features such as wetlands, shoreline, lakes or
ponds, and protected trees, and manmade features such as
existing roads, sidewalks, walls, fences or other structures,
indicating which are to be retained, removed or altered and
the adjacent properties, their existing uses and land use
designations.
vii. Proposed street, driveways, sidewalks, and parking
facilities; vehicular turnarounds, surd cutouts, and loading
areas; the location of solid waste receptacles; the inside
radii of all curves; the width of streets, driveways and
sidewalks and the total number of available parking spaces
specifying the type of construction and critical dimensions,
and the ownership of the various facilities.
viii. The size and location of all existing and proposed public
and private utilities or easements; water and sewer tap
locations; sewer cleanouts and turns; and water types, sizes,
and locations.
ix. All proposed landscaping and the dimensions and location
of all proposed signs.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
30
2-4.4 Review Period
All applications for development approval shall be submitted to the office of the City
Clerk. Required reviews and subsequent recommendations shall be completed within
thirty (30) days after the date the application is submitted in its fully completed form to
the City Clerk.
2-4.5 Withdrawal of Applications
Application for development approval may be written at any time prior to final action by
the City Commission; however, any fees or charges required for development review
shall be forfeited by the applicant.
2-4.6 Fees and Charges.
The City Clerk may establish and periodically adjust the schedule of fees or charges for
development review. Such schedule or adjustments thereto shall be subject to prior
approval by the City Commission.
2-4.7 Certifications.
Forms or other materials required under this Code may require certifications from
registered surveyors, architects, engineers or other professional persons. All such
certifications must be completed and affixed before the document or application, as
appropriate, will be considered for development review.
Sec. 2-5. PERMITS
2-5.1 Generally.
No development activity may be undertaken within the City unless such activity has been
authorized by a duly issued development permit, or the development activity has been
exempted by the City Commission from the provisions of this Code.
2-5.2 Development Permit Approval.
Upon review and approval of an application for development approval pursuant to
Section 2-4 of this Code the City may issue a development permit. The decision for
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
31
issuance of such permit shall be based upon general standards, including but not limited
to:
1. The proposed development must not be in conflict with or contrary to the
public interest;
2. Unless otherwise exempted, the proposed development must be consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan and the provisions of this Code;
3. The proposed development must not cause significant financial liability or
hardship for the City;
4. The proposed development must not create an unreasonable hazard or
nuisance, or otherwise constitute a threat to the general health, welfare or
safety of the City;
5. The proposed development must be in conformance with all other
applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations or codes.
2-5.4 Construction Permits
No permits relating to building construction, electrical, plumbing, gas, or utilities
connections shall be issued to a developer until such time as a development permit has
been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
2-5.5 Validity
Unless otherwise specified in the development permit, such permits shall remain effective
for a period of six (6) months from the date of issuance. Extensions may be granted by
the City Council in the event that performance by the developer is prevented due to
inability to obtain other applicable permits pursuant to subsection 2-5.3 or other
extenuating circumstances to be determined by the City Commission. Under no
circumstances shall a development permit remain effective for a period of more than one
(1) year from the date of issuance unless specifically provided for in an enforceable
development agreement (subsection 2-5.6).
2-5.6 Development Agreement
In order to provide flexibility and additional certainty to the comprehensive planning and
land development regulation process the City may enter into a development agreement
with a developer. Development agreements shall be governed by the provisions of
sections 163.3220 – 163.3243, Florida Statutes.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
32
Sec. 2-6 PROTECTION OF LANDOWNER’S RIGHTS.
It is the specific purpose and intent of the City Commission to ensure that each and every
land owner has beneficial use of his property in accordance with the U.S. Constitution
and the Florida Constitution, and to provide conditions and procedures whereby
landowner’s who believe they are deprived of all beneficial use of their property may
secure relief through non-judicial procedures.
2-6.2 Existing Non-Conforming Development.
Non-conforming development is considered to be those land uses or structures which are
in existence on the effective date of this Code and which by use, design or construction
do not comply with the provisions of this Code.
Subject to the following restrictions for continuance of non-conforming development
such development may, if in existence on the effective date of this Code, remain in its
non-conforming state.
1. Public Hazard. The development must not constitute a threat to the
general health, safety and welfare of the public.
2. Ordinary repair and maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair to
permit continuation of non-conforming development may be performed.
3. Expansions or extensions. Non-conforming uses shall not be expanded,
modified or extended onto adjacent properties.
4. Abandonment or discontinuance. Where non-conforming development is
abandoned or the use is discontinued for a period of six (6) months such
use shall not be continued or resumed, and shall be subject to compliance
with the provisions of this Code.
5. Damage or destruction. Where non-conforming development is
substantially damaged or destroyed reconstruction of such development
shall be in compliance with the provisions of this Code. A structure is
considered to be substantially damaged or destroyed if the cost of
reconstruction is fifty (50) percent or more of the fair market value of the
structure at the time of the damage or destruction. For non-conforming
development comprised of multiple structures the cost of reconstruction
shall be compared to the combined fair market value of all of the
structures.
6. Change of ownership. Change of ownership or other transfer of an
interest in real property on which a non-conforming use is located shall
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
33
not in and of itself terminate the non-conforming status unless the
purchaser modifies or alters the use of the property.
2-6.3 Vested Rights
A property owner’s right to development prior to adoption of this Code shall be vested,
even if such development is not in conformance with this Code, subject to the following
circumstances.
1. Final development approval has been granted to the developer by the City
and a valid, unexpired building permit has been issued to the developer by
the City.
2. Within one (1) year after adoption of the Comprehensive Plan the property
owner has requested and received approval of vested rights status from the
City Commission.
3. All vested development shall be undertaken in strict conformance with the
design plans and specifications approved by the City Commission and the
Building Official.
Any modifications, additions or alterations to the approved plans and
specifications shall not be considered vested development.
2-6.4 Hardship Relief; Variances
Variances to the provisions of this Code may be granted by the City Commission for
small scale development activities or other developments which do not require an
amendment to the Comprehensive Plan. Variances allow under this subsection shall not
supersede or abrogate the variance conditions associated with flood damage prevention
and/or the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
Any person desiring to undertake a development activity not in conformance with this
Code may apply to the Building Official for a variance in conjunction with the
application for development approval. The variance shall be granted or denied by the
City Commission in conjunction with the procedures for development review.
The Building Official shall first determine whether the need for the proposed variance
arises out of the physical surroundings, shape, topographical conditions, or other physical
or environmental conditions that are unique to the specific property involved. If so, the
Building Official shall make the following required findings based on the granting of the
variance for that site alone. If, however, the condition is common to numerous sites so
that request for similar variances are likely to the received, the Building Official shall
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
34
make the required findings based on the cumulative effect of granting the variance to all
who may apply.
The Building Official shall not vary the requirements of any provision of this Code unless
it makes positive finding, based on substantial competent evidence, on each of the
following:
1. These are extreme practical or economic difficulties in carrying out the
strict letter of this Code.
2. The variance request is not based exclusively upon a desire to reduce the
cost of developing the site.
3. The proposed variance will not substantially increase congestion on
surrounding public streets, the danger of fire, or other hazard to the public.
4. The proposed variance will not substantially diminish property values in,
nor alter the essential character of, the area surrounding the site.
5. The effect of the proposed variance is in harmony with the general intent
of this Code and the specific intent of the relevant subject area(s) of this
Code, and the Comprehensive Plan.
In reviewing a development approval involving a variance, the Building Official may
recommend such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as
may be necessary to allow a positive finding to be made on any of the foregoing factors,
or to minimize the injurious effect of the variance.
2-6.5 Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.
Any changes or alterations involving the type or designation of land uses, or the
allowable development within such land uses, as described in the Comprehensive Plan or
this Code shall be considered plan amendments. Amendments involving a change in the
type or designation of land use, or the allowable development within such land uses, may
mot be made more than two times during any calendar year except:
1. In the case of an emergency, Comprehensive Plan amendments may be
made more often than twice during any calendar year if the additional plan
amendment receives the approval of all of the members of the City
Commission. “Emergency” means any occurrence or threat thereof
whether accidental or natural, caused by man, in war or peace, which
results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or
substantial damage to or loss of property or public funds.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
35
2. Any Comprehensive Plan amendments directly related to proposed small
scale development activities may be approved without regard to the limits
on the frequency of consideration of amendments to the Comprehensive
Plan under the following conditions:
a. The proposed amendment is a residential land use of 5
acres or less and a density of 5 units per acre or less or involves
other land use categories, singularly or on combination with
residential use, of 3 acres or less and;
i. The cumulative effect of the above condition shall
not exceed 30 acres annually;
ii. The proposed amendment does not involve the
same property more than once a year; and
iii. The proposed amendment does not involve the
same owner’s property within 200 feet of property granted
a change within a period of 12 months;
Request for plan amendments involving both small-scale and large-scale development
activities shall be submitted to the City Clerk on forms to be provided by the City. Such
request shall be reviewed by the Building Official which will submit recommendations to
the City Commission for final action.
Request for plan amendments involving major development activities will be considered
by the City Commission each year at public hearings to be held during the first week of
June and the first week of December, unless otherwise specified by the City Commission.
Final action shall be taken by the City Commission after public notice and public
hearings as specified in subsection 2-6.6, paragraph 1.
Requests for plan amendments involving small-scale development activities may be
considered by the Planning Commission at any regularly scheduled meeting after due
public notice as specified in subsection 2-6.6, paragraph 2. Final action shall be taken by
the City Commission upon recommendation of the Building Official.
The City Clerk shall provide a semiannual report to the state land planning agency by
July 1 and by December 31 of each calendar summarizing the type and frequency of plan
amendments and the action taken on each by the City.
The procedure for amendment of the Comprehensive Plan for large-scale development
activities shall be as for the original adoption of the comprehensive plan or element as set
forth in Section 163.3184, Florida Statutes. The Comprehensive Plan may only be
amended in such a way as to preserve the internal consistency of the plan pursuant to
Section 163.3177(2), Florida Statutes. Corrections, updates, or modifications of current
costs which were set out as part of the comprehensive plan shall not be deemed to be
amendments.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
36
2-6.6 Public Notice and Participation
It is the intent of the City Council that landowners and the public participate in the
comprehensive planning and land development regulation process to the fullest extent
possible. Toward that end, the City will undertake procedures designed to provide
effective public participation and to provide landowners with notice of all official actions
which will regulate or change the official status of their property. These procedures are
as follows.
1. Adoption of amendments to Comprehensive Plan involving large scale
development activities. The City Commission shall hold two (2) hearings on
proposed plan amendments prior to final adoption of such amendments.
(a) The first public hearing shall be held at time of transmittal of plan
amendments to the state planning agency. It shall be held on a weekday
approximately seven (7) days after the day the first advertisement is
published. The intersection to hold and advertise a second hearing shall
be announced at the first public hearing.
(b) The second public hearing shall be held after comments are received from
the sate land planning agency and prior to adoption of the amendments by
the City Commission. It shall be held on a weekday approximately five
(5) days after the second advertisement is published.
The required advertisements shall be no less than one-quarter page in a standard
size or a tabloid size newspaper, and the headline in the advertisement shall be in
a type no smaller than 18 point. The advertisement shall not be placed in that
portion of the newspaper where legal notices and classified advertisements
appear. The advertisement shall be published in a newspaper of general paid
circulation in the county and of general interest and readership in the community,
not one of limited subject matter, pursuant to chapter 50. Whenever possible, the
advertisement shall appear in a newspaper that is published at least 5 days a week.
The following advertisement shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF CHANG OF LAND USE
The City of Springfield proposes to change
the use the use of land within the area shown in the
map in this advertisement.
A public hearing on the proposal will be
will be held on _____(date and time)________
at ___(meeting place)___. Members of the public
and all interested parties are invited to attend.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
37
The advertisement shall also contain a geographic location map which
clearly indicates the area covered by the proposal. The map shall include
major street names as a means of indication of the area.
2. Consideration of applications for development approval or variances; or smallscale
plan amendments. All meetings of the City Commission at which an application for
development approval, variance, or request for small-scale plan amendment is to be
considered shall be advertised as provided in subsection 166.041, Florida Statutes.
At each meeting the City Commission shall provide opportunities for oral or written
statements concerning any item to be acted upon at that meeting. No formal action may
be taken by the presiding body without such advertisement or public notice as described
in this subsection. Comments received from the public shall become a matter of record.
The City Commission shall also announce the date, time and place final approval action
will be considered.
3. Public Notice. Public notice involving changes in the use, designation, density or
intensity of land use, including variances or amendments, shall be advertised as
prescribed in paragraphs 1. and 2. of this section. The City shall provide additional
public notice by erecting a temporary sign on the property to be affected be official
action. Such sign shall be displayed in clear view of the public and shall describe the
type of the meeting at which official action will be taken. The sign will be installed and
kept in place for a period of not less than seven (7) days before the scheduled meeting at
which action will be taken.
2-6.7 Appeals
The City Commission shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals from any
decision, determination or interpretation of the Building Official with respect to the
provisions of this Code. An appeal may be initiated by a landowner, applicant, or
adjacent property owner aggrieved or affected by any finding, order, decision,
determination or interpretation by reviewing authorities with respect to the provisions of
this Code.
A notice of appeal in the form prescribed by the City must be filed with the City Clerk
within ten (10) working days of the decision. The filing of such notice of appeal will
require the City Clerk to forward to the City Commission within five (5) working days
any and all records concerning the subject matter of the appeal. Failure to file such
appeal shall constitute a waiver of any rights under this Code to appeal any decision
made by the Building Official.
The filing of a notice of appeal shall stay any proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the appealed action poses an imminent peril to life or property, in
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
38
which case the appeal shall not stay further proceedings. The City Commission may
review such certification and grant or deny a stay of the proceedings.
The City Commission shall consider the appeal at its next scheduled meeting following
receipt of all records concerning the subject matter of the appeal. The City Commission
may reverse, affirm, or modify the decision, determination or interpretation appealed
from and impose reasonable conditions to be compiled with by the applicant.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
39
ARTICLE III DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Sec. 3-1. PUBLIC PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to provide design and improvement standards applicable to
all development activities undertaken within the City, consistent with other appropriate
provisions of this Code. These standards are further intended to provide definite
guidance for review of application for development approval and for issuance or denial of
development permits to ensure functional and attractive development consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and the public interest.
Sec. 3-2. ACCOUNTABILITY
No building or structure shall be constructed, erected, placed or maintained, nor any
development or land use commenced or continued within the City except as authorized
by this Article.
Sec.3-3. RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS;
COMPLIANCE
All costs associated with the planning, design, construction, installation, or compliance
with permit requirements of other agencies, associated with meeting the standards set
forth in this Article shall be the responsibility of the developer, unless otherwise stated.
Sec. 3-4. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
3-4.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the platting of land and
development of residential subdivisions therefrom. The provisions of this section shall
serve to establish the identity of all lands shown on and being part of platted subdivisions
so that such lands may be thenceforth conveyed by reference to such plat, and to establish
standards of development necessary to protect the interests of the City and the general
public.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
40
3-4.2 Applicability
The City Commission must grant approval for all subdivision of real property into two
(2) or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units or any division of land; including
establishment of new streets and alleys, additions , and re-subdivisions; and , when
appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or area
being subdivided. Subdivision, platting and subsequent development of platted lands
shall be as set forth in this section and the minimum requirements of Chapter 177, Florida
Statutes.
3-4.3 Conformance with Code
In addition to the provisions specified in this section, subdivision developments shall
conform to all other applicable provisions of this Code.
3-4.4 Procedure.
The Building Official will review the plat and plans required to be submitted by this
section, and if in their opinion, such plat and plans meet the requirements of this Article,
he shall approve and certify same and the plat and plans may then be submitted to the
Commission for approval. No acceptance of streets, or otherwise, shall be made by the
Commission, until an inspection is made of all construction and approved by the Building
Official.
3-4.5 Subdivision and Street Names
The developer will not be permitted to use the names of any existing subdivision or street
unless the proposed streets are extensions, or may in the future become extensions, of
existing streets.
3-4.6 Preliminary Plat and Plans
The developer shall submit a print of the proposed plat, together with the following
information:
1. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded and the
name of the developer submitting the plat.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
41
2. An overall topographical map showing one (1) foot contours “On U.S.
Coast Guard and Geodetic Datum” of the land to be subdivided together
with an estimate of the number of upland acres contributing runoff water
to the land under consideration and the points of entry of such upland
runoff water.
3. The proposed location and width of streets, lots, setback lines, easements,
and typical street cross sections.
4. A drainage plan showing any proposed or existing storm sewers, culverts,
drainage canals, bridges, easements for drainage and final disposal of
drainage collected within the land to be subdivided, and location of outfall
ditch right-of-way.
These plans shall show existing and finished grade on centerline and road-side ditches.
3-4.7 Final Plans
Final plans of drainage shall be submitted in duplicate on black and white or blue line
prints drawn at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch on sheets 24
inches by 36 inches in size.
3-4.8 Final Plat for Recording
The final plat offered for recording shall show the following:
1. The boundary lines of the land being subdivided with distance and
bearings and the legal description of the land.
2. The lines of all proposed streets with their width and names.
3. The outline of any portions of the land intended to be dedicated for public
use, such as for schools, parks or other similar uses, and such dedication
for public use shall be clearly indicated and stated.
4. The lines of adjoining streets with their width and names.
5. All lot lines together with the identification system for all lots and blocks.
The lot numbers within a subdivision shall be assigned in a logical
numerical possible, block shall bear letter designations in contrast to
numbered lots.
6. The location of all setback lines and easements provided for public use,
service, utilities, or drainage.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
42
7. All dimensions both linear and angular for locating the boundaries of the
subdivision, lots streets, easements, and any other areas for public use,
service, utilities or drainage.
8. The radii, arcs, points of curvature, points of tangency, tangent, delta
angle, degree of curvature, shall be shown for all curves. Such data may
be listed and referenced to the plat.
9. All other information as required by law.
10. The certificate of the surveyor or engineer who prepared the plat as to the
correct representation of the plat according to applicable state law and this
ordinance.
11. Bearing data shall be shown and shall be true bearings based on Polaris,
Solar shots or existing true lines (existing true lines shall be properly
annotated) and a bearing statement which provides “bearing are true from
_____________” and state how obtained.
3-4.9 General Conditions
The following general conditions shall be applicable to all subdivisions:
1. Street System- The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining
areas (or their proper protection where adjoining land is not subdivided)
insofar as they may be deemed necessary by the City Commission to
serve the best interest of the public. The street arrangement shall be such
as not to cause hardships to owners of adjoining property when they plat
their own land and seek to provide convenient access to it. Streets
obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of the
existing streets. If a street is left at the edge of the subdivisions, it shall be
of full width.
2. Streets Widths - All right-of-way for streets shall not be less than fifty (50)
feet in width. Any intersection of streets having an interior angle of less
than ninety (90) degrees shall have an easement radius of not less than
twenty (20) feet. Dead-end streets of cul-de-sacs (streets that terminated
within a subdivision) shall terminate in a turn-a—round with a minimum
radius to outside of pavement of thirty-five (35) feet and forty (40) feet to
outside of right-of-way line.
3. Street Improvement — All streets shall be cleared, grubbed (free of
stumps, roots, etc.) and graded to the full width of the right-of-way. The
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
43
roadbed shall be at least 22 feet wide and a 3-inch crown in the center of
the road. The minimum size cross-road culvert shall be 18 inches in
diameter. Compactive effort shall produce a uniform density sub-base
suitable for the placing of base material. Base material shall consist of not
less than 6 inches clay base with 1-1/4 inches asphalt after compaction.
State standards for compaction shall apply to all streets affected hereby.
4. Utilities — Gas, water and sewage service lines shall be placed
underground. All homes shall meet the following conditions:
a. The home must be secured to a permanent foundation that
complies with applicable building codes.
b. The service equipment must be installed in a manner
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction.
c. The installation of the service equipment must comply with
Article 230 of the national Electric Code.
d. Means must be provided for the connection of a grounding
electrode conductor to the service equipment and routing it
outside the structure.
e. Electrical service boxes and meters shall be mounted to the
exterior side or rear wall of the home unless prohibited by
electrical codes.
5. Water - The cost of all materials reasonably necessary to provide city
water service to each lot in the subdivision will be paid by the developer
before actual service is started. The City will bear the cost of installation
of the water lines, meters, etc., which shall be the property of the City. An
amount equal to one-half the tap-on fee collected by the City from each
water user ultimately served within the subdivision shall be refunded to
the developer at the time said tap-on fee is collected.
6. Lot Design - The arrangement and design of the subdivision shall be such
that all lots will drain satisfactorily and will be properly related to the
topography and the character of surrounding development.
7. Setback - The minimum building setback lines required for any structure
shall be: twenty-five feet (25') from the front property line, ten feet (10')
from the side property line, fifteen feet (15') from the property line on a
side street and fifteen feet (15') from the rear property line. Setback for
accessory and storage buildings of 120 square feet or less shall be three
feet (3') from the property lines and Ten feet (10') from any primary
structure.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
44
8. Easements - All necessary water, sewer, drainage, and other easements
and rights of way shall be furnished at no expense to the City of
Springfield. Drainage easements shall have a width of not less than the
surface width required of the drainage ditch plus a fifteen (15) feet berm to
lie wholly along one side of the ditch, and in the case of a storm sewer, a
minimum width of 20 feet.
9. Required Dedication of Recreation Areas- Developers of residential
subdivisions consisting of over ten (10) residential lots shall provide land
area to be dedicated for public or private recreation use. Land area
dedicated for residential use shall be at least equal to the size of one (1)
residential lit and shall be located on upland property with the same site
characteristics as the subdivisions as a whole. Upon approval of the City
Commission, developers may provide funds in lieu of property dedication
if such funds are at least equal to the value of one (1) residential lit within
the subdivision.
3-4.10 Review of Plat and Plans
In order to provide for orderly checking of plat and plans for the Building Official, all
plats and plans shall be submitted to the Building Official, at least two (2) weeks in
advance of the proposed date of submission to the Commission. At least two (2) check
prints shall be furnished to the City Commission, one for the City’s files and one to be
returned to the developer on which any comments, changes or corrections will be noted.
The plats and plans required to be submitted by this section to the Building Official shall
be submitted by the developer’s Surveyor or Engineer.
3-4.11 Variations and Exceptions
Whenever the land to be subdivided is of such unusual conditions that strict application
or the requirements contained in this ordinance would result in real difficulties or
substantial hardships, or injuries, the Commission may, after a report from the Building
Official, vary or modify such requirements so that the developer may develop his
property in a reasonable manner but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and
interest of the City are protected and the general intent and spirit of these requirements
preserved; provided that, the developer’s surveyor or engineer shall modify the
certificates required of them by subsection 3-4.7, 10. so as to clearly state on the plans
what the modifications were and the Commission’s actions modifying the requirements
of this ordinance shall be reflected in the minutes of the Commission.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
45
3-4.12 Monuments and Lot Corners
All monuments shall be a permanent reference monument of reinforced concrete 4 inches
in diameter at least three feet long, reinforcing to be one Number 4bar 18 inches long, or
equal, with a ¼ inch copper tube 3 inches long placed in the top as a permanent reference
point, or equal, concrete to be at least 2000 psi strength, shall be placed on all block
corners, all points of curvature, all points of tangency, and shall comply with applicable
law.
All lot corners shall be in at time of submitting plat to the Building Official for checking
and shall be iron pipe at least two feet long and at least one inch in diameter, or equal.
3-4.13 Rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves
Curves from the U.S. Department of Commerce Weather Bureau shall be used in
determining the amount of runoff water in order to set widths of drainage easements and
right-of-ways. A 25 year, critical duration storm event shall be used for design purposes.
3-4.14 Recordings; Sales; and Disclosures
1. Approval and Recording of Plat. No Plat of a subdivision shall be filed or
recorded by the Clerk of Circuit Court , in and for Bay County, Florida,
until such plat has been submitted to and approved by the Commission in
accordance with this section and such approval has been entered in writing
on such plat by the Mayor, Commissioners and City Clerk.
2. Selling or Offering to Sell Land in a Subdivision Prior to Approval and
Recording Prohibited. No developer shall sell or otherwise transfer any
interest in any land in a subdivision before having submitted a plat of
subdivision to the Commission obtained the Commission’s approval as
required by this section, and recorded such approved subdivision plat in
the public records of Bay County, Florida.
3. Meets and Bounds Descriptions No Exception. The description by metes
and bounds in the deed or other instrument of transfer shall not exempt the
transaction from the requirements and prohibitions of this ordinance, if
this ordinance be otherwise applicable.
4. False Representations Prohibited. No person shall falsely represent to a
prospective purchaser of land that streets or drainage facilities serving, or
which may in the future serve, such land will be built, constructed or
maintained by the City.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
46
5. Disclosure Required. Any person or his authorized agent who has created
a subdivision and who has not had the streets or drainage easements
serving the subdivision accepted for maintenance at City expense by the
Commission, shall disclose to the prospective purchaser of lands in such
subdivision prior to the completion of the sale the following information,
which shall be substantially in the following form, and which shall be
affixed to the deed or other instrument of transfer and signed by the Seller
or Seller’s Agent and the Purchaser.
IMPORTANT: The streets or drainage easements serving, or which may in the
future serve, the land being purchased have not been accepted by the City of
Springfield for construction or maintenance at the expense of the City.
____________________________________
Seller or Seller’s Agent
____________________________________
Purchaser
Sec. 3-5 LAND USE REGULATIONS
3-5.1 Purpose
In order to promote consistency with the goals, objectives, and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan and this Code, it is necessary and proper to establish a series of land
use districts to ensure that the City can: preserve, promote, protect and improve the public
health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, and general welfare; provide adequate
and efficient public facilities and services; conserve and protect natural resources; and,
ensure the compatibility as adjacent land uses.
3-5.2 Applicability
All development within each land use district as described in subsection 3-5.3 shall be
consistent with the stated purposes and allowable uses as set forth in this Section. Unless
otherwise exempted or waived, the development standards prescribed in this Code shall
apply as appropriate to development within each land use district.
3-5.3 Land Use Districts
The following land use districts or abbreviations as established in the future land use
element of the Comprehensive Plan shall be used for purposes of implementing this
Section:
1. Residential Low-Density (RLD);
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
47
2. Mixed Use (MU);
3. General Commercial (GC);
4. Industrial
5. Recreation (REC);
6. Conservation (CON); and
7. Public/Institutional (P/I
3-5.4 Official Land Use Map
1. Land Use Map Established
The boundaries and designations of land use districts specified in section
3-5.3 shall be as described or depicted in the future land use element of the
Comprehensive Plan, or amendments thereto, and as shown on the map
entitled “Official Land Use Map of the City of Springfield, Florida” which
shall further be identified by the signatures of the City Commission and
attested to by the City Clerk. Such map shall be on file in the office of the
City Clerk and shall be available for inspection by all interested parties
during normal working hours.
2. Interpretation of Districts or Boundaries
Where, due to the scale, lack of detail or legibility of the Official Land
Use map, the boundary line of any district is uncertain or questionable, the
City Clerk shall determine its location. Any person aggrieved by the
location of a boundary line as determined by the City Clerk may appeal
the determination to the City Commission. The City Clerk and the City
Commission shall apply the following standards in determining the
location of a district boundary line;
a. Land use district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or
be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the center lines of
alleys, streets, rights-of-way or watercourses unless such boundary
lines are fixed by dimensions on the land use map.
b. Where the land use map indicates a district boundary line along or
following a lot line, the lot line shall be the boundary line.
c. Where a land use district boundary line divides a tract or plot of
land of the boundary line, unless indicated by dimensions
on the land use map, shall be determined by the use of the
map scale shown thereon.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
48
d. If, after the application for the foregoing rules, uncertainty still
exists as to the exact location of a land use district boundary line,
any determination of the boundary line shall give due
consideration to the history of the uses of property and the history
of building permits, and all other relevant facts.
3-5.5 District Purposes and Allowable Uses
1. Residential Low-Density (RLD)
a. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for preservation or
development of low-density neighborhoods consisting of singlefamily
dwelling units on individual lots.
b. Allowable Uses
The following uses are allowed as of right in the residential lowdensity
district, all other uses are prohibited:
- Single-family detached residential dwellings;
- Neighborhood parks;
- Accessory uses as provided in subsection 3-5.8 of this
Code;
- Public service or utility structures;
- Home office of convenience;
- Signs as provided for and set forth in Article IV of this
Code;
c. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted in the residential low-density
district subject to the following conditions:
- Duplex, triplex, or quadraplex attached residential
dwellings provided written permission is obtained from all
adjacent property owners.
- Public/Institutional uses (except for those including
maintenance yards, repair shops, fabricating yards or other
similar activities) provided the performance standards set
forth in subsection 3-5.7 are met.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
49
- Community residential homes (defined as a dwelling which
provides a living environment for 7 to 14 unrelated clients
of HRS including disables or handicapped persons,
nondangerous mentally ill persons or children) shall be
allowed when 6 or fewer residents are located in a singlefamily,
noncommercial, residential dwelling provided that
such homes are not located within 1,000 feet of one another
and when the location of such homes do not substantially
alter the nature character of the area.
- Single-family detached DCA approved manufactured home
designed as a RDMH structure.
2. Mixed Use (MU)
a. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for medium density
residential development and low intensity commercial
development. The mixed use concept is specifically intended to
provide flexibility in the planning and permitting process by
allowing a range of land uses within one district. Emphasis is on
performance mitigation such as landscaping, fencing, lighting,
noise standards, etc. to promote compatibility among land uses
while also providing property owners with a range of options for
use of their property.
b. Allowable Uses
The following uses are allowed as of right in the mixed use district,
all other uses are prohibited:
- All uses and conditional uses as allowed in the residential
low-density district;
- Medium-density attached residential dwellings, including
apartments, townhouses and condominiums;
- Single-family detached HUD approved manufactured
home, (SDMH ) or DCA approved manufactured home for
replacement and new installation.
- New construction of mobile home parks are no longer
permitted.
- Community parks;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
50
- Public/Institutional uses;
- Public service and utilities;
- Private recreation uses; and
- Signs as provided for and set forth in Article IV of this
Code.
c. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted in the mixed use
district provided the performance standards specified in
subsection 3-5.5 and 3-5.7 are met with the following
additions:
The following uses may be permitted in Mixed Use (MU) districts,
subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth. Other conditions
may be imposed by the City Commission to further the purposes of
the Mixed Use District.
(1.) Manufactured Home Subdivisions.
(2.) Existing Mobile home parks and subdivisions are hereby
declared to be non-conforming use and will not be required to
conform to standards and requirements of this Code for
manufactured home subdivisions except in all expansions and
additions. All replacements and new installations of manufactured
homes inside existing mobile home parks must be with HUD or
DCA certified homes.
All commercial development required to have an occupational
license pursuant to City Ordinance 182 EXCEPT:
Automobile Salvage Gravel and Sand Yards
Animal Boarding Foundries
Asphalt Dealers Manufacturing (all categories)
Barrel Factories Oil Canning Plant
Boat Building Petroleum, Gas, Liquefied
Boathouses Sausage Manufacturers
Bowling Alleys Saw or Planing Mill
Brick or Stone Dealers Shooting Galleries
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
51
Building Supply Yards Theatre
Bus or Freight Terminals Vulcanizers
Coal Yards Warehouses
Contractor Storage Yards Wood Yards
Creosoting Plants
Fire and Wreck Sales
Flea Market
3. General Commercial (GC)
a. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for high intensity
commercial development including high intensity commercial
development including retail sales and services, wholesale sales,
shopping centers, office complexes and other compatible land uses.
b. Allowable Uses
The following uses are allowed as of right in the general
commercial district, all other uses are prohibited:
- Medium-density attached residential dwellings;
- All non-manufacturing commercial activities eligible to obtain a valid
occupational license from the City;
- Shopping Centers;
- Public and Private recreation Facilities;
- Office Buildings/Complexes;
- Public/Institutional uses;
- Public Services and Utilities
- Signs as provided for and set forth in Article IV of this Code.
c. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted in the general commercial
district subject to the hereinafter set forth, or any other conditions
as may be set forth in a development order rule, or ordinance:
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
52
Duplex, triplex and quadraplex residential dwellings provided that
adjacent commercial or non-residential activities which abut the
residential use shall not be subject to supplemental performance
standards specified in subsection 3-5.7 of the Springfield Land
Development Regulations.
Single-family detached residential dwelling to replace an existing
single-family detached residential dwelling located on an
individual parcel, within a GC district, which has not removed or
abandoned (not used for the purpose for which it was
manufactured) for more than six (6) months and where such
replacement would not negatively impact adjoining conforming
properties.
Single-family detached manufactured homes HUD or DCA
approved within manufactured home subdivisions.
DCA certified manufactured commercial structures.
4. Industrial
a. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for industrial or
manufacturing activities and related uses and to prevent potential
land use incompatibilities caused by such uses.
b. Allowable Uses
The following uses are allowed as of right in the industrial district, all
other uses are prohibited:
All manufacturing operations required to obtain an occupational
license from the City pursuant to City Ordinance 182.
Single-family detached HUD approved manufactured home,
(SDMH structure), or DCA approved manufactured home,
(RDMH) structure to replace a mobile home already in a LI
district, which has not been removed or abandoned (not used for
the purpose for which it was manufactured) for more than six (6)
months and where such placement would not negatively impact
adjoining conforming properties. No new installations will be
allowed.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
53
DCA certified manufactured commercial structures.
5. Recreation (REC)
a. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas of recreation open to the
public.
b. Allowable Uses
The following uses are allowed as of right in the recreation district, all
other uses are prohibited.
Public parks, open space, refuges, ballfields, public ways and other
such activities intended for public recreation;
Public buildings and grounds;
Public services and utilities;
Private outdoor recreation activities.
6. Conservation (CON)
a. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for protection and
conservation of natural resources and locally designated environmentally
sensitive resources.
b. Locally Designated Environmentally Sensitive Resources
Locally designated environmentally sensitive resources are:
- Jurisdictional Wetlands;
- A and V Zones; and
- Martin Lake.
The City hereby declares that the most appropriate and best uses for
locally designated environmentally sensitive resources are those which do
not interfere with the natural functions of such resources. Allowable uses
shall be restricted to wildlife habitat, preservation of natural features,
propagation areas for fish or wildlife species, and passive recreation.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
54
No development permit shall be issued for development activities within
areas of environmentally sensitive resources without meeting the standards
as provided and set forth in Section 3-7. of this Code.
c. Environmentally Significant Resources
Other natural resources considered to be environmentally significant are:
- Soils;
- Identified wildlife habitat;
- Drainageways; and
- Trees
All development activities which may cause adverse impacts to the
resources identified in paragraph (c.) shall be subject to the standards and
restriction specified in Section 3-7. of this Code.
7. Public/Institutional
a. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to provide areas for public buildings and
grounds, churches, cemeteries, institutions, or other similar land uses.
b. Allowable Uses
The following uses are allowed as of right in the public/institutional
district, all other uses are prohibited.
- Governmental Buildings and Grounds;
- Churches, Non-profit Institutions, Cemeteries, Etc.
- Public Parks and Recreation Facilities;
- Public Services or Utilities.
- Signs as provided for and set forth in Article IV of this Code.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
55
3-5.6 Density/Intensity Standards
1. Public Purpose
In order to promote consistency between the goals, objectives and policies
of the Comprehensive Plan and this Code, it is necessary and proper to
establish land use densities and intensities so that the City can:
Encourage the most appropriate use of land, water, and resources
consistent with the public interest; prevent the overcrowding of land and
avoid undue concentration of population; and, deal effectively with future
problems that may result from the use and development of land within the
City.
2. Lots of Record
Lots within plats duly recorded in the records of Bay County on or before
the effective date of the Comprehensive Plan which cannot meet the
requirements set forth herein shall not be subject to the density or intensity
standards set forth in this subsection.
3. Density/Intensity Standards
No structure or land in the City shall be developed at an intensity or
density greater than the standards set forth in this subsection, except as
provided for in paragraph 2.
No single parcel of land or lot in the City shall contain more than one (1)
detached single-family dwelling. Any single parcel of land or lot
containing more than one detached single-family dwelling at the time of
passage of this Code is declared non-conforming use. Non-conforming
status shall be lost upon the removal of or destruction of or the
abandonment of such non-conforming dwellings. Upon the loss of nonconforming
status, the building removed, destroyed or abandoned shall not
be replaced, including the replacement of a manufactured home under
such circumstances.
LAND USE DISTRICT AND ALLOWABLE USES
Maximum Open Space
Density* Lot Coverage** Requirement
RESIDENTIAL LOW-DENSITY
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
56
Single-Family Detached Dwellings 5 du/acre .4 .6
Manufactured Housing, RDMH 5 du/acre .4 .6
Duplex, Triplex, Quadraplex 8 du/acre .4 .6
Public/Institutional NA .9 .1
Community Residential Home .4 .6
MIXED USE
Multi-Family Residential 15 du/acre .5 .5
Mobile Home Parks 7 du/acre .5 .5
Public/Institutional NA .9 .1
Private Recreation NA .5 .5
Non-Residential Commercial NA .5 .5
Conditional Gen. Commercial. NA .5 .5
GENERAL COMMERCIAL
Multi-Family Residential 15 du/acre (20) .5 .5
Mobile Home Subdivision 7 du/acre (10) .5 .5
Non-residential Commercial N/A .9 .1
Public/Institutional N/A .5 .5
Conditional Single-family Residential 4 du/acre .4 .6
INDUSTRIAL N/A .9 .1
RECREATION
Public Buildings and Grounds N/A .5 .5
Private Outdoor Activities N/A .5 .5
PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL, ETC.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
57
Government Buildings and Grounds N/A .9 .1
Churches, Institutions, Etc. N/A .9 .1
____________
* Dwelling units per acre
** Ratio of impervious service (buildings, driveways, parking lots, etc.) to open space or
undeveloped land.
*** With approval of the City Commission
4. Determination of Density or Intensity
a. Residential Density
Residential densities shall be determined by multiplying the
allowable dwelling units per acre by the gross acreage of the lot or
parcel to be developed. (Example: 15 du/acre x 2 acres = 30
du/acre).
b. Lot Coverage/Open Space Ratio
Lot coverage is the land area of any lot or parcel which can be
covered by impervious surfaces such as buildings, parking lots,
driveways or similar development. Open space is the land area
remaining in a landscape or natural state after development occurs.
The allowable lot coverage/open space ratio shall be determined by
multiplying the gross land area of any lot or parcel to be developed
by the applicable lot coverage standard set forth in subsection 5-
4.3 (Example: 43,560 sq. ft. x .5 = 21,780 sq. ft. allowable lot
coverage, and 21,780 sq. ft. open space).
3-5.7 Performance Standards
1. Public Purpose
This section is intended to provide performance standards which will reduce the
potential for nuisances between adjacent land uses or land use districts.
2. Applicability
Performance standards set forth herein shall be applicable to the conditional uses
specified in subsection 3-5.5.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
58
3. Performance Standards
a. Visual Buffers
A visual screen or buffer must be used to block from view all
parking areas or vehicular use areas from adjacent residential
property or developments. This barrier shall consist of at least fifty
(50) percent solid material with minimum height of three (3) feet.
Shrubs, trees, fences, or any combination of landscape material
may be used in the construction of the barrier. There shall also be
a five (5) foot buffer strip between residential use and nonresidential
use which may be comprised of native vegetation or
landscape vegetation. All visual buffers shall be properly
maintained and kept in good order and appearance by the property
owner.
b. Noise
No non-residential development shall be allowed adjacent to
residential properties which causes extended sound levels on such
residential properties to exceed 60 dBA from 7:00 A.M. to 10:00
P.M., and 55 dBA from 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. Extended sound
levels are those of a continuous or consistently repetitive nature.
c. Lighting and Glare
No multi-family residential or non-residential development
shall be allowed adjacent to any low-density residential
properties which causes excessive illumination or glare upon
such residential properties. All lighting or illumination
proposed as part of any multi-family or non- residential
development shall be located and installed so that no direct or
indirect light falls upon adjacent residential properties. All
driveways, parking lots or other vehicular access associated
with multi-family or non-residential development shall be
designed and constructed so that no direct light from vehicle
headlights is shown upon or into any adjacent residential
dwelling.
d. Electromagnetic Interference
In all land use districts, no use, activity or process shall be
conducted which produces electric and/or magnetic fields
which adversely affect public health, safety or welfare
including but not limited to interference with normal radio,
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
59
telephone, or television reception from off of the premises
where the activity is conducted.
e. Toxic or Noxious Matter
The emission of toxic or noxious matter beyond any property
line is prohibited.
f. Odor
No offensive odors shall be emitted which are detectable with
or without instruments beyond any property line.
g. Smoke
No smoke shall be emitted from any property which violates
state air quality standards.
h. Eyesores and Junk
No equipment, material, vehicle or product shall be stored or
kept in such a manner as to present an offensive or unsightly
appearance when viewed from any adjacent property.
3-5.8 Accessory Uses and Structures
1. Purpose
This subsection is intended to regulate the location, configuration and
conducts of accessory land uses and structures in order to ensure that such
accessory uses and structures are not harmful either physically or
aesthetically to residents of surrounding areas.
2. Accessory Uses
The following accessory land use may be allowed in the
RLD and MU districts:
- Accessory Apartments or Garage Apartments;
- Dining Rooms;
- Community Centers;
- Recreation Centers;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
60
- Employee Dining or Fitness Centers (MU district only);
3. Accessory Structures
The following accessory structures may be allowed in the RLD and MU
districts subject to the following conditions.
a. General Standards and Requirements
Any number of different accessory structures may be located
on a parcel, provided that the following requirements are met:
- There shall be a permitted principal development on the
parcel, located in full compliance with all standards and
requirements of this Code.
- All accessory structures shall comply with standards
pertaining to the principal use, unless exempted or
superseded elsewhere in this Code.
- Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations of
impervious surface and stormwater runoff.
- Accessory structures shall be shown on any site
development plan with full supporting documentation as
required in ARTICLE II of this Code.
b. Storage Buildings, Shops, Utility Buildings, Greenhouses
- No accessory building use for industrial storage of
hazardous, incendiary, noxious, or pernicious materials
shall be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet form
any property line of any residential dwelling.
- Storage buildings, greenhouses, and the like shall be
permitted only in compliance with standards for distance
between buildings, and setbacks, if any, from property
lines.
- Storage and other buildings regulated be this section shall
be permitted only in side and rear yards, and shall not
encroach into any required building setbacks from an
abutting right-of-way.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
61
- Setbacks: Accessory and storage buildings shall be
reasonably compatible in appearance with primary structure
of the property and shall comply with all setback
requirements as other structures except that accessory
structures of 120 square feet or less setback from the
property line is three feet (3') and ten feet (10') from the
primary structure.
- Storage and other buildings regulated by this section shall
be included in calculations for impervious surface, floor
area ratio, or any other site design requirements applying to
the principal use of the lot.
- Vehicles, including manufactured housing and mobile
homes, shall not be used as storage buildings, utility
buildings, or other such uses.
c. Private Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, and Similar Structures
- Swimming pools shall be permitted only in side and
rear yards, and shall not encroach into any required
building setback.
- Enclosures for pools shall be considered part of the
principal structure and shall comply with standards for
minimum distance between buildings, yard
requirements, and other building location requirements
of this Code.
- All pools shall be completely enclosed with an
approved wall, fence or other substantial structures not
less than five (5) feet in height. The enclosure shall
completely surround the pool area and shall be of
sufficient density to prohibit unrestrained admittance
to the enclosed are through the use of self-closing and
self-latching doors.
- No overhead electric power lines shall pass over any
pool unless enclosed in conduit and rigidly supported,
nor shall any power line be nearer than ten (10) feet
horizontally or vertically from the pool’s water edge.
- Excavations for pools to be installed for existing
dwellings shall not exceed a 2:1 slope from the
foundation of the house, unless a wall is provided.
d. Fences
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
62
- Fences or hedges may be located in all front, side and
rear yard setback areas. No fences or fence-wall shall
exceed four (4) feet in height when placed in the front
yard setbacks shall not exceed the height of eight (8)
feet.
- In areas where the property faces two (2) roadways or
is located in any other area construed to be a corner
lot, no fence shall be located in the vision triangle.
- Any fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way or
private road shall be placed with the finished side
facing that right-of-way.
- A fence required for safety and protection of hazard by
another public agency may not be subject to height
limitations above. Approval to exceed minimum
height standards may be given by the City
Commission upon receipt of satisfactory evidence of
the need to exceed height standards.
- No fence or hedge shall be constructed or installed in
such a manner to interfere with drainage on the site.
No fence, wall or similar structure shall be located in
or upon any body of water or submerged lands.
3-5.9 Design Standards for Manufactured Homes
1. Intent
It is the intent in this section to establish design standards for manufactured and
modular homes to ensure that they are compatible with existing, conventional
dwellings and to provide standards for the location and placement if individual
manufactured homes and manufactured home subdivisions.
2. Applicability
The use of mobile homes inside the City of Springfield (if not built in compliance
with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards of the
HUD Code OR approved by DCA as a manufactured home, with insignia
attached) is not allowed unless currently in existence and used as a single family
residence, and then only so long as continuously used as a single family residence
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
63
without a break in use for more than six (6) months or until any change in
ownership, after which the right to use shall terminate and said mobile home shall
be removed from the property. Manufactured homes shall comply with the
requirements hereof.
3. General Requirements
Placement of individual manufactured homes
For purposes of this ordinance, manufactured homes acceptable to be used for
residential purposes within the City are distinguished by two types as follows:
a. Residential Design Manufactured Homes, herein referred to
as RDMH structures, are manufactured homes (also called
“modular homes”), bearing a DCA seal, certifying code
compliance, meeting the following Residential Design
Standards which shall be used in determinations of
similarity in appearance between RDMH structures, with
permanent foundations approved as provided in this
subsection, and compatible in appearance and orientation
with site built housing which has been constructed in
adjacent or nearby locations. An RDMH structure is not
permitted to be used as a storage building.
b. Minimum width of main body. Minimum width of the
main body of the RDMH as located on the site shall be no
less than twenty feet (20'), as measured across the
narrowest portion. This is not intended to prohibit the
offsetting of portions of the home.
c. Minimum roof pitch; minimum roof overhang; roofing
materials. The pitch of the home’s roof shall have a
minimum vertical rise of one foot (1') for each four feet (4')
of horizontal run, and minimum roof overhang shall be six
inches (6"). The roof shall be finished with a type of
material that is commonly used in conventional residential
dwellings constructed in adjacent or nearby locations.
Built-up composition roof may not be used.
d. Exterior finish; light reflection. The exterior siding of the
home shall consist of wood, hardboard, masonry or vinyl
which is generally acceptable for site built housing which
has been constructed in adjacent or nearby locations;
provided, however, that reflection of such exterior shall not
be greater than from siding coated with clean white gloss
exterior enamel.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
64
e. Foundation. The tongue, axles, transporting lights, towing
apparatus and other transportation equipment shall be
removed from the RDMH. The RDMH shall be placed
upon a permanent foundation. Permanent foundation shall
mean:
- Installation of the home according to Chapter 15C-
1, Florida Administrative Code.
- Construction of a permanent, non-load bearing
perimeter curtain wall of concrete block, with a
minimum thickness of four inches (4") extending at
a minimum from the ground surface to the bottom
starter of the exterior wall surfaces of the home,
unpierced except for required ventilation and
access. Said curtain or wall shall be coated or
covered with a finish or with materials which blend
with the rest of the home’s siding materials.
Skirting of the type typically used around
manufactured homes or mobile homes shall not be
used as a wall or curtain around a DCA home.
f. Site orientation and setbacks of the Manufactured
(Modular) Home. RDMH structures shall be placed
on lots in such a manner as to be compatible with
and reasonably similar in orientation to the site built
housing which has been constructed on adjacent or
nearby locations. Building setback minimums must
be met as per Springfield’s Land Development
Regulation, Section 3-4.9 as amended herein.
g. Garages and Carports - Any RDMH structure
constructed will be required to have a garage or
carport if more than fifty percent (50%) of other
homes in the area have garages or carports. Such
garages and carports shall be constructed according
to requirements to building codes utilized for site
built homes.
h. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all
requirements of this ordinance and the City LDR
have been met.
i. Standard Design Manufactured Homes, hereinafter
referred to as SDMH structures are manufactured
homes certified as meeting HUD Code, but not
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
65
meeting Residential Design Manufactured Home
Standards contained herein. An SDMH structure is
NOT permitted to be used as a storage building.
j. Electrical service boxes and meters shall be
mounted to the exterior rear or side wall of the
home unless prohibited by electrical codes.
After the effective date of this ordinance, an individual mobile home dwelling unit may
not be located within the City unless: it has been approved as a HUD Designated
Manufactured Home ( SDMH) structure and meets all other requirements of this
ordinance.
All manufactured homes (SDMH) installed on private lots inside the City shall be placed
on lots in such a manner as to be compatible with and reasonably similar in orientation to
the site built housing which has been constructed in adjacent or nearby locations.
Used Mobile Homes - Due to the lack of comprehensive implementation of federal
building and safety standards for transportable structures manufactured before July 15,
1976, no mobile homes manufactured before July 15, 1976 shall be permitted in any
zoning district inside the City of Springfield. Mobile homes lawfully existing in the City
at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may not be relocated within the City. The
sale, resale, installation or transportation of a mobile home that was imported in violation
of this subsection is strictly prohibited. The Chief Building Official may grant limited
waivers for the sole purpose of transporting a substandard mobile home out of the City of
Springfield to a permitted site for demolition or disposal.
Any manufactured home dealer who takes ownership or possession of a mobile home
constructed prior to July 15, 1976 shall not transport the home to any other property
located within the city of Springfield.
It shall be unlawful to place or set up any manufactured building or home, either
temporarily or permanently, on private or commercial property, without such
manufactured building or home having first undergone a preliminary point of sale
inspection carried out by an agent of the City as per Ordinance 405 of the City of
Springfield..
All manufactured buildings and homes relocated from within the City to another location
within the City shall be subject to this ordinance requirement for preliminary inspections.
Such structures shall not be moved from their original location until the preliminary
inspection is accomplished.
All manufactured buildings and homes constructed within the past two model years prior
to the date of the permit request shall be exempt from preliminary inspection. However,
all manufactured buildings and homes placed or set up inside the city limits of
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
66
Springfield shall comply with preliminary inspection standards as well as with all other
ordinances, building codes, LDR development standards, etc. adopted by the City.
All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with those regulations
promulgated by DCA pursuant to Section 553.38(1), Florida Statutes and those local
requirements of the City as authorized under Section 553.38(2) FS, relating to the
following:
- Land Use and Zoning Requirements;
- Fire Zones;
- Building Setback Requirements;
- Side and Rear Yard Requirements;
- Site Development Requirements;
- Property Line Requirements;
- Subdivision Control;
- Onsite Installation Requirements;
-Review and Regulation of Architectural and Aesthetic Requirements;
- Landings of the requisite composition and size as per Section
1113 of the Current Building Code of the Southern Building Code
Congress International, used by the Bay County Building Department,
with said provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as
part of this requirement.
k. Manufactured homes, once placed on real property,
as herein authorized, must be returned for ad
valorem tax purposes annually as an improvement
to and part of the real property.
l. Manufactured homes are NOT permitted to be used
as storage buildings.
m. Skirting and foundation siding, including backup
framing shall be weather resistant and must blend
with the exterior siding of the home. Below grade
level and for a minimum of six inches (6") above
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
67
finish grade shall be unaffected by decay or
oxidation.
- Any SDMH Manufactured Home installed in the
City of Springfield prior to the adoption of this
ordinance and which has not been skirted shall be
skirted in compliance with provisions of this
ordinance within one (1) year from the date this
ordinance is adopted.
- Any SDMH Manufactured Home installed in the
City of Springfield after the adoption of this
ordinance shall be skirted in compliance with
provisions of this ordinance within thirty (30) days
from the date of installation. The date of installation
being the date the home is physically placed at the
home site.
n. Manufactured Home Sales Dealers will not deliver
or cause the delivery and placement of any
manufactured home to a site inside the City of
Springfield prior to the approval of the
Development Order/Permit for such placement.
o. No set-up and delivery agent shall deliver or cause
the delivery of any manufactured home to a home
site inside the City of Springfield prior to the
approval of the Development Order/Permit for such
placement.
p. No person shall occupy a manufactured home
placed on a site inside the City of Springfield until
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
q. All occupied residences and commercial
establishments within the city of Springfield must
be connected to City water and sewage, when
available, have City garbage service established and
must have electrical service. No Certificates of
Occupancy will be issued until all connections and
services have been accomplished.
r. All manufactured housing developments approved
prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be
declared non-conforming developments and shall be
exempt from these regulations for minimum lot
size, area, and setbacks when permits are requested
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
68
for replacement of existing manufactured or mobile
homes.
s. Existing mobile home parks, trailer parks, or other
manufactured housing developments shall conform
to the requirements of this ordinance and other LDR
requirements on any new developments, expansions
or additions to such mobile home, trailer park or
manufactured housing development.
t. This Code supersedes Springfield City Ordinance
391.
Sec 3-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION, DRAINAGE AND
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
1. Flood Damage Prevention
a. Purpose
Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion of flood damage; and,
Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which increase flood hazards to
other lands.
b. Development Standards; Compliance
All development undertaken within designated flood zones as
shown on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Panel number
120014 00001 B shall conform to the provisions and requirements
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
69
of City Ordinance No. 247 (Section 9.5, City Code of Ordinance)
and any amendments thereto.
2. Drainage and Stormwater Management
a. Purpose
Ensure the provision of a system of drainage ways and
conveyances so as to reduce the potential for flooding and
attendant threats to life and property.
b. Development Standards
i. The City shall require all developers submitting an application for
development approval an application for development approval to
provide as part of the overall development site plan [subsection 2-
4.4 (b)] a drainage and grading plan. At a minimum, such drainage
and grading plan shall include: 1) finished topographic contours; 2)
impervious surfaces; 3) existing drainage structures; 4) proposed
drainage structures; and, 5) proposed stormwater treatment
facilities. Construction or placement of individual single-family
dwellings, including mobile homes, or duplex dwellings on an
individual lot or parcel shall be exempt from these requirements.
ii. Design of drainage facilities and structures shall be based upon the
25-year, critical duration storm frequency event. Under no
circumstances shall a developer undertake any development
activity which causes stormwater to flow onto adjacent properties
unless such flow is directed into an approved drainage system.
iii. No development permit shall be issued by the City until the
developer has obtained a stormwater permit pursuant to Chapter
17-25, Florida Administrative Code, if applicable (DER permit).
iv. No development permit may be issued by the City until the
developer has obtained a drainage permit pursuant to Chapter 14-
86, Florida Administrative Code, if applicable (FDOT permit).
v. No developer or any other person shall obstruct, in whole or in
part, any public drainage ditch, pipe, easement or any other
drainage facility in the City, whether dedicated or not.
Sec. 3-7 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION REGULATIONS
3-7.1 Public Purpose
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
70
The destruction or pollution of environmentally significant resources within the
City constitutes a menace to the public health and welfare; creates public
nuisances; is harmful to wildlife, fish and other aquatic life; and can be
reasonably expected to decrease quality of life for residents of the City. It is
hereby declared that the prevention, abatement and control of development
activities which cause destruction or pollution of environmentally significant
resources are affected with a public interest, and the provisions of this section are
established with the purpose of protecting the health, safety and general welfare
of the people of Springfield.
3-7.2 Applicability
This section is intended to establish those resources or areas of a development site
that must be protected from harmful affects of development. Application of the
provisions of this section will divide a proposed development site into areas that
may be developed and areas that must generally be left free of development
activity. The proposed development should then be designed to fit within the
areas that may be developed.
3-7.3 Compliance when subdividing land
1. Each lot of a proposed subdivision must include a site suitable for constructing
a structure in conformity with the standards of these protection of
environmentally sensitive lands regulations.
2. The Conservation Element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan as amended from
time to time is hereby incorporated by reference into this Code.
3-7.4 Wetlands
I. There is hereby created a “Wetlands Protection Zone” in which special
restrictions on development apply. The boundaries of this zone shall be the most
landward extent of the following:
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
71
a. Areas within the dredge and fill jurisdiction of the Department of
Environmental Protection as specified in Chapter 403, Florida Statutes
and/or
b. The U. S. Army Corps of Engineers as specified in Section 404
of the Clean Water Act or Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors
Act of 1899.
2. Protection Standards
All development activities in the jurisdictional wetlands within the City are
prohibited unless:
a. Valid permits are obtained from the Department of Environmental
Regulation and/or the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers prior to the
development approval by the City, subject to the provisions of the
subsection 2-5.3 of this Code;
b. Appropriate mitigation of destroyed or damaged wetlands is
undertaken by the developer subject to the provisions of Chapter
17-3 12, Part III, Florida Administrative Code.
3-7.5 Martin Lake
1. Protection Standards
All development activities on submerged lands or waters below the
shoreline of Martin Lake are prohibited, unless specifically approved by
the City Commission upon demonstration by the developer that the
proposed development activity will not cause adverse impacts to fish,
wildlife, vegetation or other significant resources. No development or
construction activity shall be permitted within thirty (30) feet of the
shoreline of Martin Lake. Within this restricted area, all natural vegetation
shall be preserved for a distance of twenty (20) feet landward of the
shoreline, except for a corridor not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in width to
provide access to the water.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
72
3-7.6 Soils
1. Generally
All grading, filling, excavation, storage or disposal of soil and earth
materials associated with development activities shall be undertaken so as
to minimize the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation of -water
bodies or drainage ways. Erosion control measures shall be required for all
such activities except when all of the following criteria are met:
a. The site upon which land area is disturbed or filled is 10,000
square feet or less.
b. Natural and finished slopes are less than 10%.
c. Volume of soil or earth materials stored is 50 cubic yards or less.
d. Rainwater runoff is directed, either during or after construction,
from an area smaller than 5,000 square feet.
e. An impervious surface, if any, of less than 5,000 square feet is
created.
f. No drainway is blocked or has its stormwater carrying capacities or
characteristics modified.
g. The activities does not take place within 100 feet by horizontal
measurement from the top of the bank of a watercourse, the mean
high watermark (line of vegetation) of a body of water or within the
wetlands associated with a watercourse or water body, whichever
distance is greater.
2. Protection Standards
As part of the development review process required pursuant to ARTICLE
II of this Code the developer shall include an “Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan” as part of the overall site plan [subsection 2-4.4 (b)]. Such
plan shall include:
a. Calculations of maximum runoff based on the 25 year, critical
duration storm event;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
73
b. A description of, and specifications for sediment retention devices;
c. A description of, and specifications for, surface runoff and erosion
control devices;
d. A description of vegetative measures;
e. A map showing the location of all items listed in (a) through (d) in
this paragraph.
A developer may propose the use of any erosion and sediment control techniques
provided such techniques represent best management practices, and are certified
by a registered professional engineer.
Once development activity begins the developer shall maintain in good order all
erosion and sediment control measures specified in the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan regardless of whether the development project is completed or not.
3-7.7 Wildlife Habitat
1. Generally
Development shall not be permitted which will significantly damage or destroy
the habitat of species listed as endangered or threatened as specified in the
“Official Lists of Endangered and Potentially Endangered Fauna and Flora in
Florida,” published by the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission.
2. Protection Standards
The developer of any areas identified as containing habitat for endangered or
threatened species shall be responsible for the conduct of an analysis to determine
the value and extent of such habitat. This habitat analysis shall form the basis of
habitat conservation and preservation measures to be established either as a
condition of development approval or in an enforceable development agreement.
3-7.8 Flood Zones
1. Protection Standards
All development activity undertaken within designated, flood zones as shown on
the Official Flood Insurance Rate Map for Springfield, Florida (Community Panel
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
74
Number 1200 14 0001 B) shall be in conformance with the provisions of Section
3-6. of this Code.
In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 3-6. of this Code, the location
of hospitals, nursing homes, institutions or similar facilities is prohibited within
designated flood zones.
3-7.9 Stormwater Management
1. Protection Standards
All development undertaken within the City shall be in conformance with the
provisions of Chapter 17-25, Florida Administrative Code and Section 3-6. of this
Code. Stormwater permits must be obtained by developers pursuant to subsection
2-5.3 of this Code prior to the City issuing final development approval.
3-7.10 Trees
1. Generally
No developer, or any agent or representative thereof, shall cut down, destroy,
remove or move, or effectively destroy any protected tree located on any public or
private real property within the City, except that the provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to owners of single-family dwellings on single-family lots.
2. Protected Trees
Protected trees shall include the following types with a trunk of fifteen (15) inches
or more, except for Flowering Dogwood trees and Weeping Willow trees which
shall be protected when the trunk diameter is three (3) inches or more.
American Holly Magnolia
Black Cherry Maple
Cypress Oak
Dahoon Holly Pecan
Flowering Dogwood Sweetgum
Hickory Sycamore
Tupelo
Trunk diameter shall be measured at a distance of fifty-four (54) inches above
ground level, and in the case of a tree with multiple main stems the diameter shall
be the sum of the diameters of the stems. In the vent questions or disputes arise
concerning the identification, size, drip line or other conditions involving
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
75
protected trees the City may call upon and consult with the County Forester,
landscape architect or other qualified professional in order to reach a decision.
3. Removal of Protected Trees
It is the intent of this subsection to minimize the number of protected trees subject
to damage or removal, and that no authorization shall be granted to remove a tree
if the developer has failed to take reasonable measures to design and locate
proposed development so that the number of trees to be removed has been
minimized.
No authorization for the removal of a protected tree shall be granted unless the
developer demonstrates one or more of the following conditions:
a. An allowable use of the site cannot reasonably be undertaken
unless specific trees are removed or relocated.
b. The tree is located in such proximity to an existing or proposed
structure that the safety, utility or structural integrity of the
structure is materially impaired.
c. The tree materially interferes with the location, servicing or
functioning of existing utility lines or services.
d. The tree creates a substantial hazard to motor, bicycle or pedestrian
traffic by virtue of physical proximity to traffic or impairment of
vision.
e. The tree is diseased or weakened by age, abuse, storm or fire and is
likely to cause injury or damage to people, buildings or other
improvements.
f. Any law or regulation requires the removal.
4. Replacement of Removed Trees
a. Trees removed pursuant to paragraph 3. shall be replaced at the
expense of the developer.
b. For each inch of diameter removed, an inch of diameter shall be
replaced.
c. A replacement tree may be a tree moved from one location to
another on the site, or moved off the site pursuant to paragraph d.
below
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
76
d. Replacement trees shall, if practicable, be planted on the
development site. If not practicable replacement trees may be
donates, or a fee in lieu may be paid, to the City for purposes of
planting trees on public property. The fee in lieu shall be based on
the cost of purchasing the requisite size and number of replacement
trees.
e. Trees replaced pursuant to this subsection, which would be planted
under or within a space of fifteen (15) feet of either side of
overhead or underground utilities shall be selected from the
approved small tree replant list (trees with height at maturity of
eighteen feet or less) and shall have a minimum overall height of
six (6) to eight (8) feet at the time of planting. Trees which can be
planted in areas fifteen (15) feet or more from either side of
overhead or underground utilities shall be selected from the
approved list of canopy trees below and shall have a minimum
overall height of ten (10) to twelve (12) feet at time of planting.
The Bay County Cooperative Extension Service should be
consulted in selecting appropriate tree species and planting
procedures. Existing trees and native tree species that need less
water and maintenance are preferred.
Small Tree Replant List
Glossy Privet (Ligustrum Lucidum)
Loquat (Eriobotrya Japonica)
Red Buckeye (Aesculus Pavia)
Hawthorns (Crateagus Spp.)
Silverbell (Halesia Coroliniana)
Yaupon Holly (Ilex Vomitoria)
Ashe Magnolia (Magnolia Ashei)
Crab Apple (Malus Angustifolia)
Wax Myrtle (Myrica Cerifera)
Flatwoods Plum (Prunus Umbellata)
Hoptree (Ptelea Trifoliata)
Myrtle Oak (Quercus Myrtifolia)
Virginia Stweartia (Stewartia Malacodendron)
Rusty Blackhaw (Viburnum Rufidulum)
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
77
5. Tree Protection During Development Activities
To assure the health and survival of protected trees that are not to be removes, the
developer shall avoid the following kinds of tree injuries during all development
activities:
a. Mechanical injuries to roots, trunk, and branches;
b. Injuries by chemical poisoning;
c. Injuries by grade changes;
d. Injuries by excavations; and
e. Injuries by paving.
At a minimum, the protective measures described below shall be taken where
appropriate to the development activity. The measures shall be planned and
undertaken in consultation with the County Forester and shall not be construed as
limiting the authority of the City Commission to impose additional reasonable
requirements as may be necessary to preserve the health if protected trees in
particular circumstances.
The tree protection zone is a circular zone around each protected tree which
includes:
a. If the drip line is less than six (6) feet from the trunk of the tree,
the zone shall be that area within a radius of six (6) feet around the
tree;
b. If the drip line is more than six (6) feet from the trunk of the tree,
but less than twenty (20) feet, the zone shall be that area within a
radius of the full drip line around the tree;
c. If the drip line is twenty (20) feet or more from the trunk of the
tree, the zone shall be that area within a radius of twenty (20) feet
around the tree.
6. Avoiding Mechanical Injuries
a. Prior to any land preparation or other development activities a
protective barrier easily visible to equipment operators shall be
placed around all protected trees so as to encompass the entire tree
protection zone.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
78
b. No attachment, wires (other than supportive wires), signs or
permits may be fastened to any protected tree.
c. No equipment, construction materials or debris of any kind shall be
placed within the protective barrier.
d. Landscaping activities within the bounds of the protective barrier
(before and after it is removed) shall be accomplished with light
machinery or manual labor. Grubbing and similar activities are
prohibited.
e. In lieu of constructing the barriers required above, the developer
may physically designate large areas containing protected trees
where no land preparation or other development activities of any
kind will occur. The area shall be designated by placing stakes a
maximum of twenty five (25) feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic
tape, rope, etc. This perimeter line shall be beyond the tree
protection zone of any protected trees growing within the area.
f. Required protective barriers and perimeter lines shall remain in
place until all construction activity, except landscaping within the
protected area, is terminated.
7. Avoiding Injuries Due to Chemical Poisoning
a. No fuel, paint, solvent, oil, thinner, asphalt cement grout or any
other construction chemical or other material or tools of any kind
shall be stored, or allowed in any manner to enter, within a
required protective barrier or perimeter line.
b. No equipment shall be cleaned within a required protective barrier
or perimeter line.
8. Avoiding Injuries Due to Grade Changes
Grade changes shall not be made within the tree protection zone unless the
following protective measures are taken:
a. When raising the grade, the following measures shall be taken:
- Within the tree protection zone, existing sod, vegetation and leaf litter
shall be removed and the soil loosened without injuring the roots.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
79
- The area within the tree protection zone shall be properly fertilized to
improve the vigor and growth of the roots.
- Porous, four-inch agriculture drain tiles shall be laid over the soil to
drain liquids away from the trunk. A drop of at least one eighth (1/8)
inch per foot shall be provided. The drain field shall be designated to
provide adequate drainage of the existing configuration of the trees.
- The number of drains shall depend upon soil material; lighter sandy
soils and porous gravelly material require fewer drains than heavy
non-porous soils.
- Aeration shall be provided by installing vertical tiles along the system.
The vertical tiles shall be filled with gravel and capped with a heavyduty
mesh to keep out trash and debris.
- Dry wells shall be large enough to allow for maximum growth of the
tree trunk. Most large shade trees require at least a sixty (60) inch
diameter wall. For slow-growing mature trees, a space of twelve to
eighteen (12-18) inches shall be provided between the trunk and the
side of the wall at every point.
- To prevent washing of material into the well, the dry well casing walls
shall be high enough to bring the coping just above the level of the
proposed fill.
- Dry well walls shall be constructed of materials that permit passage of
air and water. Concrete blocks backed with galvanized screening may
be used for sides of the well.
- Gratings or barriers shall be used around openings that are large
enough to present a hazard to pedestrians.
- Open wells shall be cleaned regularly to remove sediment, leaves, and
debris that might interfere with the free passage of air.
- Large stones shall be placed over the remainder of the ground within
the drip line.
- A layer of gravel shall be places over the stones.
- The fill shall be completed with a layer of porous soil.
9. When Lowering the Grade, the Following measures shall be taken:
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
80
- Roots shall be cut cleanly and re-trimmed after excavation.
- The canopy shall be pruned to aid in maintaining tree vigor.
- When lowering the grade of the soil surrounding a protected tree, the
maximum number of tree roots within the tree protection zone shall be
preserved by using any of the following methods:
a. Terracing- The area within the tree protection zone is left at the
original grade by terracing.
b. Retaining Wall- The area within the tree protection zone is left at the
original grade constructing a dry retaining wall. The retaining wall
shall be porous to allow for aeration.
c. Terracing and Retaining Wall- The area within the tree protection zone
is left at the original grade by the combined use of terracing and dry
retaining wall.
10. Minor Changes in Grade
When the change in grade is minor, lesser protective measures than those
described above may be taken. The County Forester shall be consulted
before use of these methods where their use will not endanger the health
of the protected tree.
11. Avoiding Injuries Due to Excavations
a. Water, sewer and other utility lines should be routed around the
tree protection zones of protected trees whenever possible.
b. If a line cannot reasonable by routed around the tree protection zone,
the line shall be tunneled beneath the area within the zone. The tunnel
shall be offset to one side of the trunk to prevent damage to the main
tap roots.
Porous paving may be placed within the tree protection zone of a protected tree,
so long as no damage is inflicted to the tree by grade change, compaction of the
soil, or any other cause.
12. Exemptions
The following activities or operations shall be exempt from the
requirements of this subsection.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
81
a. Removal or trimming of trees by owners of single-family dwellings
undertaken on the single lot or parcel upon which the dwelling is
located.
13. Emergency Conditions
The City Council or its designated representative may waive all or part of
these requirements in the event of natural disaster such as hurricanes,
tornados, floods, or hard freezes. In such cases, the period of waiver shall
not exceed ten (10) days, unless extended by the City Council.
14. Commercial Tree Growers
Licensed plant and tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and
provisions of this subsection when trees planted or growing on the
premises of said licensee are so planted and growing for the sale to the
general public in the ordinary course of business.
15. Utility Operations
Tree pruning and removals by duly constitutes communication, water,
sewer, electrical or other utility companies or federal, state, or county
agencies, or engineers or surveyors working under a contract with such
utility companies or agencies shall be exempt, provided the removal is
limited to those areas necessary for maintenance of existing lines or
facilities or for construction of new lines or facilities in furtherance of
providing utility service to its customers, and provided further that the
activity is conducted so as to avoid any unnecessary removal and, in the
case of aerial electrical utility lines, is not greater than that specified by the
National Electrical Safety Codes as necessary to achieve safe electrical
clearances. All pruning and trimming shall be done in accordance with
National Arborist Association Standards.
16. Rights of Way
The clearing of a path for existing or new roadway rights of way,
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
82
provided that the rights of way are for existing roadways that are built in
conformance with City standards or for new roadways that will be built in
conformance with City standards. The width of the path shall not exceed
the right of way width standards for each type of roadway established in
this Code.
Sec. 3-8. UTILITIES REGULATIONS
This section is intended to provide basic standards for availability of utilities services as
follows.
3-8.1 Applicability
1. Electricity and Telephone
All residential developments shall have available a source of electricity
and telephone adequate to accommodate the basic needs of each dwelling
within such development.
2. Water Service
All persons owning or occupying dwellings, businesses or other buildings
located in the City which are accessible to the City water mains or lines
when established and placed in operation, shall connect thereto unless
their present water supply meets state specifications for purity.
Developers shall provide water distribution lines constructed to the City
standards as part of any new development.
3. Sewer Services
It shall be unlawful to use any sewer facility or part thereof, including but
not limited to, sewer package plants, sewage treatment facilities, sewer
collection lines or sewer disposal lines located in the City, to service any
area not within the territorial limits of the City.
When a sewer is not available, a septic tank must be used. Such septic
tank shall be approved by the state board of health. Such septic tank and
drain lines must be inspected by the state board of health before being
covered up. All house connections with this tank must be installed by a
licensed plumber; provided, however, any person may do his own work on
his own property.
Developers shall provide sewage collection lines constructed to City
standards as part of any new development.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
83
4. Fire Hydrants
All habitable development served by the City water system shall include a
system of fire hydrants which meets or exceeds the standards set forth in
Recommended Standards for Water Works, 1982 Edition.
Sec. 3-9. CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT
3-9.1 Generally
It is the intent of the City Commission that public facilities and services need to support
development shall be available concurrent with the impacts of such development. The
purpose of this article is to provide guidelines and procedures necessary to fulfill this
intent and to meet the concurrency requirements of state law.
Level of service standards shall be established and maintained for ensuring that adequate
facility capacity will be provided for future development and for purposes of issuing
development permits, pursuant to Section 163.3202(2)(g), Florida Statutes. The City
shall establish and maintain a level of service standard for each public facility located
within the area for which the City has authority to issue development permits. Such level
of service standards shall be set for each individual facility or facility type and not on a
system-wide basis.
3-9.2 Applicability
Development permits shall not be issued unless public facilities and services which meet
or exceed the adopted level of service standards are available concurrent with the impacts
of the development. Unless public facilities and services which meet or exceed such
standards are available at the time the development permit is issued, development permits
shall be specifically conditioned upon availability of the public facilities and services
necessary to serve the proposed development. Public facility and service availability
shall be deemed sufficient if the public facilities and services for a development are
phased, or the development is phased, so that the public facilities and those related
services which are deemed necessary by the City to operate the facilities necessitated by
that development are available and meet the adopted level of service standards concurrent
with the impacts of the development. Phases facilities and services to be provided by the
City shall be included in and consistent with the Capital Improvements Element of the
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
84
Comprehensive Plan. Public facilities and services to be provided by the developer shall
be guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. Including development
agreements pursuant to subsection 2-5.6 of this Code.
3-9.3 Minimum Requirements for Concurrency
For the purpose of determining if concurrency requirements are being met the City shall
use the minimum requirements set forth in Section X of the comprehensive Plan, as a
general guideline.
3-9.4 Level of Service Standards
1. Public Facilities and Services
Public facilities and services are those associated with:
1) transportation systems or facilities; 2) sewer systems or facilities; 3)
solid waste systems of facilities; 4) drainage systems or facilities; 5)
potable water systems or facilities; and, 6) parks and recreation systems or
facilities.
2. Levels of Service
The following level of service standards shall be used to evaluate available
facility capacity and as a basis for issuance of development permits.
a. Transportation Systems or Facilities- Levels of service for
transportation systems or facilities shall be based upon the
functional classifications of roadways, and volume/capacity
standards used by the Florida Department of Transportation.
Functional Classification Peak Hour Level of Service
URBAN
Principal Arterial D
Minor Arterial E
Collector E
Local Street E
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
85
b. Sewer Systems or Facilities- The City shall use 65 gallons per
person per day, or equivalent, to evaluate potential impacts of
proposed residential development, and the estimated sewage flows
specified in Section 10D-6.048, Table II, Florida Administrative
Code to evaluate potential impacts of non-residential development.
The City shall use 747,950 gallons per day, or the gallons per day
allocation sewage treatment by and between the City and Bay
County, as a basis for issuing development permits.
c. Solid Waste Systems or Facilities- The City shall use four and onehalf
(4.5) pounds of solid waste per person per day to evaluate
potential impacts of proposed development and as a basis for
issuing development permits.
d. Drainage Systems or Facilities- Design and construction of
drainage facilities and structures shall be based upon water
quantity and water quality standards for the 25-year, 24-hour storm
event as follows: Water Quality- Post-development runoff from the
site shall not exceed peak pre-development runoff rates; 2) Water
Quality- Stormwater treatment shall be provided for a volume
equivalent to one-half (½) inch of depth over the entire site, or the
runoff form the first one (1) inch of rainfall on the entire site in
accordance with Chapter 17-25, FAC in order to meet receiving
water quality standards in Chapter 17-302, section 17-302.500,
FAC. These standards shall apply to all new development and
redevelopment, regardless of size.
e. Potable Water Systems or Facilities- The City shall use 95 gallons
per person per day delivered at a pressure of fifty (50) pounds per
square inch to evaluate potential impacts of proposed development
and for issuing development permits.
f. Parks and Recreation Systems or Facilities- The City shall use the
following standards for evaluating potential impacts from proposed
development and for issuing development permits.
i. Recreation Site Standards
Neighborhood Park/Playground:
1/4 acre per 1000 population with ½ mile service radius.
Community Park:
1.5 acres per 1000 population with 1 mile service radius.
ii. Recreation Facilities standards
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
86
Facility Unit Per Population
Basketball 1/5,000
Tennis Courts 1/5,000
Ballfields 1/5,000
Picnic Areas 1/4,000
Equipped Playground 1/3,000
Bicycle Paths 1 mile/5,000
Community Centers 1/10,000
3-9.5 Levels of Service to be Maintained
1. All applications for development approval shall demonstrate that the
proposed development does not degrade adopted level of service
standards.
2. Development permits may be issued for proposed development which
exceeds adopted levels of service only when the terms and conditions of
such exceedances are consistent with Section X of the Comprehensive
Plan and are set forth in an enforceable, executed development agreement.
3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, levels of service may be temporarily
degraded during actual construction of new facilities, if upon completion
of construction the prescribed levels of service will be met.
4. The City Commission may temporarily waive the foregoing requirements
as they relate to levels of service for parks and recreation systems or
facilities of the sites and facilities needed to maintain levels of service are
included in the capital improvements element of the Comprehensive Plan.
3-9.6 Revisions or Adjustments
The levels of service in the Comprehensive Plan and in subsection 3-9.4 may be revised
or adjusted to accommodate changing conditions and circumstances. Revisions or
adjustments to levels or service shall be based upon accurate and reliable data or
information, and shall be considered a plan amendment subject to the provisions of
subsection 2-6.5 of this Code.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
87
3-9.7 Adequate Capacity of Facilities
For purposes of issuing development permits, the available capacity of public facilities
and services shall be determined as prescribed in this section.
1. Presumption of Adequate Capacity
Adequate capacity shall be presumed to be available for the approval of
development permits until such time as conditions and circumstances
permits until such time as conditions and circumstances indicate
otherwise. Determination of such conditions and circumstances shall be
triggered by certain thresholds which demonstrate that public facilities and
services are nearing available capacity. Development permits shall not be
denied on the basis of concurrence until such time as capacity thresholds
are reached and maintained. Presumption of adequate capacity as a basis
of meeting concurrency requirements shall not relieve the responsibility of
the developer from compliance with other provisions of this Code, or the
responsibility of the City for maintaining records which indicate the
cumulative impacts of development permits.
2. Capacity Thresholds
The City shall establish, and revise as necessary, capacity threshold
standards to be used for presumptions of adequate capacity. Thresholds
shall be indicated for transportation systems of facilities, sewer systems or
facilities, solid waste systems or facilities, drainage systems or facilities,
potable water systems or facilities, and parks and recreation systems or
facilities. The list of capacity threshold standards shall be as specified in
paragraph 3 of this section.
3. Capacity Threshold Standards
Adequate capacity shall be presumed to be available until such time as the
following standards are met or exceeded.
a. Roadways
Annual “Average Daily Traffic” (ADT) counts published by the
Florida Department of Transportation reach ninety percent (90%)
of the maximum level of service volume as established in the City
of Springfield, Evaluation and Appraisal Report, April 1990.
b. Sewer
Monthly sewer flows, based on a six (6) month average, reach
ninety percent (90%) of treatment capacity allocated to the City
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
88
pursuant to the “Four Cities Interlocal Agreement” by and between
the City and Bay County.
c. Solid Waste
Average daily tons of solid waste collected in the City reach seven
percent (7%) of the disposed capacity of Bay County solid waste
disposal facilities.
d. Drainage
Proposed development is in compliance with Section 3-6 of this
Code.
e. Potable Water
Average daily consumption (million gallons per day) of potable
water in the City reaches five percent (5%) of available capacity
from Bay County, or delivery pressure (pounds per square inch,
psi) falls below thirty (30) psi on a city-wide basis.
f. Recreation
Population demand for recreation sites and facilities, based on
annual population estimated, reaches 95% of availability for such
sites and facilities.
g. Population
All capacity thresholds will be immediately reevaluated in the
event population growth exceeds ten percent (10%) during any one
year. Population growth shall be based upon annual estimates of
population published by the Bureau of Economics and Business
Research (BEBR), University of Florida.
4. Termination of Presumption of Adequate Capacity
Presumption of adequate capacity for purposes of issuing development
permits shall be terminated when it has been determined by the City that
the capacity thresholds have been met or exceeded. At that time, the City
Clerk shall issue a statement to the City Commission which indicates that
all applications for development approval will be subject to the
concurrency requirements of this Article and the Comprehensive Plan.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
89
3-9.8 Concurrency Management System
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 3-9.7, the City shall evaluate impacts upon
public facilities and services caused by proposed development for each application fro
development approval. Impacts caused by proposed development for which adequate
capacity is presumed shall be recorded by the City and added to a cumulative total of
allotted capacity for purposes of determining when capacity thresholds have been met.
The system for determination of potential impacts on public facilities caused by proposed
development for purposes of recording a cumulative requirements when capacity
thresholds have been met, shall be as follows.
1. Determination of Availability Capacity
Available capacity shall be determined for public facilities and
services as follows:
a. Roadways
i. The City Clerk shall obtain the latest available
“Average Daily Traffic” (ADT) counts from the
Florida Department of Transportation each year, or
as revised ADT counts become available.
ii. Each year, ADT counts will be used to: 1)
determine if capacity thresholds have been reached
or exceeded; and, 2) establish the basis from which
traffic caused by proposed development can be
expected to impact upon level of service standards.
iii. Using the annual ADT counts as a basis, potential
traffic to be generated by a proposed development
shall be estimated through use of criteria specified
in Trip Generation, 4th Edition, Institute of
Transportation Engineers, 1987. Estimates of trips
to be generated shall be added to the annual ADT
basis to determine if capacity thresholds or levels of
service standards will be met or exceeded. The City
Clerk shall maintain a cumulative total of estimated
trips added to the ADT count basis until such time
as revised ADT counts become available from the
Florida Department of Transportation.
2. Sewer
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
90
i. The City shall maintain an estimate of average daily
sewage flow which shall be updated each month.
Sewage flow estimates will be derived from an
average of monthly sewage flows for six (6) month
period immediately preceding the month for which
the estimate is being made. The “Four Cities- Bay
County Monthly Sewage Flow Report” shall be
used to estimate monthly sewage flows.
ii. Estimated average daily flows derived from the
average monthly sewage flows shall be used as the
basis to determine if capacity thresholds or level of
service standards will be met or exceeded. Average
daily sewage flow will be estimated for all proposed
development using the level of service specified in
subsection 3-9.4. Additional sewage flow caused
by proposed development shall be added to the
estimated monthly sewage flow to determine if
adequate capacity is available.
iii. The City Clerk shall maintain a cumulative total of
permitted sewage flows and shall reduce the City’s
allocated capacity accordingly on a monthly basis.
3. Solid Waste
i. On an annual basis, the City shall identify available
solid waste disposal capability which can be
provided by Bay County. This volume shall
provide the basis to determine if capacity thresholds
or level of service standards will be met or
exceeded.
ii. The City shall apply the level of service standard
found in subsection 3-9.4 to estimate volumes of
solid waste generated by proposed developments.
4. Drainage
i. The City shall require all developers submitting an
application for development approval to provide as
part of the overall development site plan a drainage
and grading plan. At a minimum, such drainage
and grading plan shall include: 1) finished
topographic contours; 2) impervious surfaces; 3)
existing drainage structures; and, 4) proposed
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
91
drainage structures; and, 5) proposed stormwater
treatment facilities.
ii. Design standards for drainage shall be as specified
in Section 3-6. No development permit shall be
issued by the City until the developer has obtained a
stormwater permit pursuant to Chapter 17-25,
Florida Administrative Code, if applicable, and the
developer has a drainage and grading plan approved
by the City.
iii. Drainage facilities for the proposed development of
a single-family detached or duplex dwelling unit on
an individual lot or parcel shall be presumed
adequate when: 1) proposed development is part of
a larger common plan of development which has
been previously approved by the City; or, 2) site
modifications are in conformance with Section 3-6
of this Code.
iv. All development shall be undertaken in strict
conformance with the erosion control measures
specified in subsection 3-7.6 of this Code.
5. Potable Water
i On an annual basis, the City shall identify the
amount of potable water and delivery rate (pounds
per square inch) which can be supplied by Bay
County. This amount shall provide the basis to
determine whether capacity thresholds or levels of
service standards will be met or exceeded.
ii. The City shall apply the level of service standard
found in subsection 3-9.4 to estimate potable water
consumption for all proposed development.
6. Recreation
i On an annual basis, the City shall identify public
and private recreation sites and facilities available
for use by the general public. These sites and
facilities shall provide the basis to determine
whether capacity thresholds or levels of service
standards have been met or exceeded.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
92
ii The City shall apply the level of service standards
found in subsection 3-9.4 to estimate demand for
recreation sites and facilities caused by proposed
development.
7. Action upon Failure to Show Available Capacity
a. The project owner or developer may provide the necessary
improvements to maintain level of service standards. In
such case the application shall include appropriate plans for
improvements, documentation that such improvements are
designed to provide the capacity necessary to achieve or
maintain the level of service, and an enforceable
development agreement guaranteeing the construction,
consistent with calculations of capacity above.
b. The proposed project may be altered such that project level
of service is no less than the adopted level of service.
8. Burden of Showing Compliance on Developer
The burden of showing compliance with level of service
requirements shall be upon the developer. All applications for
development approval shall provide sufficient information showing
compliance with these standards.
9. Initial Determination of Concurrency
The initial determination of concurrency occurs during the review
of the application for development approval, and shall include
compliance with the level of service standards adopted by the City.
3-9.9 Annual Concurrency Report
Contents
The City shall prepare an Annual Concurrency Report that includes:
1. A summary of building permit activity, including:
a. those that expired without commencing construction;
b. those that are active at the time of the report;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
93
c. the quantity of development represented by the outstanding
building permits;
d. those that result from final development permits issued prior to the
adoption of this Code; and
e. those that result from final development permits issued pursuant to
the requirements of this Code.
2. An evaluation of each facility and service indicating:
a. the capacity available for each at the beginning of the reporting
period and the end of the reporting period;
b. the portion of the available capacity held for valid preliminary and
final development orders;
c. a comparison of actual capacity and levels of service to adopted
levels of service from the Comprehensive Plan.
d. a comparison of actual capacity and levels of service to adopted
levels of service from the comprehensive Plan.
e. a forecast of the capacity for each based upon the most recently
updated schedule of capital improvements in the Capital
Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan.
Use of the Annual Concurrency Report
The Annual Concurrency Reports shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the capacity and levels of service of public facilities for the purpose of
issuing development orders during the twelve (12) months following
completion of the annual report.
3-9.10 Guarantee of Adequate Capacity
Upon determination of adequate capacity as described in this Article the City shall
guarantee to the developer availability of capacity in the types, amounts, or volume
specified in the final development permit or development agreement. Such guarantees of
available capacity shall be valid for a period of six (6) months from the date the final
development permit is issued.
Any guarantee of adequate capacity by the City shall become null and void in the event
circumstances beyond the control of the City causes adequate capacity to become
unavailable. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to: acts of other
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
94
governmental agencies; war; acts of God; or, changes in statutes, rulers or other related
legislative actions.
Sec. 3-10. TRAFFIC CIRCULATION AND PARKING
3-10.1 Generally
This section establishes minimum requirements applicable to transportation systems,
including public and private streets, bikeways, pedestrian ways, parking and loading
areas, and access control to and from public streets. The standards in this Section are
intended to minimize the traffic impacts of development, to assure that all developments
adequately and safely provide for the storage and movement of vehicles consistent with
good engineering and development design practices.
3-10.2 Technical Construction Standards
Design and construction of all highways, roads, or streets including pavement width,
right-of-way, sight clearance and all other associated design considerations shall be as
specified in the most recently published edition of the Manual of Uniform Standards for
Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, Florida Department of
Transportation, unless otherwise specified in this Code.
3-10.3 Functional Classifications of Roadways
Roadways within the City have been identified in the Comprehensive Plan as to
functional classification established by the Florida Department of Transportation.
Functional classifications of roadways within the City are as follows:
1. Arterial Roadways (State Highway System)
- US 98 (Tyndall Pkwy./ 15th Street
- State Road 22
- Business US 98
- Transmitter Road
2. Collector Roadways (City Street System)
- Bob Little Road
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
95
- 7th Street
- Cherry Street
- School Avenue
- 5th Street
3. Local Streets (City Street System)
All other roads and streets
The preceding functional classifications shall be used in reference to standards as
applied in this section.
3-10.4 General Design Standards
1. All streets in a new development shall be designed and constructed pursuant
to the standards in the Technical Construction Standards Manual in
subsection 3-10.2. Streets shall be dedicated to the City upon completion,
inspection, and acceptance by the City.
2. The street system of the proposed development shall, to the extent
practicable, conform to the natural topography of the site, preserving
existing hydrological and vegetative patterns, and minimizing erosion
potential, runoff, and the need for site alteration. Particular effort should
be directed toward securing the flattest possible grade near intersections.
3. Streets shall be laid out to avoid environmentally sensitive areas.
4. Private streets may be allowed within developments that will remain under
common ownership, provided they are designed and constructed pursuant to
the standards in the Technical Construction Standards Manual in subsection
3-10.2.
5. The street layout in all new development shall be coordinated with and
interconnected to the street system of the surrounding area.
6. Streets in proposed subdivisions shall be connected to rights-of-way in
adjacent areas to allow for proper inter-neighborhood traffic flow. If
adjacent lands are unplatted, stub outs in the new development shall be
provided for future connection to the adjacent unplatted land.
7. Residential streets shall be arranged to discourage through traffic.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
96
8. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and in no case shall
be less than 75 degrees.
9. New intersections along one side on an existing street shall, where possible,
coincide with existing intersections. Where an offset (jog) is necessary at an
intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting streets shall
be no less than 150 feet.
10. No two streets may intersect with any other street on the same side at a
distance of less than 400 feet measured from centerline to centerline of the
intersecting street. When the intersected street is an arterial, the distance
between intersecting streets shall be no less than 1,000 feet.
3-10.5 Rights-of-Way
1. Right-of-Way Width
Right-of-way requirements for road construction shall be as set forth the
Technical Construction Standards Manual specified in subsection 3-10.2
2. Protection and Use
a. No encroachment shall be permitted into existing rights-of-way,
except for temporary use authorized by the City.
b. Use of the right-of-way for public or private utilities, including, but
not limited to, sanitary sewer, potable water, telephone wires, cable
television wires, gas lines, or electricity transmission, shall be
allowed subject to the placement specifications in the Technical
Construction Standards Manual in subsection 3-10.2, or equivalent,
and other applicable laws or regulations.
c. Sidewalks and bicycle ways shall be placed within the right-ofway.
3. Vacations of Rights-of-Ways
Applications to vacate a right-of-way shall be approved upon a finding
that all of the following requirements are met:
a. The requested vacation is consistent with the Traffic Circulation
Element of the City Comprehensive Plan.
b. The right-of-way does not provide the sole access to any property.
Remaining access shall not be by easement.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
97
c. The vacation would not jeopardize the current or future location of
any utility.
d. The proposed vacation is not detrimental to the public interest, and
provides a positive benefit to the City.
e. The proposed vacation does not provide a public access-way to the
water.
3-10.6 Access Control
1. Principal Arterials (State Highway System)
All driveways, access points, entrances or exits or other vehicular
connections to the State Highway System must be authorized by the Florida
Department of Transportation. Vehicular connection permits must be
obtained by developers pursuant to Chapter 14-96, Florida Administrative
Code, such permits are required for vehicular connections onto US 98
(Tyndall Pkwy. / 15th Street) Business US 98, and State Road 22.
2. City Streets
Location and Spacing of Access Points
Location and Spacing of access points shall be as specified in the Technical
Construction Standards Manual in subsection 3-10.2.
3-10.7 Bicycle and Pedestrian Ways
1. All new developments shall be required to install bicycle paths and/or
sidewalks when the need for such facilities has been established as an
integral part of the City’s non-automotive traffic circulation system.
Decisions by the City in applying the requirements for bicycle paths or
sidewalks shall be based on the following criteria:
a. Application of this requirement is necessary to install or
complete a portion of the bicycle path or sidewalk system;
b. Installation of bicycle path or sidewalks is not contrary to
public safety;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
98
c. The cost of providing bicycle paths or sidewalks in not
excessively disproportionate to the need or probable area; and
d. Other available factors or means do not indicate an absence of
need.
2. Technical Construction Standards
Required bicycle paths and sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in
conformance with the standards set forth in the Manual of Uniform
Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets
and Highways as published by the Florida Department of Transportation.
3-10.8 Off-Street Parking and Loading
1. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and established upon the erection or
enlargement of any building or structure or upon an increase in the capacity of
any building or structure for any purpose, including, but not limited to, dwelling
units, guest rooms, floor area, seating capacity, employment or patronage.
No on-street public parking spaces may be used in calculating the number of
parking spaces required of any business. Where any business has a designated
employment, seating or patronage capacity or twenty-five (25) persons or more,
twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum parking requirements may be satisfied
by available off-street parking facilities provided the availability thereof is on the
same side of the block and not separated by a major street or thoroughfare and is
located within five hundred (500) feet of the business, provided the parking
facility and its access is not interrupted by any fence, walls, or other structure
which would separate the business from the off-street parking area. The
measurement from the business to the parking area shall be measured from the
entrance of the business to the entrance of the parking facility along the
commonly traveled and approved pedestrian walkway or route between the
business and the parking facility.
Off –Street parking requirements shall be as follows:
Use Spaces Required
DWELLINGS
Single-family, duplex, 2 per unit
cluster or town house
dwelling units
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
99
Apartment or condominium 1.5 per unit (plus 1 per
each 10 units)
Hotels, motels and mobile 1 per unit (plus 2 per
home parks office)
Boarding homes 1 per bedroom
Dormitories 1 per each 3 beds
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
Church, temple or other 1 per 4 seats in main
place of worship assembly room
Fraternal organization or 1 per 300 sq. ft. gross
private club floor area, plus 1.5 per bedroom
Auditorium, theater, gym- 1 per 4 seating spaces
nasiums or convention hall
Libraries and museums 1 per 500 sq. ft. gross area
Private schools 1 per 4 seats in assembly
kindergartens and day care centers hall plus 1 per classroom
Amusement place, dance hall, 1 per 4 seating spaces or
Swimming pool or exhibition hall 1 per each 100 sq. ft. of floor or
grounds used for amusement or
assembly
Bowling alley 5 per alley
HEALTH FACILITIES
Hospitals 1.75 per bed
Sanitariums, convalescent homes 1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area
or similar institutions
Animal hospitals 1 per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Medical, dental and health offices 1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
and clinics
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
100
Funeral parlors or mortuaries 1 per each 4 chapel seats
BUSINESS
Food stores and drug stores 1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
(over 4,000 sq. ft.: Use 1 per
100 sq. ft. gross floor area)
Commercial, retail business 1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
personal services
Business and professional offices 1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Banks or other financial institutions 1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Printing, publishing or broadcasting 1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Restaurant, lounge or establishment 1 per 100 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 per
for consumption of beverages on 4 seats, whichever is greater
premises
Drive-in restaurants Subject to City Commission’s
approval
Shopping centers 1 per each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor
area up to 15 acre center, and 1 per
each 200 sq. ft. gross floor area for
over 15 acre center
Convenience food stores Subject to City Commission’s
Approval
2. Location of off-street parking.
The parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as that of the structure it
serves or within five hundred (500) feet of the principal entrance thereto, as
measured along the most direct pedestrian walkway.
3. Joint use of off-street parking space.
No part of an off-street parking area required for any building or land use shall be
used as a parking facility for another building or other land use, except where the
parking demands of different uses occur at different times. The following
requirements must be satisfied in order to comply with this exception:
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
101
a. A notarized statement from all property owners involved
must be presented, indicating that the activities of each
separate building or land use which creates a demand for
parking shall occur at different times.
b. Such statement must include an agreement between the parties
for maintenance.
c. Such agreement shall continue for so long as there is not a
conflict of traffic between the different land uses which would
result in violation of the minimum standards of this article.
Nothing in this division shall be constructed to prevent the joint use of off-street
parking space by two (2) or more buildings or land uses if the total requirements
for the various individual land uses or buildings computed separately.
4. Off-street parking lot requirements.
All parking areas shall be surfaced with a hard, dustless material approved by the
Development Review Board; properly drained; designed for pedestrian safety and
shall provide direct access to a public street or alley. Each off-street parking
space shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of
twenty (20) feet. Vehicular off-street turning and maneuvering space shall be
provided for each lot containing five (5) or more spaces so that no vehicle will be
required to back into or from any public street or alley.
5. Off-street loading and unloading requirements.
There shall be provided on the same lot as that of the principal structures (other
than a one- or two-family dwelling) adequate space for vehicular off-street
loading, unloading, and the maneuvering of commercial vehicles. Vehicular offstreet
maneuvering spaces shall be provided so that no vehicular backing onto or
from a public street is required. All vehicular loading and maneuvering areas
shall be surfaced with a hard, dustless material, and shall have direct access to a
public street or alley. A minimum of one such loading space shall be provided for
all nonresidential buildings where six (6)or more parking spaces are required, plus
one additional space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet (or fraction
thereof).
ARTICLE IV SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 4-1. PURPOSE
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
102
The purpose of this Article shall be to coordinate the type, placement, and physical
dimensions of signs within the City; to recognize the commercial communication
requirements of all sectors of the business community; to encourage the innovative use of
design; to promote both renovation and proper maintenance; and to guarantee equal
treatment under the law through accurate record keeping and consistent enforcement.
These shall be accomplished by regulation of the display, erection, use, and maintenance
of signs. The placement and physical dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by type
and length of street frontage. No sign shall be permitted as a main or accessory use
except in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
Sec. 4-2. SCOPE
This Article shall not relate to building design. Nor shall this Article regulate official
traffic control or governmental signs; the copy and message of signs; window displays;
product dispensers and point of purchase displays; scoreboards on athletic fields; flags of
any nation, government or noncommercial organization; gravestones; barber poles;
religious symbols; commemorative plaques; the display of street numbers; or any display
or construction not defined herein as a sign.
Sec. 4-3. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
Abandoned Sign- A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business;
lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal
owner can be found.
Animated Sign- Any sign which uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or
to create a special effect or scene (compare “Flashing Sign”).
Awning- A shelter projecting from and supporting by the exterior wall of a building
constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting framework (compare “Marquee”).
Awning Sign- A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an
awning.
Banner Sign- A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing
framework.
Billboard- (see “Off-Premise Sign”)
Changeable Copy Sign (Automatic)- A sign on which copy is changed manually in the
field, e.g., readerboards with changeable letters.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
103
Changeable Copy Sign (Manual)- A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field,
e.g., readerboards with changeable letters.
Clearance (of a Sign)- The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent
street and the lowest point of any sign, including framework, embellishments, poles and
supports, extending over that grade.
Construction Sign- A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor,
and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sigh is
located.
Copy- The wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter form.
Directional / Information Sign- An on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or
facility information and which may not contain the name or logo of an establishment or
any advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs.
Double-Faced Sign- A sign with two faces.
Electrical Sign- A sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are
used.
Electric Message Center- (see “Changeable Copy Sign, Automatic”)
Facade- The entire building front including the parapet.
Face of Sign- The are of the sign in which the copy is placed.
Festoons- A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, or pinwheels.
Flashing Portable or on Premise Sign- A sign which contains an intermittent, sequential,
or rotating light source or which, through reflection or other means, creates an illusion of
flashing, intermittent, or rotation light. Does not include changeable copy signs.
Freestanding Sign- A sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached
to any building.
Frontage- The length of the property line of any one premise along a public right-of-way
on which it borders.
Frontage, Building- The length of an outside building wall facing a public right-of way.
Governmental Sign- Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the
city, county, state, or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or
direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property or facility.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
104
Height (of a Sign)- The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign,
including embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath
the sign, whichever is greater.
Identification Sign- A sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building,
institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified.
Illegal Sign- A sign which does not meet the requirements of this Article and which has
not received legal nonconforming status.
Illuminated Sign- A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or
externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
Incidental Sign- A small, emblem, or decal, located on the window or wall of the
building, informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises,
e.g., a credit card sign or sign indicating house of business.
Lot- A parcel of land legally defined on a subdivision map recorded with the assessment
department or land registry office, or a parcel of land defined by a legal record or survey
map.
Maintenance- For the purpose of this Article, the cleaning, painting, repair, or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy,
design, or structure of the sign.
Mansard- A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall.
Marquee- A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and
extended from the facade of a building (compare “Awning”).
Marquee Sign- Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure.
Nameplate- A nonelectric on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address,
and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.
Nonconforming Sign- (1) A sign which was erected legally but which does not comply
with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulations. (2) A sign which does not
conform to the sign code requirements provided herein but for which a variance has been
issued.
Occupancy- The portion of a building or premise owned, leased, rented, or otherwise
occupied for a given use.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
105
On-Premise Sign- A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located.
Off- Premise Sign- A sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service,
or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property
on which said sign is located, e.g., “billboards: or “outdoor advertising”.
Owner- A person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of this Article,
the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign
unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of
the City Clerk, e.g., a sign leased from a sign company.
Painted Wall Sign- Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face
of a wall.
Parapet- The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
Person- For the purposes of this Ordinance, any individual, corporation, association, firm,
partnership, or similarly defined interest.
Point of Purchase Display- Advertising of a retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an
advertisement on a product dispenser.
Political Sign- For the purposes of this ordinance, a temporary sign used in connection
with a local, state, or national election or referendum.
Premises- A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its
unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate.
Projecting Sign- A sing, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from
a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign.
Real Estate Sign- A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is
located as being for rent, lease, or sale.
Roofline- The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any
cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections.
Roof Sign- Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building (compare “Mansard,”
“Wall Signs”).
Rotating Sign- A sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves in a
revolving or similar manner. Such motion does not refer to methods of changing copy.
Sign- Any device, stricture, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written
copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any
establishment, product, goods, or service.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
106
Sign, Area of- (1) Projecting and Freestanding: The area of a freestanding or projecting
sign shall have only one face (the largest one) of any double- or Multi-sided sign counted
in calculating its area. The area of the sign shall be measured as follows if the sign is
composed of one or more individual cabinets:
a. The area around and enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet or module
shall be summed and then totaled to determine total area. The perimeter
of measurable area shall not include embellishments such as pole covers,
framing, decorative roofing, etc., provided that there is not written
advertising copy on such embellishments.
(2) Wall Signs: The area shall be within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any
straight line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising
message. The combined areas of the individual figures shall be considered the total sigh
area.
Snipe Sign- A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc.
Subdivision Identification Sign- A freestanding or wall sign identifying a recognized
subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development.
Temporary Sign- A sign not constructed or intended for long-term use.
Under-Canopy Sign- A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.
Use- The purpose for which a building, lot, sign, or structure is intended, designed,
occupied, or maintained.
Wall Sign- A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches from the
wall of a building. This definition includes painted, individual letter, and cabinet signs,
and signs on a mansard.
Sec. 4-4 APPLICABILITY
No person shall erect, place or maintain a sign within the City except in accordance with
the provisions of this Article.
Sec. 4-5. PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following signs are prohibited in all areas of the City:
1. Abandoned signs;
2. Any non-governmental sign located within a dedicated City street right-ofway;
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
107
3. Flashing, fluttering undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving or
animated signs; except for time and/or temperature signs.
Sec. 4-6. PERMITS REQUIRED
No person shall erect, place or construct any sign without first obtaining a permit from
the City except as specified in Section 4-7. No permit is requires for the maintenance of
a sign or for a change of a copy on painted, printed or changeable copy signs.
Sec. 4-7. SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS
The following types of signs are exempt from permit requirements but must be in
conformance with all other requirements of this Article.
a. Construction signs of 24 square feet or less
b. Directional /Informational signs of four (4) square feet or less located
behind the applicable setbacks.
c. Holiday or special events decorations
d. Nameplates of two (2) square feet or less
e. Political signs
f. Public signs
g. Real estate signs
h. Window signs
i. Incidental signs
Sec. 4-8. MAINTENANCE
All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted if
paint is required. Defective parts shall be replaced. The City Commission shall have the
authority under subsection 4-18.5 to order the repair or removal of any sign which is
defective, damaged, or substantially deteriorated.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
108
Sec. 4-9. CHANGEABLE COPY
Unless otherwise specified by this Article, any sign herein allowed may use manual or
automatic changeable copy.
Sec. 4-10. LIGHTING/ILLUMINATION
Unless otherwise specified by this Article, all signs may be lighted or illuminated
consistent with the following provisions.
1. Sign lighting shall not be installed or located so as to cause
confusion with traffic control lights.
2. Illumination by spotlights or floodlights may be allowed provided
that no light emitted shines onto an adjoining property or into the
eyes of persons driving or walking upon any roadway or sidewalk.
3. Exposed incandescent lights shall not be used for lighting outdoor
signs.
4. Revolving beacons and flashing lights are prohibited.
Sec. 4-11. LICENSE
No person may engage in the business or erecting, altering, relocating, constructing, or
maintaining signs without a valid occupational license and all required state and federal
license.
Sec. 4-12. INEDMINFICATION AND INSURNANCE
All persons involved in the maintenance, installation, alteration, or relocation of signs
near or any public right-of-way or property shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify
the City, its officers, agents, and employees, against any and all claims of negligence
resulting from such work insofar as this Article has not specifically directed the
placement of a sign.
Sec. 4-13. ALLOWABLE SIGNS-LAND USE DISTRICTS
4-13.1 The following signs are allowed in all districts.
1. All signs not requiring permits.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
109
2. One (1) construction sign for each street frontage of construction project,
not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area. Such signs may be erected 120
days prior to beginning of construction and shall be removed 30 days
following completion of construction.
3. One (1) nonillumination real estate sign per not to exceed four (4) square
feet in sign area. Such signs must be removed ten (10) fays following
sale, rental, or lease.
4. One (1) attached nameplate per occupancy, not to exceed four (4) square
feet in sign area.
5. Political signs, not to exceed six (6) square feet in residential districts and
thirty-two (32) square feet on non-residential districts. All political signs
shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the election or runoff.
6. Four (4) directional / information signs per business, not to exceed four (4)
square feet in area or two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in height provided that
no directional/information sign not located behind the applicable setback
shall contain any name or logo, and provided that the location of any such
directional /information signs is approved by the Development Review
Board.
7. One (1) temporary special events-sign and decoration per premises as
allowed by the City Council for special events, grand openings, or
holidays. Such signs and decoration may be erected 30 days prior to a
special event or holiday. Fro grand openings such signs may be used for
no more than fourteen (14) days.
8. Temporary banners for civic events or events of general public good
extending across the public right of way at locations specified by the
Development Review Board. Such banners shall be up no more than
fourteen (14) days.
9. “For Sale” signs advertising vehicles, boats or other similar items for sale
by owner provided such sign does not exceed two (2) square feet of sign
area.
4-13.2 Permitted Signs in RLD Districts
The following signs shall be permitted in RLD land use districts; all other signs are
prohibited.
1. All signs permitted in subsection 6-13.1
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
110
2. Two (2) subdivisions identifications signs per subdivision, or
development, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of sign area.
3. Signs describing a home occupation or home office of convenience
provided signs are mounted flat against the wall of the building; there are
no more than one (1) sign per residence; and, the sign does not exceed
four (4) square feet of sign area.
4. Snipe signs for garage sales, yard sales or similar events provided that the
sign is removed by the installer or owner of said sign no later than the 24-
hour period following the sale or event.
5. For churches, synagogues or similar institutional uses one (1) freestanding
sign not to exceed 24 square feet in sign area, and one wall sign not to
exceed 24 square feet in sign area.
6. All allowed freestanding signs in RLD districts shall have a height limit of
eight (8) feet and shall have a setback of ten (10) feet from any public
right-of-way, provided, however, that the setback requirement shall not
apply to subdivision identification signs so long as they do not create a
sight obstruction.
4-13.3 Permitted Signs in MU Districts
The following signs shall be permitted in MU districts; all other signs are prohibited.
1. All signs permitted in subsection 4-13.2.
2. Two identification signs per apartment, townhouse, condominium or other
multi-family residential development, not to exceed 24 square feet of sign
area.
3. For commercial development allowed in MU districts, one (1)
freestanding sign per premises not to exceed 24 square feet of sign area
and one (1) wall sign not to exceed 24 square feet of sign area.
4. All allowed freestanding signs in MU districts shall have a height limit of
ten (10) feet and shall have a setback of ten (10) feet from any public
right-of-way.
4-13.4 Permitted Signs in GC and IND Districts
The following signs shall be permitted in GC districts, all others are prohibited.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
111
1. All signs permitted in subsection 4-13.3.
2. One (1) freestanding sign per premises and street front is allowed. This
sign may not exceed one (1) square foot in sign area for each linear foot of
main street frontage. If the property is a shopping center only one (1)
freestanding sign is allowed per street front. Where the premises is
located on a corner or has more than one (1) public street frontage, one (1)
additional freestanding sign will be allowed on the additional frontage, not
to exceed the size of other allowed freestanding signs. If liner footage
exceeds 300' a second pylon is allowed as long as total square footage of
all signage does not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot.
3. All freestanding signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet behind the
public right-of-way line, unless the grade clearance of the sign is a
minimum of ten (10) feet in which case the leading edge of the sign may
extend to the right-of-way line. In no case may a sign extend over the
right-of-way line. In the case of electrified signs, the bottom of the sign
and the outlining lighting enclosure shall not be less than sixteen (16) feet
above grade in areas accessible by vehicles.
4. No part of any sign shall be located within a twenty-five (25) foot radius
of the intersection of the improved surface of any two streets or the
improved surface of any street and railroad unless any part of the sign
extending over or into this radius has at least ten (10) feet of clearance.
5. No part of any sign shall be located within a fifteen (15) foot radius of the
intersection of any driveway and the improved surface of any street unless
any part of the sign extending over or into this radius has at least ten (10)
feet of clearance.
6. Wall signs shall not exceed an aggregate area or one (1) square foot in
sign area for each linear foot of that occupancy’s building frontage.
7. Awning signs are measured by copy area only.
8. One (1) under-canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed eight (8) square
feet in sign area.
9. Incidental signs not to exceed four (4) square feet in aggregate sign area
per occupancy.
10. The maximum permitted height for any on-premise sign in a nonresidential
district shall be fifty (50) feet above the grade of the adjacent
street.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
112
11. Projecting signs shall conform to the requirements of the Standard
Building Code and shall be permitted only where a public sidewalk abuts
the side of the building on which the projecting sign is affixed.
4-13.5 Permit in P/I Districts
The following signs permitted in P/I districts, all others are prohibited.
1. All government signs
2. For all government institutional use, one (1) freestanding sign not to
exceed 24 square feet of sign area, wall sign not to exceed 24 square feet
of wall area.
3. All freestanding signs in P/I districts shall have a limit of ten (10) feet and
shall have a setback of ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way.
Sec. 4-14. Signs
In addition to any regulation applying to signs in general, the following regulations shall
apply to portable signs.
1. Portable signs shall comply with the same setback and sight distance
requirements as all other signs.
2. No portable signs shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent,
rotating or moving light or lights. No portable sign shall be animated.
3. Portable signs shall be used only for on premise advertising and shall not
be used on billboards.
4. Sign Permits shall be required for portable signs. Permits for portable
signs shall be for (6) months and may be renewed.
5. Portable signs shall be limited to one (1) per business.
6. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, portable signs may be permitted
in MU and GC districts.
7. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this Article, the Building
Official shall have the authority to remove and impound any portable sign
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
113
which remains on any public right-of-way forty-eight (48) hours after
delivery of notice to remove the sign from the public right-of-way.
Sec. 4-15. Off-Premises Sign (Billboards)
In addition to any regulations applying to signs in general the following regulations shall
apply to off-premise sign (billboards).
4-15.1 Location
1. Off-premise signs may be located, installed or construction only in MU, GC
and IND districts, and only along arterial and collector roadways.
2. No billboards shall be located closer than 1000 feet to any other billboard
on the same side on any street, on the route of travel. The distance shall
be measured along the nearest edge of the pavement at points directly
opposite the center of the sign and located on the same side of the same
street.
3. Billboards shall not be located one above the other side by side.
4. Unless otherwise provided for in this Article, billboards shall comply with
the same height, setback and sight distance requirements as all other signs.
5. No billboard shall be located closer than 100 feet to any residential district
or any property used for residential purposes, unless separated from it by a
street or building.
4-15.2 Development Standards
1. The lowest portion of any billboard must be at least sixteen (16) feet
above grade.
2. No billboard shall be illuminated by or contain flashing intermittent,
rotating or moving light or lights used primarily to attract attention,
excluding electric message centers or time and temperature.
3. All billboards shall be all-metal single pole construction except for the
skirt which may be of other durable materials.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
114
4. The maximum permitted height for any off-premise sign shall be sixtyfive
feet above the adjacent street or the maximum height permitted in the
district within which the sign is located.
5. Billboard porta-panels may be used for temporary uses only. No
animation.
Sec. 4-16. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Existing, permanent signs which do not conform to the provisions of this Article shall be
legally conforming provided that:
1. The Building Official determines that such signs are properly maintained
and do not in any way endanger the public.
2. Such signs are not located on any public right of way.
4-16.1 Loss of Legally Nonconforming Status
A legal nonconforming sign shall lose this designation if:
1. The sign is relocated or replaced.
2. The structure or size of the sign is altered in any way except towards
compliance with this Article. This does not refer to normal maintenance.
3. The ownership of the sign and/or property changes on premises.
4. The sign becomes abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months.
4-16.2 Maintenance and Repair of Nonconforming Signs
The legal nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this Article regarding
safety, maintenance, and repair. However, if the sign suffers more than 50 percent
appraised damage or deterioration, it must be brought into conformance with this Code or
removed.
Sec. 4-17. Construction Standards
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
115
All permanent signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the requirements
of the Standard Building Code and the National Electronic Code, and as specified in this
Section.
4-17.1 Anchoring
1. No sign shall be suspended by nonrigid attachments that will allow the
sign to swing in a wind.
2. All freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on or
permanently attached to concrete foundations.
3. All portable signs on display shall be braced or secured to prevent motion.
4-17.2 Wind Loads
All signs shall be designed and constructed to meet the wind loading requirements as set
in the Standard Building Code. In addition, on all signs 30 feet or greater in overall
height, the drawings and structural specifications submitted for permitting shall bear the
seal of a Registered Engineer.
4-17.3 Additional Construction Specifications
1. No signs shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any
fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a means of
egress.
2. No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will
interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
3. Signs shall be located in such a way as to maintain horizontal and vertical
clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with
National Electrical Code specifications, depending on voltages concerned.
4. All signs containing electrical components shall be constructed according
to the specifications of the National Electric Code as well as the
specifications of Underwriters Laboratories or other approved testing
agency. All such shall have a clearly visible testing agency label
permanently affixed.
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
116
Sec. 4-18 Administration and Enforcement
4-18.1 Administration
The Building Official shall be authorized to process applications for permits and
variances, schedule public hearings as required, and enforce and carry out all provisions
of this Article, both in letter and in spirit.
The Building Official is empowered, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter or
inspect any building, structure, or premises in the City for the purpose of inspection of a
sign and its structural and electrical connections to ensure compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances. The Building Official may be accompanied by the appropriate
inspectors or other officials necessary to ensure compliance. Such inspections shall be
carried out during business hours unless an emergency exists.
4-18.2 Application for Permits
Application for a permit for the erection, alteration, or relocation of a sign shall be made
to the Building Official upon a form provided by the City and shall include the following
information:
1. Name and address of the owner of the sign.
2. Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be
located, along with the name and address of the property owner.
3. The type of sign structure as defined in this Article.
4. A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with the
locations and square footage areas of all existing on the same premises.
5. Specifications and scale drawings showing the materials, design,
dimensions, structural supports, and electrical components of the proposed
sign.
4-18.3 Issuance and Denial
The Building Official shall make a recommendation to the City Commission concerning
approval or denial of the permit within ten (10) days after the application for permit is
received by the City. The City Commission shall act upon such recommendation at its
next regularly scheduled meeting.
4-18.4 Permit Conditions
CITY OF SPRINGFIELD
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION CODE
117
A permit issued by the City Commission becomes null and void if work is not
commenced within 90 days of issuance. If work authorized by the permit is suspended or
abandoned for 90 days, the permit must be renewed with an additional payment of onehalf
of the original fee.
If any sign is installed or placed on any property prior to the receipt of a permit, the sign,
including any embellishments, poles, and supporting structures, shall be removed. If any
alteration, addition, or enlargement requiring a permit is made to a sign prior to the
receipt of a permit, such alteration, addition, or enlargement shall be removed. No
variance from these provisions shall be granted.
4-18.5 Removal of Signs
The Building Official, upon approval by the City Commission, may cause the removal of
an illegal or unsafe sign in case of emergency, or for failure to comply with the orders of
removal, relocation or repair, or upon determination that the sign has been abandoned for
a period of ninety (90) days. After removal or demolition of the sign , a notice shall be
mailed to the sign owner stating the nature of the work and the date on which it was
performed and demanding payment on the costs as certified by the Building Official
together with an additional fifteen percent for inspection and incidental costs. For the
purposes of this section, removal of a sign shall include the removal of any
embellishments, poles, and supporting structures.
If the amount specified in the notice is not paid within 30 days of the notice, it shall
become as assessment upon a lien against the property of the sign owner, and will be
certified as an assessment against the property with a ten percent penalty for collection in
the same manner as the real estate taxes.
The owner of the property upon which the sign is located shall be presumed to be the
owner of all signs thereon unless facts to the contrary are brought to the attention of the
City, as in the case of a leased sign.
 
