CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SEBASTIAN, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Adopted: 10-28-92 
Effective: 10-28-92 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SEBASTIAN, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Lonnie R. Powell 
Mayor 
____________ 
Frank Oberbeck 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
George G. Reid 
Peter R. Holyk 
Carolyn Corum 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert S. McClary 
City Manager 
____________ 
Charles Ian Nash 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kathryn M. O'Halloran 
City Clerk OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SEBASTIAN, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Arthur Firtion 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carolyn Corum 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Norma Damp 
Louise Cartwright 
Raymond Halloran 
City Council 
____________ 
Joel L. Koford 
City Manager 
____________ 
Clifton McClelland, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kathryn M. O'Halloran 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through March 13, 1991, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Charles Vignos, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Charles Ian Nash, City Attorney, and Kathryn M. O'Halloran, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 0-92-23 
An Ordinance of the City of Sebastian, Indian River County, Florida, Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of Sebastian, Indian River County, Florida; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending the Code of Ordinances; and Providing When the New Code of Ordinances and This Ordinance Shall Be Effective. 
Whereas, the City Council of the City of Sebastian has determined that it is in the best interest of the City and its residents to update its current Code of Ordinances. 
Now, Therefore, Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Sebastian, Indian River County, Florida: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian, Florida," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 110, each inclusive, hereinafter referred to in this Ordinance as the "Code", is hereby adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 8, 1992, and not included in the Code adopted by this Ordinance, or recognized and continued in force by reference in the Code, are hereby repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal of prior ordinances provided for in Section 2 of this Ordinance shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in any ordinance hereinafter adopted or expressly provided in the Code, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or of any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided for in this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Section of the Code, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed in this Section, the City Council of the City of Sebastian may pursue such other remedies, including, but not limited to, abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council of the City of Sebastian to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Any ordinance adopted after July 8, 1992, that amends or refers to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Ordinance and the Code shall become effective immediately upon the adoption of this Ordinance. 
The foregoing Ordinance was moved for adoption by Councilmember Holyk. The motion was seconded by Councilmember Oberbeck and, upon being put to a vote, the vote was as follows: 
Mayor: Lonnie R. Powell      Aye 
Vice-Mayor: Frank Oberbeck    Aye 
Councilmember: Peter R. Holyk   Aye 
Councilmember: George G. Reid   Aye 
Councilmember: Carolyn Corum   Absent 
The mayor thereupon declared this Ordinance duly passed and adopted this 28th day of October, 1992. 
CITY OF SEBASTIAN, FLORIDA 
	/s/ Lonnie R. Powell 
      Lonnie R. Powell, Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Kathryn M. O'Halloran 
      Kathryn M. O'Halloran, CMC/AAE, City Clerk 	
 	 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that notice of public hearing on this Ordinance was published in the Sebastian Sun as required by State Statute, that one public hearing was held on this Ordinance at 7:00 p.m. on the 28th day of October, 1992, and that following said public hearing this Ordinance was passed by the City Council. 
	/s/ Kathryn M. O'Halloran 
      Kathryn M. O'Halloran, CMC/AAE, City Clerk 
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Codification authority, § 2.15(b).  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Sebastian" followed them and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
City council. Whenever the term "city council" or "council" is used, it shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Sebastian. 
Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Corporate limits. Wherever in this Code an act is prohibited, declared unlawful, or required to be performed, directly or by implication, such references shall imply "within the corporate limits of the City of Sebastian." 
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Indian River. 
F.S. Whenever the abbreviation F.S. is used, it shall refer to the official Florida Statutes or latest supplement, as adopted by the state legislature. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officer or office. Reference to any office or officer of the city, state or county includes any person authorized by law to perform the duties of such office or officer. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, trusts, estates, joint ventures, business trusts, syndicates, groups, combination limited liability companies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
(Code 1980, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1980, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1980, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1980, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— No bill of attainder, ex part facto law or law impairing the obligation of contracts shall ever be passed, Fla. Const. Art. I, § 10.  
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  The administrative ordinances of the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city; 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same; 
(10)  Any ordinance relating to the airport of the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones; 
(12)  Any ordinance regulating the installation or repair of gas piping or apparatus; 
(13)  Any ordinance regulating land use or zoning or rezoning of lands; 
(14)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(15)  Any ordinance regarding the Federal Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance; 
(16)  Any ordinance annexing areas into the city; 
(17)  Any ordinance establishing fees, rates or taxes; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1980, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sebastian, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Sebastian, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section shall read as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1980, § 1-7) 
Charter reference— Codification, § 2.15(b).  
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-8) 
Charter reference— Codification, § 2.15(b).  
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Sebastian to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1980, § 1-9) 
State Law reference— Forgery, F.S. § 831.01; falsifying public records, F.S. § 839.13.  
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Fines and forfeitures in county court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083.  
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-11)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative departments, art. III. 
Cross reference— Volunteer fire department, § 42-26; administration of the flood hazard regulations, § 46-37; organization and duties of the police force of the city, § 58-26; police officer retirement system, § 58-46 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Official city seal and official city logo. 
(a)  The official seal of the city as established in this Code shall be a round seal and bear the legend "City of Sebastian, Florida," and in the center "Seal." The city seal shall be used only for official City of Sebastian business. Any unauthorized use of the city seal is a second degree misdemeanor, pursuant to Section 165.043, and punishable in accordance with section 1-10, Code of Ordinances. (The seal is located in the city clerk's office.) 
(b)  The official logo of the city is that design created by Curt Oxford Woodcarver, Inc. with rights transferred to the city in 2000, as depicted in the image below. The manufacture, use, display, or other employment of any facsimile or reproduction of the city logo, except by city officials or employees in the performance of their official duties, without the express approval of the City Manager is a violation of the Code of Ordinances, punishable in accordance with section 1-10. 
 
City Logo
(Code 1980, § 2-1; Ord. No. O-15-08, § 1, 11-18-15)  
Sec. 2-2. - Powers and duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk shall perform the duties of clerk of the council, and receive all minutes and documents from all boards, commissions or committees appointed by the city manager and/or the city council, and in that capacity shall give notice of city council and other meetings to its members and the public, keep the journal of its proceedings, and shall keep and maintain all official documents for the city. In addition, the city clerk is designated as the city's records management liaison officer (exclusive of law enforcement records), city supervisor of elections and such other and additional duties as are assigned to the city clerk by the Charter or by the city council. The city clerk shall have such powers as are confirmed by the Charter, this Code of Ordinances and by the Florida Statutes, as presently constituted or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2; Ord. No. O-01-05, § 1, 2-14-01; Ord. No. O-13-01, § 1, 3-13-13) 
Charter reference— Authentication, recording and codification of ordinances, § 2.15; city clerk, § 3.05. 
Cross reference— Employee benefits, § 2-136 et seq.  
Sec. 2-3. - City engineer. 
The office of city engineer shall be held by a person who is a registered engineer in the state. The city engineer shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 2-3)  
Secs. 2-4—2-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 2-4 pertained to personnel procedures, derived from the 1980 Code, § 2-4. Such section was deleted by Ord. No. O-99-13, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 1999.  
Sec. 2-10. - Procurement of goods and services. 
(a)  Applicability. Except as specifically set forth herein, all procurements for goods and services for the city shall fall under the ultimate responsibility of the charter officer utilizing the goods or services (hereinafter called the "purchasing officer"), and shall be effected in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Purchasing thresholds. Any request for the purchase of materials, equipment, services and supplies unless otherwise exempt under this section is subject to competitive bid procedures as follows: 
(1)  Up to $2500.00—Purchasing officer or their designee may authorize purchase. 
(2)  $2500.01 to $5,000.00—Two or more verbal quotes where practical; purchasing officer or designee may authorize purchase. 
(3)  $5,000.01 to $15,000.00—Three or more written quotes; purchasing officer or designee may authorize purchase. 
(4)  $15,000.01 to $25,000.00—Three or more written quotes; city council authorization required. 
(5)  Over $25,000.00—Formal sealed bids and city council authorization required. 
(c)  Exceptions to thresholds. 
(1)  Joint bid: The purchasing officer shall have the authority to cooperate with other local governments or other public entities in the development and use of mutually cooperative procurement contracts or master agreements. Such contracts shall require council approval. 
(2)  Piggyback: The purchasing officer shall have the authority to utilize contracts or master agreements of state, federal or other local governments or other public entities to procure goods and services, if the contract or agreement has been awarded through procedures substantially equivalent to the requirements of this section. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to procure goods and services if the purchase is with a person, firm, organization, or corporation whose offer to sell to the city is at sale price for that commodity equal to or lower than the existing piggyback price for the same or equal commodity being sought. All such purchases over $15,000.00 shall continue to require council approval. 
(3)  Sole source. A contract may be awarded for goods or services without competitive bids when the purchasing officer determines in writing that there is only one practical source for the required item. Approval shall be in accordance with the dollar threshold established by this section. 
(4)  Emergency purchase. Where the purchasing officer finds it to be in the best interest of the city, they may declare the existence of an emergency procurement condition and suspend any or all provisions of this section. Spending authority under this provision shall not exceed $25,000.00, however, if a state of emergency covering the city has been declared the limit shall be raised to $50,000.00. All emergency purchases over $15,000.00 shall be reported to council as soon as practical. As used in this section, the term "emergency" means a sudden unexpected turn of events that causes: 
a.  An immediate danger to the public health or safety; 
b.  An immediate danger of loss of public or private property; 
c.  An interruption in the delivery of an essential governmental service; or 
d.  An interruption in the normal function and operation of any city department that would result in a work stoppage or other substantial monetary loss. 
(5)  Change orders. The purchasing officer may approve cumulative changes of up to 15 percent of the total contract price. Changes in excess of 15 percent of the total contract price or any change in excess of $15,000.00 must have the prior approval of the city council. 
(6)  Contract renewals. Any contract containing a provision for renewal may be renewed in accordance with its terms. Authorization for approval shall be in accordance with the dollar threshold established by this section. 
(d)  Exemptions to applicability. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Purchases between the council and nonprofit organizations, other governments, or other public entities, and intragovernmental services. 
(2)  Purchases of advertising, works of art for public display, medically related professional services, employee benefit related purchases, water, utility services, postage, shows/displays/cultural events sponsored by the city. 
(3)  Purchase of real property. 
(4)  Professional and personal service contracts including but not limited to attorney services, appraisers and expert witnesses services, which shall be approved by the city council if in excess of $15,000.00. 
(5)  Procurement of goods and services when the same is governed by a mandatory procedure established by statute. 
(6)  Franchise, sponsorship or joint enterprise agreements. 
(7)  Any situation where compliance with this code will place the city in conflict with mandatory provisions of state law, federal law or the terms of any grant. 
(e)  Prohibitions. No contract or purchase shall: 
(1)  Be purposely subdivided to circumvent any requirements of this section. 
(2)  Be made in excess of the amounts allocated from the general fund for the general classification of expenditures in the budget for the then current budget year, nor shall any expense of a special fund exceed the amount of money available to that fund. 
(f)  Waiver. City council may waive or modify the bidding requirements for good cause. 
(Ord. No. O-06-01, § 1, 2-22-06)  
Sec. 2-11. - Local vendor preference policy. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Local business means the vendor has: 
a.  A valid business tax receipt issued by the City of Sebastian or by Indian River County at the time a bid or proposal is submitted, and 
b.  A physical address located within the local area, in an area zoned for the conduct of such business, from which the vendor is operating a significant portion of its business, and at which it maintains full-time employees. 
(2)  Nonlocal business means any vendor that does not meet the definition of a business within the local area. 
(b)  Establishment as local area business. To establish that a vendor is a local area business a vendor shall provide written documentation of compliance with the definitions for each such local business as defined in subsection (1) herein, at the time of submitting a bid or proposal. Post office boxes are not verifiable and shall not be used for the purpose of establishing the required physical business address. A vendor that misrepresents the local area status of its firm in a proposal or bid submittal to the city will lose the privilege to claim local preference status for a period two years. 
(c)  Local preference in purchasing and contracting. The City of Sebastian shall give preference to local area businesses in the purchase of commodities, personal property, general services, professional services, and the purchase of or contract for construction or renovation of public works or other public improvements by means of competitive bid. The city shall give such preference to local area businesses in the following manner: 
(1)  Competitive bid. Each formal competitive bid solicitation shall clearly identify how the price order of the bids received will be evaluated and determined. 
When a qualified and responsive nonlocal business submits the lowest price bid, and the lowest bid submitted by a qualified and responsive local area business is within five percent of the lowest bid, then the lowest bidding local area business shall have the opportunity to submit an offer to match the price submitted by the lowest nonlocal area business bidder. 
Within five working days after the posting of the qualified and responsive bids, any local area business that has submitted a bid within five percent of the lowest bid by a nonlocal area business, and that wants the opportunity to match the lowest bid, shall submit a written offer to match the lowest bid. If the lowest local area business bidder submits an offer that matches the lowest bid submitted, then the award shall be made to such local area business. 
If the lowest local area business bidder declines or is unable to match the lowest bids, then the option to do so moves to the next local area business if its bid is within five percent of the lowest bids, and it is a qualified and responsive bidder. 
If the lowest bid is submitted by a qualified and responsive local area business, there is no local vendor preference. 
If a local area business accepts the opportunity to match the lowest bid of a nonlocal area business and that bid is based on unit price bid items and estimated quantities, then the unit prices for all bid items shall be reduced in proportion to the reduction in the local area business's total bid amount required to match the lowest total bid. 
(2)  Ties. In the event of any tie in the final bid price between a local area business, and a nonlocal area business, a contract award, or the first opportunity to negotiate, as applicable, shall be made to the local area business. In the event of any tie between a business located within the City of Sebastian and a business within the greater local area, the business located within the City of Sebastian shall be awarded the contract or receive the first opportunity to negotiate, as applicable. In the event of any two businesses located within the City of Sebastian, or two businesses located within the greater local area, the local vendor with the greatest number of full-time employees working in the City of Sebastian or the greater local area respectively, shall be awarded the contract or receive the first opportunity to negotiate as applicable. 
(d)  Exception to local vendor preference policy. The local preference policy set forth herein shall not apply to any of the following purchases or contracts: 
(1)  Goods or services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement or piggyback agreement; or 
(2)  Purchases or contract which are funded, in whole or part, by a governmental entity and the laws, regulations, or policies governing such funding prohibit application of that preference; or 
(3)  Purchases made or contracts let under emergency or noncompetitive situations, or for litigation related legal services, as described in the city's purchasing policies; or 
(4)  Purchases or contracts with an estimated cost of $5,000.00 or less; or 
(5)  Purchases or contracts where the difference between the amount of the low bid submitted by a qualified and responsive nonlocal area business and the lowest bid submitted by a qualified and responsive local area business is greater than $25,000.00; or 
(6)  Where all bids are rejected. 
(e)  Waiver of the application for local vendor preference policy. Any request for the waiver of local preference to any particular purchase or contract must be heard by the city council prior to advertising the bid. The city council, as the awarding authority, may approve the waiver of local preference upon review and at its discretion. 
(f)  Comparison and review of qualifications. The preferences established herein no way prohibit the right of the City of Sebastian to compare and review the quality of materials proposed for purchase, and to compare and review the qualifications, character, responsibility and fitness of all persons, firms or corporations submitting bids or proposals. Furthermore, the local preference established herein shall not prohibit the city from giving any other preference permitted by law in addition to the local preference contained herein. 
(g)  Administration of local preference policy. This policy shall apply to all departments, functions and funds under the governance of the City of Sebastian, unless subsection (d) applies. 
(h)  Dispute resolution. Any dispute arising under the provision of this section shall first be presented to the city manager for determination. The decision of the city manager shall be appealable to the city council, and the decision of the city council shall be final and binding on all parties. 
(Ord. No. O-09-13, §§ 1, 2, 10-14-09; Ord. No. O-16-06, § 1, 8-10-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-09-13, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 14, 2009, repealed former § 2-11, and enacted a new § 2-11 as set out herein. The former § 2-11 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Secs. 2-12—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, art. II; elections, art. IV. 
Cross reference— Building inspector to report result of inspection of buildings within the city to the city council, § 26-34; elections, ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-07, adopted Oct. 14, 2015, repealed § 2-31, which pertained to mayor to declare states of emergency and derived from Code 1980, § 21-1. The user's attention is directed to § 2-37.  
Sec. 2-32. - Compensation of vice-mayor. 
When the vice-mayor shall be required to act as mayor, due to the absence or disability of the mayor, he shall be compensated at the rate of $35.00 per day during the period of such service. In no event shall the vice-mayor be entitled to compensation greater than that which would be provided to the mayor as a consequence of substituting for the mayor in any particular function, regardless of duration. The vice-mayor shall be due such additional compensation when city business requires his attention for five hours or more on any one day. 
(Code 1980, § 2-17) 
Charter reference— Compensation; expenses, § 2.05; duties of mayor, § 2.06.  
Sec. 2-33. - Agenda for meetings; emergency matters. 
Any item to appear on the agenda for the regular city council meeting is to be filed in the office of the city clerk, city hall, at a time designated by the council, preceding the council meeting. At the council meeting, emergency items may be considered by the unanimous decision of the members of the city council present at the meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 2-16) 
Charter reference— Procedure for meetings, § 2.12. 
State Law reference— Public meetings, F.S. § 286.011 et seq.  
Sec. 2-34. - Expenses of council members. 
There shall be paid to each council member a $300.00 per month expense allowance as lump sum reimbursement for incidental expenses, to include costs for travel within 75 miles of the city. A council member may file a written notice with city clerk that the expense allowance is declined. 
(Ord. No. O-93-07, § 1, 4-14-93; Ord. No. O-00-01, § 1, 2-1-00; Ord. No. O-04-17, § 1, 9-15-04; Ord. No. O-06-19, § 1, 10-11-06)  
Sec. 2-35. - Travel authorization and reimbursement. 
Council member shall obtain prior authorization for travel more than 75 miles outside the City of Sebastian at a regular city council meeting. Such authorization shall be by majority vote of the council members in attendance. Appointment by the council of a member to be the city's representative to a committee or agency shall be deemed to be authorization to attend meetings of said committee or agency. 
Council members shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary travel expenses in accordance with policies and procedures adopted by resolution, including mileage costs for travel beyond 75 miles. 
(Ord. No. O-00-01, § 4, 2-1-00; Ord. No. O-04-17, § 3, 9-15-04; Ord. No. O-06-19, § 2, 10-11-06)  
Sec. 2-36. - Other boards or committees. 
Absent express authorization within the ordinance or resolution establishing a board or committee of the city, no member of council shall serve thereupon in any capacity. 
(Ord. No. O-04-16, § 2, 9-15-04)  
ARTICLE IIA. - PUBLIC EMERGENCIES 
 
Sec. 2-37. - Public emergencies; mayor to declare states of emergency. 
Duties of mayor, city manager, city council during emergencies: 
(1)  In accordance with Section 2.06(b) of the Charter of the City of Sebastian and Chapter 870.043 Florida Statutes, the mayor may in times of public emergency, or imminent threat thereof, declare a state of emergency within the boundaries of the city or in any portion thereof and invoke the provisions of F.S. §§ 870-041—870.047, inclusive, as the same may be renumbered or amended from time to time. The city council may terminate a state of emergency at any time. 
(2)  a.  The city manager shall be responsible for the overall emergency management function of the city, shall prepare and maintain the city's emergency management plan, shall coordinate with Indian River County and shall keep the mayor and the city council advised of any action. 
b.  The city manager shall utilize any available means to give the public notice of the declaration of a state of emergency and the specific requirements therein. 
c.  The city manager may issue such orders as are immediately necessary for the protection of life and property; provided, however, that any such orders shall at the earliest practicable time, be presented to the city council for ratification, confirmation, amendment or termination. 
(3)  If, due to a disaster or emergency, it becomes impossible for the city council to meet at City Hall, the council may meet upon the call of the mayor or any city councilmember at any other place within the city until city hall is sufficiently repaired to resume meetings there. All reasonable attempts must be made to comply with the Sunshine Law and the Public Records Law of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. O-15-07, § 1, 10-14-15)  
Secs. 2-38—2-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Council-employee relationship, § 2.10; investigations by council, § 2.11; administration and legal departments, art. III; charter officers, §§ 3.01—3.03; city clerk, § 3.05; police department, § 3.06 et seq.; city attorney, § 3.09. 
Cross reference— Finance department, § 2-106 et seq.; airport manager, § 22-29; building department created, § 26-33; manager of the golf course, § 74-32. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-56—2-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Charter officer, § 3.01; appointment, § 3.02; removal, § 3.03; city manager powers and duties, etc., § 3.04. 
Cross reference— City manager to prepare and submit the budget to city council, § 2-87. 
 
Sec. 2-66. - City manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city, appointed by the city council. The city manager shall become vested in accordance with the employment agreement between the city manager and the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-15) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of city manager, removal of employees, § 3.04.  
Secs. 2-67—2-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRAVEL EXPENSES 
 
Sec. 2-75. - Provision to supersede state law. 
Section 112.061, Florida Statutes, shall govern travel for the city, except for the following provisions: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Mileage shall be reimbursed at the existing Internal Revenue Service maximum allowance. 
(Ord. No. O-00-01, § 2, 2-1-00; Ord. No. O-04-17, § 2, 9-15-04; Ord. No. O-19-03, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-19)  
Sec. 2-76. - Generally. 
The city will pay the reasonable travel expenses of the city council members, charter officers, and employees in connection with authorized city travel. 
(Ord. No. O-00-01, § 3, 2-1-00)  
Secs. 2-77—2-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of finance director, § 2-109; collection and distribution of airport funds, § 22-30; cemetery trust fund, § 34-2; operating funds for the Municipal golf course, § 74-34; taxation, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; government financial matters, F.S. ch. 218. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-86. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 and end on September 30. 
(Code 1980, § 2-52) 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of finance director, § 2-109. 
State Law reference— Mandate for fiscal year, F.S. § 166.241.  
Sec. 2-87. - Submission of budget by city manager. 
The city manager, not later than the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in August of each year, shall submit to the city council a budget and an explanatory budget message setting forth recommended expenditures for the coming fiscal year, and the anticipated revenues for that year, and recommending the millage to be fixed on city ad valorem taxes. 
(Code 1980, § 2-53) 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget and millage, F.S. ch. 205.  
Sec. 2-88. - Budget. 
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be in the form required by general law with additions as may be required by the city council. In organizing the budget the city manager shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose, activity, or object. The budget shall show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and the actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income. 
(Code 1980, § 2-55) 
State Law reference— Municipal borrowing, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.  
Sec. 2-89. - Council action on budget. 
The city council shall advertise and hold public hearings on the budget as required by general law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-57) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of budget, F.S. § 200.065.  
Sec. 2-90. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. Provided, however, the city council may create and maintain reserve funds in the operation of utilities and the retirement of utility indebtedness for the purpose of offsetting depreciation of utility physical properties as well as the expenditures necessary in times of emergencies brought about by unexpected weather or other conditions. 
(Code 1980, § 2-61)  
Sec. 2-91. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-01, § 3, adopted Feb. 22, 2006, repealed § 2-91, which pertained to the central procurement system and derived from Code 1980, § 2-63 and Ord. No. O-96-10, § 3, adopted July 24, 1996.  
Sec. 2-92. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-01, § 3, adopted Feb. 22, 2006, repealed § 2-92, which pertained to competitive sealed bids over $5,000.00 and derived from Code 1980, § 2-64; Ord. No. O-91-16, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 12, 1991 and Ord. No. O-96-10, § 4, adopted July 24, 1996.  
Sec. 2-93. - Sale, exchange or abandonment of city property. 
(a)  Personal property. If, upon recommendation of the respective department head, the city manager has determined that personal property owned by the city is no longer needed or is obsolete, the property may be sold by bid or by auction. Notice of sale shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The city manager shall establish a price, or determine sale by auction; however, if the depreciated value of any personal property is in excess of $4,000.00, approval of the city council is required prior to such sale. 
(b)  Real property. When the city council has determined that any real property which is owned by the city should be sold it is no longer needed for city purposes, such property may be sold by bid or by auction with reserve. Notice of sale shall be published once a week for at least two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city calling for bids and specifying the terms of purchase, including the minimum price, if any. If a suitable offer to purchase is not received, the city may terminate the sale procedure and may reinitiate such procedures if desired. 
(c)  Exchange of real property. When the city council finds it is in the public interest to exchange real property owned by the city for other real property needed to fulfill a city purpose, the city council shall adopt an ordinance authorizing the exchange on such terms and conditions as the city finds is in the public interest. 
(d)  Abandonment of interest in real property. The city may abandon any city-held easement or city interest in real property by adopting an ordinance declaring the interest abandoned. In the case of a utility or drainage easements, or an easement located on the rear lot line or side lot line of a lot located in a platted subdivision the abandonment may be by adopting a resolution to abandon such easements. 
(e)  Bidding procedures. The bidding procedures set forth in section 2-92, for purchasing items shall apply to subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the item is offered for sale by bid. 
(Code 1980, § 2-65; Ord. No. O-95-28, § 1, 12-6-95) 
State Law reference— Alternate procedure for purchase of property, F.S. § 166.045.  
Secs. 2-94—2-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-56 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Created. 
The city manager shall appoint a qualified person working directly under his supervision to be director of finance, performing the duties prescribed hereunder and such further functions as the city manager may assign. 
(Code 1980, § 2-71; Ord. No. O-99-13, § 2, 9-22-99)  
Sec. 2-107. - Director of finance—Powers and duties. 
The director of finance shall be the city auditor and treasurer, and accordingly shall maintain a general accounting system for the city government and units thereof; be custodian of all funds belonging to or under the control of the city; supervise the collection of all money due the city; supervise all tax or other assessments; and supervise the disbursement of city funds, in furtherance of which the director must be a signator on any disbursement of city funds. 
(Code 1980, § 2-72; Ord. No. O-99-13, § 3, 9-22-99)  
Sec. 2-108. - Same—Surety bond required. 
(a)  The director of finance shall post a bond payable to the city in the penal sum of no less than $100,000.00, conditional for the faithful performance of all his duties as director of finance and the accounting, safekeeping and delivery unto the city of all money or property coming into his hands belonging to the city, with surety of a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. 
(b)  The bond provided for in this section shall be presented to and be subject to the approval of the city council. The premium for the bond provided in this section shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-73; Ord. No. O-99-13, § 4, 9-22-99)  
Sec. 2-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-99-13, § 5, adopted Sept. 22, 1999, deleted § 2-109, which pertained to the powers and duties of the finance director. Such section was derived from the 1980 Code, § 2-74.  
Sec. 2-110. - Report of invested funds. 
The director of finance shall submit reports on all invested funds to the city manager and the city council quarterly. The report shall give a complete list of all invested funds, indicating the financial institution or name of the securities in which the funds are invested, description, amount invested, maturity date and amount, if any, market value, and interest or dividend yield. 
(Code 1980, § 2-75; Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 2-111. - Investments. 
An investment policy in conformance with Florida Statute 218.415 shall be adopted by resolution and updated from time to time as mandated by changes in the law and financial conditions. 
(Code 1980, § 2-76; Ord. No. O-99-17, § 2, 11-3-99) 
State Law reference— Municipal investments, F.S. § 166.261; investment of public funds, F.S. ch. 280.  
Secs. 2-112—2-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-99-17, §§ 3, 4, adopted Nov. 3, 1999, provided for the deletion of §§ 2-112 and 2-113, which pertained to the selection of regular investment funds and trust funds. Such sections were derived from the 1980 Code, §§ 2-77 and 2-78.  
DIVISION 3. - ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION AT AGE 65 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding in or renting a portion of a dwelling. 
Household income means that the adjusted gross income, as defined in s. 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of a household. 
Property appraiser means the Indian River County Property Appraiser. 
(Ord. No. O-04-02, § 1, 3-24-04)  
Sec. 2-122. - Additional homestead exemption. 
An additional homestead exemption in the amount of $50,000.00, which additional homestead exemption applies only to taxes levied by the City of Sebastian, shall be allowed for any person who has legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon the permanent residence of the owner, who has attained age 65, whose household income doesn't exceed $20,000.00 as such amount has been adjusted in accordance with F.S. § 196.075(3), and who submits to the property appraiser a sworn statement of household income as required hereafter. 
(Ord. No. O-04-02, § 1, 3-24-04; Ord. No. O-07-10, § 1, 7-25-07)  
Sec. 2-123. - Annual submittal required. 
A taxpayer claiming the exemption must submit to the property appraiser, not later than March 1 of each year, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. O-04-02, § 1, 3-24-04)  
Secs. 2-124—2-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel procedures, § 2-4. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-136—2-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OLD AGE, SURVIVORS AND DISABILITY INSURANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Social security for public employees, F.S. ch. 650. 
 
Sec. 2-146. - Adopted. 
The provisions adopted regarding social security are incorporated in this division by reference and are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Secs. 2-147—2-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; construction board, § 26-191 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Board shall mean any permanent board or committee of the city, which is established by ordinance as a permanent board or committee of the city. 
Committee shall mean any temporary committee or commission of the city, which is established by resolution to study a specific problem and recommend a solution or policy alternative within a time certain. Its existence shall terminate upon the completion of its assignment or on a date certain as provided by the resolution creating the committee or commission. 
Neither "board" nor "committee" shall be construed to include the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-97-56, § 1, 9-25-97; Ord. No. O-98-05, § 1, 7-8-98)  
Sec. 2-167. - Appointments. 
The city council shall make all appointments and reappointments to the boards and committees of the city. Unless waived by the city council and the applicant, the city council shall interview persons requesting consideration for appointment at a public meeting. Following such interview, the city council shall fill the vacancy from the list of applicants. All boards and committees shall have at least one alternate member, with a maximum of two alternate members. 
No person shall serve on more than one city board or permanent committee simultaneously. 
(Ord. No. O-97-56, § 2, 9-25-97; Ord. No. O-98-05, § 2, 7-8-98; Ord. No. O-04-16, § 1, 9-15-04)  
Sec. 2-168. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-11-06, § 1, adopted June 22, 2011, repealed § 2-168, which pertained to list of volunteers and derived from Ord. No. O-97-56, § 3, adopted Sept. 25, 1997.  
Sec. 2-169. - Announcement of vacancies, applications for consideration. 
Vacancies in the membership of any city board or committee shall be publicly announced by the city clerk. Persons wishing to be considered for appointment shall file an application with the office of the city clerk. Procedures for advertisement and filling of vacancies shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-97-56, § 4, 9-25-97; Ord. No. O-12-12, § 1, 12-12-12)  
Sec. 2-170. - Qualifications. 
The primary consideration in appointing board and committee members shall be to provide the board or committee with the needed technical, professional, financial, business or administrative expertise. An applicant's previous term as a member or an alternate member of the board or committee on which there is a vacancy may be given special consideration. Whenever a current or former member of a board or committee is being considered for appointment or reappointment to a board, the city council shall consider the number and nature of the memoranda of conflict previously filed by such individual pursuant to F.S. ch. 112, relating to that individual's previous membership on the board or committee for which the appointment is being considered. All of the members of each board or committee shall be residents of the city, however it shall be required that any member of the planning and zoning commission have been a resident of the city for a minimum period of one year. Additional qualifications may be ordained or be otherwise applicable for a particular board or committee. 
(Ord. No. O-97-56, § 5, 9-25-97; Ord. No. O-08-04, § 1, 6-25-08)  
Sec. 2-171. - Terms. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or by state law, board members shall be appointed to fill specific three-year terms of membership, which shall be staggered, so that no more than three members of a particular board shall be appointed in any given calendar year. In the event that an appointment is made to fill an unexpired term, the member shall serve until the end of the unexpired term. 
Terms of all members of any board or committee shall remain active until such time as council appoints a new member. 
(Ord. No. O-97-56, § 6, 9-25-97; Ord. No. O-98-05, § 3, 7-8-98; Ord. No. O-11-18, § 1, 11-16-11; Ord. No. O-12-12, § 2, 12-12-12)  
Sec. 2-172. - Removal. 
Any member of a board or committee of the city may be removed from office by the city council without cause by a vote approved by at least four members of the entire membership of the city council. Any member of a board or committee of the city may be removed from office for the violation of any provision of state law governing the conduct of elected or appointed officials; conviction in any court for a violation of law involving moral turpitude; misfeasance, nonfeasance or malfeasance in the performance of official duties; or abandonment of office by a majority vote of the members of the city council present at the meeting where said removal is being considered. 
Upon the direction of a majority of the city council, a notice of removal shall be served upon the member sought to be removed, which shall specify the grounds for removal. The notice of removal shall be delivered by personal delivery or by ordinary first class mail to the member at the address provided by the records of the city clerk. Service shall be accomplished as soon as is practicable after the city council directs service of the notice of removal. Except as provided in section 2-173 below, the notice shall include a statement that the member has the right to request a hearing before the city council and that the request for a hearing must be received by the city clerk on or before a date to be specified in the notice which shall be seven days from the date of service if the notice is personally served, or ten days from the date of mailing if the notice is served by mail. 
Upon timely request for a hearing before the city council, the council shall set a date and time for the hearing and direct the city clerk to give the member notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the member may present evidence and argument as to why the removal should not occur. The member may be represented by legal counsel and all proceedings shall be recorded on magnetic tape by the city clerk. The decision of the council may be either to remove, suspend, reprimand or to absolve the member. For purpose of this section, the effective date of removal of a member shall be immediately after the expiration of the time in which the member has the right to request a hearing before the city council. If the member timely requests a hearing, and if the city council decides to remove the member upon the conclusion of the hearing, the removal shall take effect immediately. If a member timely requests a hearing, but withdraws the request prior to the hearing, the effective date shall be the date on which the request was withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. O-97-56, § 7, 9-25-97)  
Sec. 2-173. - Attendance requirement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any board or committee member shall be automatically removed if he or she is absent from three consecutive meetings without an acceptable excuse. An "acceptable excuse" is defined as an absence for medical reasons, business reasons, personal reasons, or any other reason which the chair of the board or committee deems appropriate. Upon notification by the chair of the board or committee that a member has not complied with the attendance requirement, the city council shall issue an order of removal. 
The effective date of removal shall be the date on which the order of removal was entered. Removal of board or committee members pursuant to this section shall not be subject to section 2-172. 
(Ord. No. O-97-56, § 8, 9-25-97; Ord. No. O-12-12, § 3, 12-12-12)  
Secs. 2-174, 2-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Code enforcement, F.S. ch. 162. 
 
Sec. 2-176. - Created. 
There is hereby created and established pursuant to the authority granted by the Local Government Code Enforcement Boards Act, F.S. ch. 162, and administered under the procedures set forth in said act, the Sebastian Code Enforcement System utilizing a special magistrate to be appointed by city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-91; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, 2-9-94; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, 11-18-98; Ord. No. O-06-06, § 1, 7-12-06)  
Sec. 2-177. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager shall have administrative responsibility for the enforcement of the Code and the activities of the enforcement officers. 
(b)  The city attorney may prosecute cases on behalf of the city in coordination with the administrative direction of the city manager, and shall have administrative responsibility for the conduct of hearings and coordination of the activities of the special magistrate. 
(Code 1980, § 2-92; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, 2-9-94; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, 11-18-98; Ord. No. O-06-06, § 2, 7-12-06)  
Sec. 2-178. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-178, which pertained to jurisdiction for code enforcement and derived from Code 1980, § 2-93; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-179. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-179, which pertained to membership and composition of the code enforcement board and derived from Code 1980, § 2-94(a); Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-180. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-180, which pertained to board member qualifications and derived from Code 1980, § 2-94(b); Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-97-57, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 1997; and Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-181. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-181, which pertained to terms of office and derived from Code 1980, § 2-94(c); Ord. No. O-91-23, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 1991; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-97-57, § 2, adopted Sept. 25, 1997; and Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-182. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-182, which pertained to board quorums and derived from Code 1980, § 2-96; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; and Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-183. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-183, which pertained to compensation and derived from Code 1980, § 2-97; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; and Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-184. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-184, which pertained to organization of the board and derived from Code 1980, § 2-95; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-185. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-185, which pertained to board rules and regulations and derived from Code 1980, § 2-98; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-186. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-186, which pertained to the board clerk and derived from Code 1980, § 2-99; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-187. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-187, which pertained to board legal counsel and derived from Code 1980, § 2-100; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-97-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 1997; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-188. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-188, which pertained to presentation of cases and derived from Code 1980, § 2-101; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-97-01, § 2, adopted Jan. 8, 1997; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-189. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-189, which pertained to subpoena powers and derived from Code 1980, § 2-107; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-190, which pertained to the obstructing officer and derived from Code 1980, § 2-109; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-191. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-191, which pertained to service of notice and derived from Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-192. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-192, which pertained to enforcement methods and derived from Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-193. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-06, § 3, adopted July 12, 2006, repealed § 2-193, which pertained to procedures before board for enforcement of codes and derived from Code 1980, §§ 2-102, 2-103; Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1994; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1998.  
Sec. 2-194. - Procedure for enforcement by court; citations. 
(a)  These procedures are enacted pursuant to F.S. § 162.21. 
(b)  Citation authorization; application. A code enforcement officer so designated by the city is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted city code or ordinance; the county court will hear the charge. Designation as a code enforcement officer does not provide the code enforcement officer with the power of arrest or subject the code officer to the provisions of F.S. §§ 943.085—943.244. 
(c)  Notification prior to citation issuance; procedures. 
(1)  Prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. If the code enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible, then the code enforcement officer does not have to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation. 
Notwithstanding the preceding subsection 2-194(c)(1), the city council shall adopt, by resolution, a schedule of violations and penalties to be assessed by code enforcement officer, including standard notification time periods for specific types of violations, said time periods not exceeding 30 days. 
(2)  A citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall contain: 
a.  The date and time of issuance. 
b.  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
c.  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
d.  A brief description of the violation and the facts constituting reasonable cause. 
e.  The number of the section of the code or ordinance violated. 
f.  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer. 
g.  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
h.  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
i.  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
j.  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(d)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, a code enforcement officer shall ensure that the original citation and one copy of the citation are deposited with the county court. 
(e)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the enforcement of building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73, as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the city. 
(g)  The provisions of this section are an additional and supplemental means of enforcing city codes and ordinances; nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 2-195. - Procedure for enforcement of contractor licensing statutes. 
(a)  These procedures are enacted pursuant to F.S. § 489.127. 
(b)  A code enforcement officer so designated by the city may issue a citation for any violation of F.S. § 489.127(1) or § 489.132(1) (relating to unlicensed, uncertified or unregistered contractors), or for any violation of chapter 26 of this Code, whenever, based upon personal investigation, the code enforcement officer has reasonable and probable cause to believe that such a violation has occurred. 
(c)  A contracting citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall contain the information outlined in subsection 2-194(c)(2), items a. through j. 
(d)  Penalties. The city council shall adopt, by resolution, a schedule of penalties to be assessed by the code enforcement officer, for each prohibited contracting activity as set forth in F.S. §§ 489.127(1) and 489.132(1), and chapter 26 of this Code. The maximum civil penalty which may be levied shall not exceed $500.00. Each day a willful, knowing violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Cessation of violations; hearing procedures. 
(1)  The act for which the citation is issued shall be ceased upon receipt of the citation. The person charged with the violation shall elect either to correct the violation and pay the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the citation or, within ten days of receipt of the citation, exclusive of weekends and legal holidays, request an administrative hearing to contest the issuance of the citation by the code enforcement officer. Said administrative hearing shall be held before the city code enforcement special magistrate. Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer commits a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided for in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(2)  Failure of a violator to contest the decision of the code enforcement officer within the time period set forth in the preceding paragraph shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing. A waiver of the right to an administrative hearing shall be deemed an admission of the violation and penalties may be imposed accordingly. 
(3)  If the person receiving the citation, or his designated representative, shows that the citation is invalid, the special magistrate shall dismiss the citation. 
(4)  If the special magistrate finds the existence of a violation, the enforcement board may order the violator to pay a civil penalty of not less than the amount set forth on the citation but not more than $500.00 per day for each violation. In determining the amount of the penalty, the special magistrate shall consider the following factors: 
a.  The gravity of the violation. 
b.  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation. 
c.  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(5)  Upon written notification by the code enforcement officer that a violation has not been corrected within the timeframe set forth on the citation (as applicable) and no contest of the citation has been made as set forth above, the special magistrate shall enter an order ordering the violator to pay the maximum civil penalty set forth on the citation, and a hearing shall not be necessary for the issuance of such order. 
(6)  A certified copy of any order imposing a penalty against an uncertified contractor shall be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against any real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including a levy against personal property; however, such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A civil penalty imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this subsection, whichever occurs first. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the city council may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under § 4, article X of the State Constitution. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, 11-18-98; Ord. No. O-06-06, § 4, 7-12-06)  
Sec. 2-196. - Appeals. 
An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final order of the special magistrate to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo (no new evidence or testimony shall be presented) but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special magistrate. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution by the special magistrate of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. O-93-16, § 1, 2-9-94; Ord. No. O-98-10, § 1, 11-18-98; Ord. No. O-06-06, § 5, 7-12-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions § 162.11.  
Secs. 2-197—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-23, § 1, adopted Oct. 10, 2001, repealed div. 3, §§ 2-211—2-214, in its entirety and reserved said sections. Former §§ 2-211—2-214 established a recreational advisory board for the city and derived from Ord. No. O-98-08, § 1, adopted May 13, 1998. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. O-03-29, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 2003, added a new div. 3, §§ 2-111—2-114, as set forth herein. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Establishment. 
The city council hereby establishes a parks and recreation advisory committee. The purpose of the committee shall be to study and provide recommendations to city council: 
• As to the development of the park system; and 
• As to the provision of active recreation programs and facilities. 
Membership on the committee shall be through appointment by city council. 
(Ord. No. O-03-29, § 1, 12-10-03)  
Sec. 2-212. - Panel composition. 
The committee shall be composed of five residents and two alternates appointed at-large. 
(Ord. No. O-03-29, § 1, 12-10-03; Ord. No. O-07-07, § 1, 6-13-07)  
Sec. 2-213. - Terms. 
There shall be a continuity of terms for the membership from the original establishment of the committee, with terms hereinafter governed by the general provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-03-29, § 1, 12-10-03; Ord. No. O-07-07, § 2, 6-13-07)  
Sec. 2-214. - Procedures. 
At the regular meeting of June of each calendar year, or at the first regular meeting thereafter, the committee shall select a chairman and vice-chairman. The committee shall adopt rules of procedure and a meeting schedule. 
(Ord. No. O-03-29, § 1, 12-10-03)  
Secs. 2-215—2-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUDGET REVIEW ADVISORY BOARD[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-98-14, §§ 1—3, adopted Oct. 14, 1998, did not specify manner of codification; hence, such provisions have been designated by the editor as div. 4, §§ 2-221—2-223. 
Cross reference— Finance and budget, § 2-86 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Established. 
There is hereby established a citizens' budget review advisory board. The board shall be composed of seven residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-98-14, § 1, 10-14-98)  
Sec. 2-222. - Responsibilities. 
The board shall assist in the city's budget review process and shall make recommendations to the city council prior to the first budget hearing for each fiscal year. In order to effectively advise the city council, the board shall become familiar with the city's budget process and shall review the city's proposed budget and all reports submitted by city staff concerning the proposed budget. 
(Ord. No. O-98-14, § 2, 10-14-98)  
Sec. 2-223. - Terms of members. 
The city manager or his designee shall be an ex officio member of the board and shall provide the board with all financial documents and materials which reasonably relate to the budget advisory responsibilities of the board. Each city council member shall appoint one member of the initial board, and each initial member's term shall end at the same time as the term of the council member making the appointment. The city council shall appoint two additional members, who will serve until the next election. Thereafter, each newly elected or re-elected city council member shall, at the first regular meeting after taking office, appoint one board member, who shall serve for a two-year term. The city council, at the first regular meeting after each election, shall appoint two additional board members, who shall serve for one-year terms. 
(Ord. No. O-98-14, § 3, 10-14-98)  
Secs. 2-224—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Appointment. 
The 15 members of the charter review committee, as established by section 5.03 of the City Charter, shall be appointed in the following manner: 
(1)  Each member of the city council shall appoint two city residents to the committee; and 
(2)  The remaining five members of the committee shall be appointed by the council as a body in accordance with the general provisions for selection of membership of city boards and committees. 
The announcement of the individual appointments, and the selection of the at-large members, shall occur at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting following the seating of the newly elected city council of the years designed in the Charter for formulation of the committee. 
There shall be no limit on the number of times a resident may serve on this committee, nor shall any member of another city board or committee be prohibited from concurrently serving thereupon. 
(Ord. No. O-99-02, § 1, 4-14-99; Ord. No. O-07-08, § 1, 6-13-07)  
Sec. 2-232. - Operational procedures. 
The Charter review committee shall hold its organization meeting in the week following formulation of its membership. At said meeting the majority of the members present shall select a chairman and a vice-chairman. The selection thereof, and the operations of the committee, shall be carried out in accordance with the established general procedures for boards and committees of the city. At said organization meeting, the committee shall establish the time and frequency of its meetings. 
The city attorney shall be advisor to the committee and the city clerk shall provide secretarial services to the committee. 
After submitting its final recommendation, which shall occur within six months of the committee's formulation, the committee shall have a final meeting in the week following city council action on said recommendation and shall thereafter be dissolved. 
(Ord. No. O-99-02, § 2, 4-14-99; Ord. No. O-07-08, § 2, 6-13-07)  
Secs. 2-233—2-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - NATURAL RESOURCES BOARD[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-07-11, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 27, 2007, repealed the former Div. 6, § 2-240, and enacted a new Div. 6 as set out herein. The former Div. 6 pertained to tree and landscape advisory board and derived from Ord. No. O-05-18, § 16, 10-16-05. 
 
Sec. 2-240. - Natural resources board; creation. 
There is hereby created a natural resources board, which shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate members. Meeting shall be held at such times and places as determined by the city council and shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. O-07-11, § 1, 6-27-07)  
Sec. 2-241. - Natural resources board; mission and duties. 
Mission statement: To improve the quality of life in Sebastian by nurturing the beneficial relationship between our citizens and our environment by protecting, preserving and promoting our natural resources. 
In pursuit of this mission, the natural resources board will provide analysis and advice to the city council on environmental issues with a three-pronged focus on Preservation & Enhancement, Regulatory Programs and Public Assets Management. 
Preservation and Enhancement guidance will feature: 
a.  efforts for the protection of historic, specimen and protected trees; 
b.  development of initiatives and programs for conservation of sensitive lands and open space, to be pursued both within the city proper and regionally on an intergovernmental basis; 
c.  spearheading public education and awareness events such as the Champion Tree Program, Arbor Day and Earth Day celebrations; and 
d.  a model for monitoring and enhancing the urban forest and protected species within the habitat. 
Regulatory Programs guidance will feature: 
a.  periodic review of the tree protection and landscape code provisions to formulate recommended amendments; 
b.  proposals for development of additional areas of environmental protection regulations; and 
c.  formulation of policy considerations to be used as guidelines by the Planning and Zoning Commission in considering land development regulations. 
Public Assets Management guidance will feature: 
a.  proposed planting of trees or landscaping; and 
b.  developing environmental best management practices to be employed by the city. 
The city council may assign or request additional activities by the board. 
(Ord. No. O-07-11, § 2, 6-27-07)  
Secs. 2-242—2-249. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - VETERANS ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-250. - Veterans advisory board; creation. 
There is hereby created a veterans advisory board, which shall consist of five regular members and two alternate members, appointed in the following manner: 
(1)  The Commander of VFW Post 10210, or in the discretion of the Commander, another member of the VFW designated by the Commander; 
(2)  A member of the VFW Post 10210 designated by the Commander; 
(3)  The Commander of American Legion Post 189, or in the discretion of the Commander, another member of American Legion Post 189 designated by the Commander; 
(4)  A member of American Legion Post 189 designated by the Commander; 
(5)  On a rotating basis: 
(a)  The President of the Ladies Auxiliary of VFW Post 10210, or in the discretion of the president, another member of the Ladies Auxiliary designated by the President or, 
(b)  The President of the Ladies Auxiliary of American Legion Post 189, or in the discretion of the President, another member of the Ladies Auxiliary designated by the President. 
(6)  The Commanders of VFW Post 10210 and America Legion Post 189 shall each select one alternate member of the board from their respective Posts. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 1, 4-25-12)  
Sec. 2-251. - Mission. 
The veterans advisory board shall advise the city council with respect to matters especially relating to or affecting veterans, male and female, who have served in the Armed Forces of the United States, and their dependents, including without limitation: 
(a)  Celebrations, ceremonials, monuments, parades, recognitions, honors and awards; 
(b)  Education including training and retraining; 
(c)  Employment; 
(d)  Housing; 
(e)  Benefits, preferences and entitlements; 
(f)  Transportation; 
(g)  Community participation and volunteer opportunities; 
(h)  Health and rehabilitation; 
(i)  Any other matters requested or assigned by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 1, 4-25-12)  
Sec. 2-252. - Officers, procedure. 
The board shall select its own officers and adopt and enforce its own rules of procedure; provided, however, that all meetings shall be held in the city council chambers, all provisions of Florida's Open Government Laws, including the Sunshine Law and the Public Record Laws shall apply and all meetings shall be open to the public. 
The board shall periodically report on its activities to the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 1, 4-25-12)  
Sec. 2-253. - Repealer. 
This division shall stand repealed on March 1, 2020, unless, prior to that time, the city council adopts a succeeding ordinance providing for further extension. 
(Ord. No. O-12-05, § 1, 4-25-12; Ord. No. O-15-02, § 1, 3-11-15)  
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— License taxes for advertising, § 30-52; land development code, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertisers, F.S. ch. 479. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Posting signs, etc., to poles, etc.; advertising vehicles for sale on public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, nail, tack or otherwise attach any temporary sign or any advertising placard, poster, handbill or painted sign on any public property or to any tree, telephone or other utility post or any building located on public property. It shall further be unlawful to so attach such signs to trees, poles or buildings on private property unless the private property owner personally attaches such sign or gives his specific and written consent for another person to make such attachment of signs. 
(b)  Where such sign or advertising is erected on public or private property without the owner's consent, the city or private property owner, respectively, will have the right to remove any such signs without notification to any person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any motor [vehicle] or other vehicle on public property in the city, for the purpose of advertising that such vehicle is being offered for sale, unless it is in connection with a purpose or business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed. For purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a vehicle is being offered for sale if a sign or other written advertisement is prominently displayed thereon. For purposes of this section, the term "vehicle" shall include, but shall not be limited to trailers, motorcycles, boats and all other types of water craft. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1; Ord. No. O-97-02, § 1, 1-8-97)  
Secs. 6-2—6-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Certain advertising prohibited, § 14-77; certain signs prohibited, § 14-78; nuisances, ch. 66; sign regulations, land development code, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 6-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handbill means any printed or written commercial matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature of a commercial nature. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public, and shall mean and include any other copyrighted material. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1980, § 3-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-27. - Exemption for mail and newspapers. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1980, § 3-17)  
Sec. 6-28. - Handbills prohibited on private property; exception. 
(a)  Unless otherwise permitted as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place, deposit or otherwise dispose of any handbill in or upon private property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section, it shall be lawful for any person to deliver or transmit any handbill in or upon private property when such delivery or transmittal is made directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private property. Provided, however, that no person shall attempt to deliver or transmit any handbill upon any private property if requested not to do so by anyone thereon, or if there is placed on such property a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Solicitors," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such property do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills delivered in or upon such property. 
(Code 1980, §§ 3-18, 3-19; Ord. No. O-91-15, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-91)  
Sec. 6-29. - Placing on motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place in or upon any automobile or other vehicle standing or being situated on the streets, any handbill, circular or other advertising matter. 
(Code 1980, § 3-21) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Throwing advertising materials in motor vehicles, F.S. § 316.2055.  
Sec. 6-30. - Restricted in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; except that a handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept such handbill. 
(Code 1980, § 3-22) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 6-31. - Violation of article; subject to criminal prosecution. 
The code enforcement special magistrate shall have the jurisdiction and authority to hear and decide alleged violations of the provisions of this article. This shall not, however, preclude the referral of violators to the appropriate governmental agency for criminal prosecution in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 403.413(5). 
(Ord. No. O-91-15, § 4, 7-10-91; Ord. No. O-06-06, § 6, 7-12-06)  
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages prohibited in certain places, § 14-80; businesses, ch. 30; alcoholic beverages prohibited in public parks, § 74-3. 
State Law reference— Liquors and beverages, F.S. § 561.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Sales of liquor near churches and schools restricted. 
(a)  Separation of licensed premises from schools and churches. No premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages shall be authorized by the city within 450 feet of any established public or private elementary school, middle school, high school, charter school or church with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Restaurants, which: 
a.  Derive at least 51 percent of their gross revenues from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages; and 
b.  Does not contain a freestanding bar. 
(2)  The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to a person or establishment holding a current and valid permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city from its present location. 
(b)  The term "alcoholic beverages," as used in this section shall be taken to include the words "distilled spirits" and shall extend to and include all spirituous beverages created by distillation and by mixture of distilled beverages by what is commonly termed blending, and shall include beer, malt beverages or wine, as defined in the state beverage law. The term "church" or "school" as used in this section shall have its commonly-understood meaning, but shall be limited to those establishments meeting in a free-standing building in a single use site of a minimum size of one-half acre. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1; Ord. No. O-05-12, § 1, 4-27-05; Ord. No. O-10-09, § 1, 1-12-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate location of business, F.S. § 562.45(2).  
Sec. 10-2. - Prohibited hours of sale. 
(a)  Except as permitted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed, served, permitted to be sold, permitted to be consumed, permitted to be served, offered for sale or offered for consumption at any location where alcoholic beverages are permitted to be sold or consumed pursuant to a license or permit issued by the state department of business regulation, division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco, within the city limits during the following hours of each day: 
(1)  Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sundays. 
(2)  Between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Mondays. 
(3)  Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Tuesdays. 
(4)  Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Wednesdays. 
(5)  Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Thursdays. 
(6)  Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Fridays. 
(7)  Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above to the contrary, alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed, served, permitted to be sold, permitted to be consumed, permitted to be served, offered for sale or offered for consumption, at any location where alcoholic beverages are permitted to be sold or consumed pursuant to a license or permit issued by the state department of business regulation, division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco, within the city limits on New Year's Day (January 1) between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 3:00 a.m., in addition to the hours otherwise allowed. 
(Code 1980, § 4-2; Ord. No. O-92-02, § 1, 2-12-92; Ord. No. O-10-09, § 1, 1-12-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. § 562.14.  
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; special requirements for carnivals, circuses and other amusement attractions, § 30-50. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment that sells or rents adult material, unless the adult material is accessible only by employees and either the gross income from the sale and rental of adult material comprises less than ten percent of the gross income from the sale and rental of goods and services at the establishment, or the individual items of adult material offered for sale and rental comprise less than 25 percent of the individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in any of the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings or other audio matter. It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this Code regarding operation of an adult bookstore without an adult entertainment license if the alleged violator shows that the adult material is accessible only by employees and either the gross income from the sale and rental of adult material comprises less than ten percent of the gross income from the sale and rental of goods and services at the establishment, or the individual items of adult material offered for sale and rental comprise less than 25 percent of the individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in any of the following categories: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings, or other audio matter. 
Adult booth means a small enclosure inside an adult entertainment establishment accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term adult booth includes, but is not limited to, a peep show booth, or other booth used to view adult material. The term adult booth does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment, or a restroom. 
Adult dancing establishment means an establishment where any employee: 
(1)  Displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a person other than another employee, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; or 
(2)  Wears any covering, tape, pastie or device which simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, regardless of whether the employee actually engages in dancing; and 
(3)  Offers, solicits, or contracts to dance with a person other than another employee in consideration for any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that person; 
(4)  Dances with a person other than another employee in consideration for any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that person; or 
(5)  Dances within three feet of a person other than another employee in consideration for any tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that person. 
Adult entertainment establishment means an adult theater, an adult bookstore, an adult motel or an adult dancing establishment operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. "Operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall not depend upon actual profit or loss. Also, "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall be presumed where the establishment has an occupational license. An establishment with an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
Adult material means any one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings, or audio matter, that have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult motel means a motel, as defined in section 20A-12.2 of the city's Land Development Code, used by persons for the viewing of films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means an establishment which, except as set forth in the final sentence of this definition, consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part of an enclosed building, or an open-air area used by persons for the viewing of films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. An establishment which has adult booths is considered to be an adult theater. 
Alcoholic beverage means a beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight. 
(1)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic beverage if there is proof that the beverage in question is or was known as whiskey, moonshine whiskey, shine, rum, gin, tequila, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, beer, malt liquor, wine or by any other similar name, or was contained in a bottle or can labeled as any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturer's insignia, name or trademark. 
(2)  Any person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste, smell, or drinking of such alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature thereof, may testify as to his opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
Conviction means a determination of guilt resulting from a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
Department means the finance department, building department and police department, including the respective directors, employees, officers and agents thereof. 
Employee means a person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wage. 
Establishment means a site or premises, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are conducted for commercial or pecuniary gain. "Operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall not depend upon actual profit or loss. Also, "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain" shall be presumed where the establishment has an occupational license. 
Inspector means an employee or officer of the community development department or police department who inspects premises licensed under this article and takes or requires the actions authorized by this article in the event of violations being found on licensed premises, and who also inspects premises seeking to be licensed under this article and makes or requires corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on the premises. 
Law enforcement officer means an officer who is on official duty for the police department. 
Licensee means any person whose application for an adult entertainment establishment has been granted and who owns, operates or controls the establishment. 
Operator means any person who engages in or performs any activity which is necessary to or which facilitates the operation of an adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to, the licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bartender, disc jockey, sales clerk, desk clerk, ticket taker, movie projectionist, or supervisor. 
Person includes, but is not limited to, individuals, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and any other similar entities. 
Private performance means the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee of an adult entertainment establishment to a person other than another employee while the person is in an area not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment, or while the person is in an area in which the person is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of all persons outside the area. 
Prohibited sign means any sign that provides a visual representation that has as its primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as well as any other signs that are prohibited by the city's sign ordinance. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals or pubic region; 
b.  Cleavage of the human buttocks; or 
c.  That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola (the colored ring around the nipple). This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act means: 
(1)  A criminal violation of this article; 
(2)  Any felony; 
(3)  An offense under F.S. ch. 794, Sexual Battery; 
(4)  An offense under F.S. ch. 796, Prostitution; 
(5)  An offense under F.S. ch. 800, Lewdness; Indecent Exposure; 
(6)  An offense under F.S. ch. 826, Bigamy, Incest; 
(7)  An offense under F.S. ch. 847, Obscene Literature; Profanity; or 
(8)  An offense under an analogous federal law, statute of a state other than Florida, or under an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
Specified sexual activity means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(2)  Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sapphism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia or zooerasty; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3). 
Straddle dance, also known as a lap dance or face dance, means either of the following acts: 
(1)  The use by an employee of any part of his body to touch the genital or pubic area of a person while at the establishment, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of any employee with a person while at the establishment. Such touching shall be considered a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching occurs while the employee is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. It shall also be considered a straddle dance regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or through a medium. 
(2)  The straddling of the legs of an employee over any part of the body of a person other than another employee at the establishment while the employee is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-5, 1-8-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-27. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to F.S. ch. 166, and in the interest of the health, peace, safety, morals, and general welfare of the people of Sebastian. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-1.2, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-28. - Interpretation. 
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of licensing and regulating adult entertainment and related activities. Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this article shall apply equally to all persons, regardless of sex. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-2, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-29. - Purpose. 
The intent of the city council in adopting this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-3, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-30. - Findings of fact. 
Based upon evidence and testimony presented at public hearings before the city council, and on the findings incorporated in "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values," conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, Indianapolis, January 1984, the city council hereby finds that: 
(1)  Establishments exist or may exist within the city where books, magazines, motion pictures, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties and/or devices which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed and/or sold. 
(2)  Establishments exist or may exist within the city: 
a.  Where dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals who, for any form of commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area; or 
b.  Where straddle dancing occurs. 
(3)  The activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur at establishments for the purpose of making a profit and, as such, are subject to regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the city. 
(4)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are present in establishments, other activities which are illegal, immoral, or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. 
(5)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are present in establishments, they tend to attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower real property values, promote crime, particularly the kinds detailed in subsection (4), and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(6)  The establishments in which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur are usually constructed, in part or in whole, of substandard materials, and are usually maintained in a manner reflecting disregard for the health and safety of the occupants. 
(7)  The activities described in subsections (1) and (2) frequently occur in establishments concurrent with the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  The concurrence of the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) leads to an increase in criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and order of the city. 
(9)  The concurrence of the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages with the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance, depreciates the value of adjoining real property, harms the economic welfare of the city, and adversely affects the public's interest in the quality of life, tone of commerce, and community environment in the city. 
(10)  In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages at establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur. 
(11)  Employees of establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur engage in a higher incidence of certain types of criminal behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(12)  Physical contact within establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur between employees exhibiting specified anatomical areas and customers poses a threat to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(13)  In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the conduct of owners, managers, operators, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, and customers at establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur. 
(14)  The potential dangers to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the people of the city posed by permitting an establishment at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur to operate without first obtaining a license under this article are so great as to require the licensure of such establishments prior to their being permitted to operate. 
(15)  Requiring licensees of establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur to keep a list of information concerning current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects, and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(16)  Straddle dancing does not contain any element of communication, and is therefore conduct rather than expression. 
(17)  Straddle dancing in establishments poses a threat to the health of the participants and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-4, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-31. - Responsibilities of city council, finance department, police department and community development department. 
(a)  Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this article is vested in the council. 
(b)  The finance department is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and cancelling adult entertainment licenses for proposed or existing adult entertainment establishments. 
(c)  The police department is responsible for verifying information contained on an application pursuant to section 14-47, for inspecting any proposed, licensed, or unlicensed establishment in order to ascertain whether the establishment is in compliance with applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth in this Code, and for enforcing applicable criminal statutes and ordinances, including those set forth in this Code. 
(d)  The community development department is responsible for inspecting any proposed establishment for which a license is being applied for or any licensed establishment in order to ascertain whether it complies with or is complying with this article and all applicable building, fire and health codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in the city. The community development department is also responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed establishment for which a license is being applied for complies with all applicable zoning regulations in effect in the city, and whether a licensed establishment is complying with this article and all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws in effect in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-9, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-32. - Powers of the city council. 
The city council may bring suit in the circuit court to restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-41, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-33. - Violators subject to criminal prosecution. 
Whoever violates any section or provision of this article shall be guilty of a second degree misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082(4)(b) and 775.083(e). 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-40, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-34. - Regulation of obscenity subject to state law. 
It is not the intent of the city council to legislate with respect to matters of obscenity. These matters are regulated by state law, including F.S. ch. 847. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-6, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-35. - Regulation of massage establishments subject to state law. 
It is not the intent of the city council to legislate with respect to matters of massage establishments. These matters are regulated by state agency, the department of professional regulation, board of massage, and by state law, F.S. ch. 480. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-7, 1-8-92)  
Secs. 14-36—14-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-46. - Required; classification of. 
(a)  Requirement. No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to operate without having been first granted an adult entertainment license by the finance department under this article. 
(b)  Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment licenses referred to in this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore; 
(2)  Adult theater; 
(3)  Adult dancing establishment; or 
(4)  Adult motel. 
(c)  Single classification of license. An adult entertainment license for a particular adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to one classification of license. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-10, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-47. - Application required; contents of; fee; rejection of incomplete application; consent by applicant. 
(a)  Application required. Any person desiring to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall file with the finance director a sworn license application on a standard application form supplied by the finance director. 
(b)  Contents of application. The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is at least 18 years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and, if in existence, a copy of the partnership agreement; or 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and, if applicable, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process; 
(2)  If the applicant intends to conduct the establishment under a name other than that of the applicant, the establishment's fictitious name registration pursuant to F.S. § 865.09 (1990 Supp.); 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section has had a previous license under this article suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license under this article has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation; 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section holds any other licenses under this article and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed establishments; 
(5)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing; 
(6)  The location of the proposed establishment, including a legal description of the property site, and a legal street address; 
(7)  The applicant's mailing address, residential address, and residential telephone number, if any; 
(8)  A site plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment, including, but not limited to: 
a.  All property lines, rights-of-way, and the location of buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts, and driveways; 
b.  All windows, doors, entrances and exits, fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures; 
c.  All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size; 
(9)  A recent photograph of the applicant; and 
(10)  Either the applicant's driver's license number or his state or federally issued identification card number. 
(c)  Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $200.00. If the application for a license is approved and a license is granted, the fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual license fee required for the first year pursuant to section 14-51. 
(d)  Incomplete application. If the finance director determines or learns at any time that the applicant has not properly completed the application for a proposed establishment, he shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and shall allow the applicant ten days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license under section 14-49 shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(e)  Consent. By applying for a license under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the finance director and other city departments of their respective responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-11, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-48. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the finance director and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the finance director shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the police department and the community development department. Each department shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, the application and the proposed establishment in accordance with its responsibilities summarized in section 14-31. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event such department disapproves, it shall so state its reasons. 
(b)  A department shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed establishment will be in violation of any provision of this article or of any building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the finance department. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-12, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-49. - Grant; denial; appeal. 
(a)  Time period for granting or denying license. The finance department shall grant or deny an application for a license within 20 working days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the 20th day, the applicant may be permitted to begin operating the establishment for which a license is sought, unless and until the finance department notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for that denial. 
(b)  Granting of application. If all departments approve the application, the finance department shall grant the application, notify the applicant of the granting, and issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual license fee provided in sections 14-50 and 14-51, with credit as provided in section 14-47(c). 
(c)  Denial of application. 
(1)  The finance department shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Any of the departments has disapproved of the application. 
b.  The application contains material false information. 
c.  The applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection 14-47(b)(1) has a license under this article that has been suspended or revoked. 
d.  The granting of the application would violate either a statute or ordinance, or an order from a court of law that effectively prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment establishment license. 
(2)  If the finance director denies the application, he shall notify the applicant of the denial, and state the reasons for the denial. 
(3)  If a person applies for a license at a particular location within a period of nine months from the date of denial of a previous application for a license at that location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which would probably lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be rejected. 
(4)  If an applicant is denied a license after fulfilling all the requirements of this article, such applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial, should the applicant believe that such denial is without good cause. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the city council within ten days after the applicant receives written notice of such denial, and shall state wherein the applicant believes the denial of his license is without good cause. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-13, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-50. - Contents; term; renewal; expiration; cancellation. 
(a)  Contents. An adult entertainment license shall state on its face the name of the licensee, the name of the establishment, the street address of the establishment, the classification of the license, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)  Term. All licenses issued under this article, except new licenses, shall be annual licenses which shall be paid for on or before October 1, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. If a license is issued after October 1 but before March 31 of the following year, the applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee and such license shall expire the following September 30. If a license is issued after March 31 but before October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half of the appropriate license fee and such license shall expire on September 30 of the same year. 
(c)  Renewals. Licenses shall be renewed annually. Subject to other provisions of this article, a licensee under this article shall be entitled to a renewal of his annual license from year to year, as a matter of course, by October 1 by presenting the license for the previous year and by paying the appropriate license fee. 
(d)  Expiration. A license that is not renewed under this article by October 1 of each year shall expire. An expired license may be renewed by November 30 of the same year upon presentation of an affidavit stating that no adult entertainment activity has taken place at the establishment subsequent to expiration, upon payment of the appropriate license fee, and upon payment of a penalty of ten percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of October, or fraction thereof, and an additional penalty of five percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of November, or fraction thereof. 
(e)  Cancellation. An expired license not renewed by November 30 shall be cancelled summarily by the finance department. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-14, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-51. - Annual license fees, regulatory in nature. 
(a)  There is hereby levied the following annual license fees under this article for an adult entertainment establishment: 
(1)  An establishment having a license for only an adult bookstore: $750.00. 
(2)  An establishment having a license for only an adult theater, as follows: 
a.  Having only adult booths: $35.00 for each booth; 
b.  Having only a hall or auditorium: $3.50 for each seat; 
c.  Having only an area outdoors designed to permit viewing by customers seated in vehicles: $3.50 for each parking space; or 
d.  Having a combination of subsections a., b., and/or c.: the cumulative license fee applicable to each under subsections a., b., and/or c. 
(3)  An establishment having a license for only an adult motel: $750.00. 
(4)  An establishment having a license for only an adult dancing establishment: $750.00. 
(5)  An establishment having a license for two classifications: $800.00. 
(6)  An establishment having a license for three classifications: $900.00. 
(b)  The annual license fees collected under this article are declared to be regulatory fees that are collected for the purpose of examination and inspection of adult entertainment establishments under this article and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to and not in lieu of the occupational license taxes imposed by other sections of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-15, 1-8-92) 
Cross reference— License tax schedule, § 30-52.  
Sec. 14-52. - Records and reports; consent by licensee. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the finance director and the departments to implement this article and to carry out its purpose. Whenever the information required by or provided under section 14-47(b) has changed, the licensee shall promptly provide the finance director with the changed information. 
(b)  By holding a license under this article, the licensee shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the finance department and other departments of their respective responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-16, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-53. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  Requirements for transfer. A licensee shall not transfer his license to another person, and thereby surrender possession, control, and operation of the licensed establishment to such other person, unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  Obtains an amendment to the license from the finance director which provides that he is now the licensee, which amendment may be obtained only if he has completed and properly filed an application with the finance director setting forth the information called for under section 14-47(b)(1) through (5), inclusive, (9) and (11), and the application has been approved by the finance department; 
(2)  If he has purchased the licensed establishment from the licensee, produces satisfactory proof that the sale was bona fide; and 
(3)  Pays a transfer fee of ten percent of the appropriate annual license fee. 
(b)  Effect of suspension or revocation procedures. No license may be transferred pursuant to subsection (a) of this section when the finance director has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(c)  No transfer to different location. A licensee shall not transfer his license to another location. 
(d)  Attempted improper transfer void; license abandoned. Any attempted transfer of a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the license shall be deemed abandoned and shall automatically revert to the finance department. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-17, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-54. - Suspension. 
(a)  Violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning regulation. If a department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a licensed adult entertainment establishment is operating in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation, whether federal, state or local, contrary to the respective general requirements of section 14-46(a), (b), (c), or (d), the department shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period the department shall notify the finance department, who shall forthwith suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the department notifies the finance director in writing that the violation of the provision in question has been corrected. 
(b)  Illegal transfer. If the finance department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 14-53, he shall forthwith suspend the license, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the finance department is satisfied that the requirements of section 14-53(a) have been met. 
(c)  Convictions for violations of this article. 
(1)  If three or more violations of this article occur at an adult entertainment establishment within a two-year period, and convictions result from at least three of the violations, the finance department shall, upon the date of the third such conviction, suspend the license, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 30 days. 
(2)  If one or more violations of this article occur at the establishment within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 30 days under subsection (c)(1), but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 30 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the finance department shall, upon the date of the first such conviction, suspend the license again, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 90 days. 
(3)  If one or more violations of this article occur within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 90 days under subsection (c)(2) of this section, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 90 days, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the finance director shall, upon the date of the first such conviction, suspend the license again, and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 180 days. 
(4)  The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsections (c)(1) through (3) of this section. 
(d)  Effective date of suspension. All periods of suspension shall begin five days after the date the finance director mails the notice of suspension to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers his license to the finance director, whichever happens first. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-18, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-55. - Revocation. 
(a)  False information. In the event the finance department learns or finds upon sufficient cause that a license was granted based upon false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact, the finance director or department shall forthwith revoke the license and notify the licensee of the revocation. 
(b)  Conviction for violations of this article. 
(1)  If one or more violations of this article occur at an adult entertainment establishment which has had a license suspended for a period of 180 days pursuant to section 14-54(c)(3), and the violations occur within a period of two years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for 180 days, but not including any time during which the license was suspended for 180 days, the finance department shall forthwith revoke the license, and notify the licensee of the revocation. 
(2)  The transfer or renewal of a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Effect of revocation. If a license is revoked, the licensee shall not be allowed to obtain another adult entertainment license for a period of ten years, and no license shall be issued again to any other person for the location upon which the adult entertainment establishment was situated. 
(d)  Effective date of revocation. The revocation shall take effect five days after the date the finance department mails the notice of revocation to the licensee or on the date the licensee delivers his license to the finance department, whichever happens first. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-19, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-56. - Employee records. 
(a)  The licensee of an adult entertainment establishment is responsible for keeping a record of all employees who are currently employed by the establishment, and of all former employees who were employed by the establishment during the preceding one-year period. The record shall contain the current or former employee's: 
(1)  Full legal name, including any aliases; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Residential address; 
(4)  Residential telephone number, if any; 
(5)  Driver's license number or state or federally issued identification card number; and 
(6)  A recent photograph of the current or former employee. 
(b)  The original records required by subsection (a) of this section, or true and exact photocopies thereof, shall be kept at the establishment at all times. 
(c)  Any operator of an adult entertainment establishment shall be responsible for knowing the location of the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof. 
(d)  Any operator of an adult entertainment establishment shall, upon request by a law enforcement officer, make available for inspection the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof, while the establishment is open for business. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-20, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-57. - False statement or false information in applying for license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment license to make a false statement which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license, or to provide false information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-39, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-58. - Alteration. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or otherwise change the contents of an adult entertainment license. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-38, 1-8-92)  
Secs. 14-59—14-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-71. - General requirements. 
Each adult entertainment establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following general requirements: 
(1)  Conform to all applicable building statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local; 
(2)  Conform to all applicable fire statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local; 
(3)  Conform to all applicable health statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state or local; 
(4)  Conform to all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws, whether state or local; 
(5)  Keep the adult entertainment license posted in a conspicuous place at the establishment at all times, which license shall be available for inspection upon request at all times by the public; 
(6)  Except as provided in subsection (7) of this section, opaquely cover each nonopaque area through which a person outside the establishment may otherwise see inside the establishment; 
(7)  Have a vestibule, foyer or room, at least six feet by six feet in dimension, located between the outer door and the interior of the establishment, the inside of which can be viewed from outside the establishment, and which allows the inside of the establishment to be viewed only from such vestibule, foyer or room and not from outside the establishment; and 
(8)  On the first Monday of every month provide the police department with a listing of all persons who are or have been employees of the establishment since the first Monday of the previous month, and their positions. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-21, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-72. - Adult theater. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 14-71, an adult theater shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  If the adult theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may lawfully occupy the area; 
b.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
c.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area; and 
d.  Have sufficient illumination so persons in all areas of the auditorium can be seen. 
(2)  If the adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at the entranceway which states the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth, which number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth; 
b.  Unless fire or building codes require different or higher standards, adult booths shall have a permanently open entranceway not less than two feet wide and not less than six feet high, which entranceway shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails, or the like which would allow the entranceway to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door or other partition; if building or fire codes require higher standards for adult booths, the higher standards will apply; 
c.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth; 
d.  Have a well illuminated continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
e.  Have, except for the entranceway, walls or partitions of solid construction without any holes or openings in such walls or partitions; and 
f.  Be illuminated by a lightbulb of a wattage no less than 25 watts. 
(3)  If the adult theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those persons may not been seen from any public right-of-way, property zoned for residential use, religious institution, educational institution, or park. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-22, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-73. - Adult dancing establishment. 
In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in section 14-71, an adult dancing establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  It shall have a stage provided for the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee to a person other than another employee consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet; and 
(2)  It shall have no area in which a private performance is allowed to occur. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-23, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-74. - Operation of establishment without valid adult entertainment license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment where the person knows or should know that: 
(1)  The establishment does not have an adult entertainment license for any applicable classification; 
(2)  The establishment has a license which is under suspension; 
(3)  The establishment has a license which has been revoked or cancelled; or 
(4)  The establishment has a license which has expired. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-24, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-75. - Prohibited activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of all of the sections of this article that pertain thereto. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult theater which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 14-72. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult dancing establishment which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 14-73. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment while the entrance or exit of the establishment is locked when a person other than an employee is inside the establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-25, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-76. - Allowing employee to engage in prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow any employee to: 
(1)  Engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment. 
(2)  Contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment. 
(3)  Engage in any specified sexual activity at the establishment. 
(4)  Display or expose at the establishment less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, less than completely and opaquely covered cleavage of the human buttocks, less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple of the human female breast, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, unless such employee is in an area described in section 14-73. 
(5)  Display or expose any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the establishment, including with another employee. 
(6)  Engage in a private performance. 
(7)  While engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, intentionally touch any person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee. 
(8)  Intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of any person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee, at any point below the waist and above the knee of the person, or to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female person. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-26, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-77. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by this article or any applicable state statute. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-27, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-78. - Prohibited signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to allow the exterior portions of the establishment to have any prohibited sign. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-28, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-79. - Minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow: 
(1)  Admittance to the establishment of a person under 18 years of age; 
(2)  A person under 18 years of age to remain at the establishment; 
(3)  A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services at the establishment; or 
(4)  A person who is under 18 years of age to work as an employee at the establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-29, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-80. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly, or with reason to know, permit, suffer, or allow the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages in or about the establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-30, 1-8-92) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10.  
Sec. 14-81. - Working at establishment which does not have a valid adult entertainment license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment that he knows or should know is not licensed under this article, or which has a license which is under suspension, has been revoked or cancelled, or has expired. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-31, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-82. - Employee records required. 
It shall be unlawful to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, at which the records of employees required by section 14-54 have not been compiled, are not maintained, or are not available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-32, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-83. - Engaging in prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to: 
(1)  Engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment; 
(2)  Contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment; 
(3)  Engage in any specified sexual activity at the establishment; 
(4)  Display or expose at the establishment less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, less than completely and opaquely covered cleavage of the human buttocks, less than completely and opaquely covered areola and nipple of the human female breast, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, unless such employee is in an area described in section 14-73; 
(5)  Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area while simulating any specified sexual activity with any other person at the establishment, including with another employee; 
(6)  Engage in a private performance; 
(7)  While engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, intentionally touch any person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee; or 
(8)  Touch the clothed or unclothed body of any person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee, at any point below the waist and above the knee of the person, or to touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any female person. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-33, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-84. - Touching of employee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult entertainment establishment, other than another employee, to intentionally touch an employee who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area at the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in an adult entertainment establishment, other than another employee, to intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed breast of any employee, or to touch the clothed body of any employee at any point below the waist and above the knee of the employee. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-34, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-85. - Exceeding occupancy limit of adult booth. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy an adult booth in which booth there are more people than that specified in the posted sign required by section 14-72. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-35, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-86. - Use of restrooms or dressing rooms. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this article indicating to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to expose any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-36, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 14-87. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment to allow such establishment to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon of any particular day. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of an adult entertainment establishment to engage in a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon of any particular day. 
(Ord. No. O-91-13, § 10-37, 1-8-92)  
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Indian River County has adopted a comprehensive Animal Control Ordinance No. 83-22, and County Resolution No. 83-43, applicable to all of Indian River County, except to the extent that a municipality has an inconsistent ordinance. Copies of such ordinance and resolution are attached to Ord. No. O-87-26, from which this chapter is derived and which is on file in the offices of the city. Subsequently, Indian River County adopted Ord. No. 91-51 on December 17, 1991 referred to as "Indian River County Animal Control Ordinance" and passed Resolution No. 93-58 on March 9, 1993 amending the fees, penalties and procedures related to the enforcement of the Animal Control Ordinance. 
Cross reference— Animals prohibited in public parks, § 74-2. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - City designated bird and wildlife sanctuary; unlawful to trap birds and certain animals; permit to kill; signs. 
The city, including all lands now or hereafter within its territorial limits, is hereby established as a sanctuary and a reserve for all birds and fur-bearing animals; and it shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, kill or trap or in any manner kill or destroy such birds and fur-bearing animals within the city limits unless written permission is expressly granted to an individual or group by the city manager. The city manager is hereby authorized to issue a permit for the killing or destroying of any birds and fur-bearing animals that become obnoxious or destructive. Appropriate signs of a permanent nature, approved by the city council may be furnished, placed and maintained at the principal entrances to the city limits. 
(Code 1980, § 5-1; Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94; Ord. No. O-11-17, § 1, 9-14-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-11-17, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2011, amended § 18-1 title to read as herein set out. Former § 18-1 title pertained to city designated bird and wildlife sanctuary; unlawful to shoot or trap birds and certain animals; permit to kill; signs.  
Secs. 18-2—18-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 18-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous animal or reptile means any wild or feral mammal or reptile which by its nature or breeding has the capability of inflicting serious bodily injury to humans. 
Fowl means all types of chickens, ducks, turkeys or similar birds. 
Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle and other grazing animals. 
Nondomesticated animal means any animal other than livestock, fowl or any dog, cat, bird or similar animal. 
(Code 1980, § 5-2(a); Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-27. - Animal enclosure. 
All pens, cages, coops, lofts or enclosures wherein animals, fowl or birds are kept shall be securely built and maintained, adequate in size for the kind and number of animals, fowl or birds contained therein and maintained in a sanitary condition; such enclosures shall be cleaned and maintained so as to not become offensive to residents or businesses adjacent thereto. The keeping of enclosures under conditions allowing the breeding of flies is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94)  
Sec. 18-28. - Pens, coops, etc. for small animals. 
(a)  Any person keeping small animals, including but not limited to rabbits, guinea pigs, rats, mice and gerbils shall keep such animals in a pen, cage or enclosure meeting the requirements of section 18-27. When more than two but less than ten such animals are kept, such pen, cage or enclosure shall be at least 20 feet from any adjacent property line. In no event shall the total number of such animals be kept or maintained at any residence or property exceed ten. 
(b)  Small animals kept in or by a duly licensed or established shelter, veterinary clinic, pet store, zoo or educational or institutional research facility are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94)  
Sec. 18-29. - Keeping of fowl. 
(a)  Any person keeping fowl shall keep them in a pen, coop or enclosure meeting the requirements of section 18-27 of this article. No more than two such fowl may be kept on any single lot. 
(b)  Fowl kept in or by a duly licensed or established shelter, veterinary clinic, pet store, zoo or educational or institutional research facility are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94)  
Sec. 18-30. - Keeping of pigeons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor pigeons within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94)  
Sec. 18-31. - Keeping of livestock prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, pen or feed livestock or nondomesticated animals within the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 18-31(a), if the following conditions of this subsection are continuously met at all times, one pure-bred pot-bellied pig (hereinafter "the pig") may be kept, maintained, penned or fed at a residence which is utilized primarily as a residence by at least one person: 
(1)  The pig shall be maintained or kept within the interior of the primary structure or dwelling located on the residential property for at least ten hours during each calendar day; 
(2)  The area outside of the residential structure or dwelling where the pig is, from time to time, maintained, kept, penned or fed shall be enclosed by a fence having a height of not less than four feet; 
(3)  At least annually the pig shall be vaccinated for pseudorabies; 
(4)  At least annually, the pig shall be tested by a licensed veterinarian for brucellosis and pseudorabies; 
(5)  The pig shall not be infected with brucellosis or pseudorabies; 
(6)  The pig shall not be used in any commercial venture; it shall be kept and maintained solely as a pet for personal pleasure. 
(c)  Livestock or nondomesticated animals kept in or by a duly licensed animal shelter, veterinary clinic, pet store, zoo, educational or institutional research facility are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 5-2; Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94)  
Sec. 18-32. - Dangerous animals or reptiles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise, harbor, use, possess or have on his premises or under his control or attempted control any dangerous animals within the city. 
(b)  Dangerous animals kept in or by a duly licensed or established shelter, veterinary clinic, pet store, zoo, or educational or institutional research facility are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(c)  In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise, harbor, use, possess or have under his control or attempted control any animals commonly known as ratites, which include, but are not limited to ostrich, rhea, emu and cassowary. 
(Ord. No. O-93-14, § 1, 1-26-94)  
Chapter 26 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, adopted August 22, 2012, amended Ch. 26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 26, §§ 26-1—26-8, 26-31—26-40, 26-61—70, 26-81—26-88, 26-136—26-140, 26-161—26-176, 26-191—26-198, 26-210, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1980, §§ 7-1, 7-16—7-20, 7-22, 7-23, 7-25, 7-35—7-49, 7-61—7-65, 7-77, 7-90—7-103, 7-105—7-107. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Charter reference— Codes of technical regulations, § 2.14. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; land development code, ch. 54; manufactured and mobile homes, ch. 62; minimum ground anchor standards for mobile homes, § 62-3; nuisances, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 102; water and sewer connections, § 102-31 et seq.; individual water systems prohibited, § 102-32. 
State Law reference— Building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Floor elevations. 
(a)  The minimum floor elevation of residential, duplex, multiple-family residences, motels, or hotels constructed in the city shall be no less than 18 inches above the crown of the abutting improved street, and no less than six feet above mean sea level, whichever is the higher elevation. Specific standards for properties located in a flood zone shall be in accordance with chapter 46 floods. 
(b)  The minimum floor elevation of commercial and industrial structures, private or public garages, cabanas, utility rooms, storage rooms and similar structures constructed in the city shall be no less than six inches above the crown of the abutting improved street. The elevations of floors where alley right-of-way exists shall not be less than six inches above alley paving. The floor elevation cited under subsection (a) of this section shall comply with the elevations specified in this subsection and shall be no less than six feet above mean sea level, whichever is the higher elevation. Specific standards for properties located in a flood zone shall be in accordance with chapter 46 floods. 
(c)  The federal flood insurance rate maps, as amended, for the city are hereby incorporated into this Code by specific reference, a copy of which shall be available for inspection by the public in the office of community development. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-2. - Blockage or unreasonable obstruction of flow of water prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to block or unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water or designed drainage of water by any means, including construction, excavation, or fill of land. During any construction activity involving clearing or fill, the perimeter of the property shall be secured with a silt barrier meeting the standards of the water management district for such devices. 
Upon discovery of unreasonable obstructions to a public drainage facility during construction, on the first such incident a stop work order shall be issued for the job site and the contractor shall be given notice to restore the functional flow of water within 24 hours. If the drainage problem is not remedied within the 24 hours, the contractor shall be given a citation in the initial amount of $500.00, and an additional fine shall be levied in said amount for each 24 hour period thereafter until the obstruction is completely remedied. Subsequent violation shall result in an immediate citation without warning in accordance with this fine schedule. Additionally, no building code inspections will be performed on a property found in violation of this section until it comes back into compliance. 
Any structure, driveway, pipe excavation, or fill of land in violation of this section for more than 48 hours may be brought into compliance with this section by the city. The costs thereof shall be charged to both the contractor and owner and, if unpaid after three days, shall constitute a lien upon the property equal in dignity to the lien for taxes. 
Appeals of any such citation shall be made to the construction board and must be filed within 48 hours. The appeal shall be limited to the factual issues going to the validity of the violation or the existence of prior violations. 
Upon failure to pay citations or liens imposed under this section within three days of issuance or, if appealed, within three days of resolution of such appeal, no permits shall be issued for work in the city to the person owing such amounts. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-3. - Location of portable sanitary facilities. 
It shall be a condition of every building permit that any temporary sanitary facilities, such as portable toilets, be located at every construction site but shall not be placed within a public right-of-way in a manner that impedes the normal flow of traffic or obstructs sidewalks, or within ten feet of a waterway. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-4. - Trash receptacle required at site. 
It shall be a condition of every building permit that enclosed containers be located at the construction site sufficient for the storage and collection of loose debris, paper, building waste or other trash produced by those working on the site. In no event shall said trash receptacles be located with the right-of-way or drainage improvements. The number of containers required at the work site, and the frequency of disposal thereof shall be determined in the sound discretion of the building inspector, based upon the volume of refuse produced. 
Construction materials or other debris cast or scattered upon any adjacent public or private property as a result of construction activities shall be removed by the contractor not later than the end of each work day, or earlier if said materials cause a nuisance. Is the sound discretion of the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-5. - Maximum fill elevations. 
(a)  The maximum elevation to which fill may be placed upon a construction site to be served by a septic system shall be one foot above either the elevation set for the septic tank by the health department, or the applicable minimum floor elevation pursuant to section 26-1, above, whichever is greater. 
(b)  The maximum elevation to which fill may be placed upon a construction site not served by a septic system shall be one foot above the applicable minimum floor elevation pursuant to section 26-1, above. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-6. - Hours of construction limitations. 
Construction activities within the city limits shall only be allowed during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-7. - Display of building numbers. 
(a)  Definition of building. For purposes of this section, the term "building" shall include any structure that is designed for people to occupy or is designed for the storage of goods in connection with a commercial, charitable, civic or religious activity. The "building" shall be deemed to include a residence, a structure used in connection with any business, and including a warehouse, but shall not include a residential garage or a residential accessory building which is not used by any persons for purposes of conducting a business or for purposes of sleeping. 
(b)  Display of building numbers required. All buildings shall have the assigned address number displayed in a manner such that the building number is visible from the public or private street on which the building fronts, regardless of whether mail is delivered to the building. The address number to be displayed pursuant to this section shall be the address number assigned by the city, and no other address number shall be displayed except in accordance with the requirements of subsection (g) hereof. 
(c)  Condition of release of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy will be not be issued for a new building until the address number has been displayed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Timing of required compliance. All existing buildings which are not in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be brought into compliance by the owner of any such building within 14 days after the owner is provided with written notice of noncompliance by the city. 
(e)  Criteria governing compliance. A building shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of this section if the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  The address number is in Arabic numerals that are clear and in good condition; 
(2)  The material utilized for the number is constructed of weather resistant material and permanently affixed to the building or sign upon which it is displayed; 
(3)  The color and type of material which forms the address number is such that the address number is legible and reasonably identifiable from the street or improved right-of-way upon which the building fronts; 
(4)  Residential buildings shall have the address number that is at least four inches in height; 
(5)  Commercial and industrial buildings shall have its address number at least five inches in height; 
(6)  All buildings which have a monument sign on the same lot or parcel of land where the building is located shall display their address number on such sign and said address numbers shall not be parallel to the street and shall be on both sides of a two-sided sign. 
(f)  Lots with more than one building. In addition to the criteria set forth in subsection (e) hereof, if the owner of a parcel of a lot or tract of real property which has only one street address has more than one building located on that lot or tract or real property, then each building shall have a unit number assigned to it and the unit number shall be displayed in a manner that allows it to be observed from the street or improved road right-of-way upon which each such building fronts and in close proximity to the main entrance to each such building. 
(g)  Lots with a building having more than one unit. If a building, which has a single street address, has more than one residential unit, commercial unit or industrial unit, each such unit shall be assigned a separate number and each separate unit shall display its own unit number on or directly next to its main entrance for that unit. Each unit number shall be not less than five inches in height. The requirements of this paragraph are in addition to the requirements set forth in subsection (e) hereof. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-8. - Securing site during hurricane watch. 
(a)  Within 24 hours of issuance of an official hurricane watch or warning within the city limits, all contractors are required to secure construction sites under their control by: 
(1)  Removing all loose materials susceptible to becoming airborne during a storm; 
(2)  Taking reasonable measures to secure any structures or partially completed structures against wind intrusion; and 
(3)  Restoring normal drainage flow through any swales on the site, or adjacent swales impacted by construction. 
The city manager is authorized to promulgate, subject to council override by resolution, reasonable regulations having the legal effect of law to establish reasonable standards hereunder for securing a construction site. 
(b)  Violations hereof shall subject the contractor to penalties ranging from a fine of up to $1,000.00 per site, suspension of a contractor license for up to six months, or both. Actions for enforcement hereof shall be heard exclusively by the city construction board. Prior warning is not a condition precedent to the bringing of an enforcement action hereunder, and lack of actual notice of the existence of a hurricane watch or warning shall not be considered a defense in an action for enforcement. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-9—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Technical codes adopted. 
(a)  The city does hereby adopt as building codes for the city the below-listed editions, copies of which are on file in the office of the building department and which shall be accessible to the public upon request during the normal business hours of the community development department. Such codes, which shall be referred to as the standard codes, are hereby made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the city subject only to specific additions, deletions or amendments set out in the Code of Ordinances, provided, however, the latest editions set forth in the Florida Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall apply: 
(1)  Florida Building Code, less and except Chapter 1, Administration; and Chapter 1, Model Administrative Code 2010, Building Officials Association of Florida. 
(2)  NFPA 70: National Electrical Code 
(3)  Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(4)  Unsafe Structures Abatement Code of the City of Sebastian. 
For purposes of determining compliance with the Florida Building Code, the city adopts the following design strength wind speeds for risk categories I—IV as set forth in section 1609 and figures 1609 A, B, C. Specifically shown in "Indian River County Ultimate Design Wind Speeds Map" available at the building department. 
Risk Category I: 150 mph. 
Risk Category II: 160 mph. 
Risk Category III and IV: 170 mph. 
(b)  Future editions of the standard codes shall be reviewed by the building official and shall be presented to the city council for consideration of adoption and incorporation herein within 90 days of publication thereof. 
(c)  No construction shall be done within the city limits except in accordance with the standard codes listed in this section, as amended and/or expanded by the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(d)  The construction board established pursuant to section 26-191 of the City Code of Ordinances shall serve as the board of appeals to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the this code and the standard codes adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-32. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-33. - Building official; appointment, qualifications and duties. 
(a)  There shall be a building official for the city, who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(b)  The building official shall be qualified by education and training in accordance with state law to perform the duties of his office. 
(c)  The building official shall have authority to receive applications and issue building permits and to enforce the building code, building ordinances and standard codes adopted by the city. Neither the building official nor anyone under his or her direction shall enter any private property without the consent of the owner. The repair, vacation or demolition of unsafe buildings or structures shall be handled pursuant to the Unsafe Structures Abatement Code, as amended herein. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-34. - Unsafe Structures Abatement Code. 
(a)  Unsafe buildings and structures shall be abated according to the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code 2012 editions, promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., subject to all amendments, modifications, or deletions hereinafter contained. 
26-34.01. Title. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall be known as the Unsafe Structures Abatement Code of the City of Sebastian, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(c)  Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the Florida Existing Building Code. 
(d)  Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
26-34.02. Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(b)  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(c)  Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Florida Existing Building Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the standard codes adopted by the City of Sebastian. 
(d)  Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
(e)  Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(f)  Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official. 
(h)  Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
26-34.03. Definitions. 
(a)  Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter. 
(b)  Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. 
(c)  Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the Florida Building Code, Florida Fire Prevention Code or Code of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. 
(d)  Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(e)  Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
26-34.04. General definitions. 
Anchored. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection. 
Approved. Approved by the building official. 
Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit. 
Building official. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. 
Detached. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection. 
Deterioration. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a lot or lots. 
Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Guard. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
Habitable space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Imminent danger. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
Labeled. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose. 
Let for occupancy or let. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
Neglect. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure. 
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
Openable area. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
Pest elimination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved pest elimination methods. 
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon. 
Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
Rooming house. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
Sleeping unit. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units. 
Strict liability offense. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
Tenant. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
Toilet room. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
Workmanlike. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure. 
26-34.05. Duties and powers of the building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. 
(b)  Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a Florida Licensed Architect or Engineer. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 
(c)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the building official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(d)  Identification. The building official or appointee shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. 
26-34.06. Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with section 26-34.07. 
(c)  Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with section 26-34.07 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the building official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(d)  Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(e)  Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises. 
26-34.07. Notices and orders. 
(a)  Notice to person responsible. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in sections 26-34.07(b) and 26-34.07(c) to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for unsafe structure procedures shall also comply with section 26-34.08(h). 
(b)  Form. Such notice prescribed in section 26-34.07(a) shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  Be in writing. 
2.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
3.  Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
4.  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the building or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code. 
5.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
6.  Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with section 26-34.06(c). 
(c)  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
1.  Delivered personally to the owner; 
2.  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address of the owner, according to the official records of the Indian River County Property Appraiser or 
3.  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(d)  Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in section 26-34.06(d). 
(e)  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, unless such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
26-34.08. Unsafe structures and equipment. 
(a)  General. When a structure or equipment is found by the building official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be declared unsafe pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that it is not capable of resisting winds or similar loads as required by the Florida Building Code or partial or complete collapse is possible. 
(c)  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
(d)  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the building official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by the Florida Building Code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
(e)  Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under the standard codes of the City of Sebastian, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
(f)  Unsafe structure or premises. For the purpose of this code, any structure or premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered unsafe: 
1.  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic. 
2.  Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum requirements established by the Florida Building Code for new buildings or it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged. 
3.  Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting wind, or similar loads as required by the Florida Building Code for new buildings. 
4.  Any building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe or unsanitary for its use and occupancy. 
5.  Any building or structure that is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act. 
6.  Any building or structure that has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation or prohibition of any specific requirement applicable to such building or structure by the standard codes of the city, county or state law to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety. 
7.  A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, that because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the code official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(g)  Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post an unsafe structure placard on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the building official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource. 
(h)  Notice. Whenever the building official has declared a structure or equipment unsafe under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with section 26-34.07(c). If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the unsafe equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in section 26-34.07(b). 
(i)  Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the building official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word "Unsafe" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard. 
(j)  Placard removal. The building official shall remove the unsafe placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the unsafe condition and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes an unsafe placard without the approval of the building official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code. 
(k)  Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure declared unsafe and placarded by the building official shall be vacated as ordered by the building official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall permit anyone to occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. 
(l)  Abatement methods. The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the building official shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. 
(m)  Record. The building official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition. 
26-34.09. Emergency measures. 
(a)  Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Building Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
(b)  Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(c)  Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction may institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(d)  Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code. 
26-34.10. Demolition. 
(a)  General. The building official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the building official judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, the building official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the building official. 
(b)  Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with section 26-34.07. 
(c)  Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the building official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a tax lien upon such real estate. 
(d)  Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
26-34.11. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
(a)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. 
(b)  Barriers. Residential swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches in depth, shall have pool barriers as set forth in section 26-138. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-35. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-36. - Refusal of permit for fire hazard. 
No permit shall be granted for the construction or erection of any building, structure or addition thereto if such building when completed will constitute a fire hazard pursuant to the fire code adopted in section 42-46, the uniform fire standards in F.S. ch. 633 or with the Florida Fire Prevention Code adopted in section 26-31 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-37. - Sanitary facilities required. 
No permit shall be issued under this article for the construction or erection of any building, structure or addition thereto unless the sanitary facilities to be provided thereby shall meet the minimum requirements of the state regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-38, 26-39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-40. - Construction board to serve as board of appeals. 
(a)  The construction board established pursuant to section 26-191 of the City Code of Ordinances shall serve as the board of appeals to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code and the standard codes adopted by the city. 
(b)  Decisions of the construction board, pursuant to this section, may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the decision of the construction board. It shall require three affirmative votes of the city council to override the construction board. 
(c)  All references in the standard codes to the construction board of adjustments and appeals shall be deemed to refer to the construction board. Except as provided herein, the construction board shall have all the powers and duties of the construction board of adjustments and appeals. An application of an appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the standard codes or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the standard codes do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of the standard codes as amended herein. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the building official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members. 
(d)  Where an aggrieved party decides to appeal a decision, including a final order, of the building official, community development director or administrative official, the application of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days following the staff decision. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-41—26-65. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-66. - Powers and duties of building official. 
(a)  The city building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the standard codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application and provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of the standard codes, and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for therein. 
(b)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code. If such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises are unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(c)  All buildings and structures, regardless of type, which are unsafe or which constitute a hazard to human life, health or welfare are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the procedure as outlined in the unsafe structures abatement code. 
(d)  Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the standard codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(e)  The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any provisions of this code. 
(f)  The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the standard codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. In all such cases, no permit fees shall be refunded. 
(g)  The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the standard codes. 
(h)  The building official may give temporary permission to connect and furnish electric current to any wiring apparatus or fixtures for a period of not exceeding 30 days, if, in his opinion, such wiring apparatus or fixtures are in such condition that current may safely be connected therewith, and there exists an urgent necessity for such use, when written permission is filed with him, requesting such permission. 
(i)  Any person failing or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in the second degree and subject to fine or imprisonment as provided by section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-67. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health, or general welfare, not specifically covered in the standard codes, shall be determined by the building official subject to appeal to the construction board. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-68, 26-69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-70. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the construction board, charged with the enforcement of any of the codes established by this article, acting for the applicable governing body in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not be liable personally for ordinary negligence, and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for ordinary negligence for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee or member of the board upon an act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provisions of such codes shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings, and any judgments shall be the responsibility of the City of Sebastian. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-71—26-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 26-81. - Required; application. 
(a)  Before any building or structure of whatsoever nature shall be erected or constructed within the corporate limits of the city, or any addition shall be made to any existing building or structure within the corporate limits of the city, the owner, contractor, person building or responsible for building such building or structure or making such addition thereto shall complete an application for a building permit from the city for such erection, construction or addition. No building or structure shall be erected in the city nor any addition made to any existing building or structure in the city unless a permit therefore has been granted as provided by this article and no work shall be done in connection with any such building or addition unless such permit has been granted. All applications for such permit shall be made to the building official. Such applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall state thereon: 
(1)  The location of the proposed structure, building or addition; 
(2)  The owner and contractor or builder thereof; 
(3)  The distance of the building or structure from the street and property lines; 
(4)  The character of the building and the material of which the walls and roof are to be constructed; 
(5)  The purpose for which the building is to be used; and 
(6)  The approximate cost and dimensions thereof. The building permit fees will be based on the greater of the actual cost of the project or the approximate cost gained from the latest edition of "International Code Council Building Valuation Data". 
(7)  The application shall have the original signature of the owner or his authorized agent. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued until approved by the city building official. The city building official shall approve or reject the application for permit within a reasonable time after filing the submission of application for permit. 
(c)  The building permit shall be issued by the building official upon his approval. 
(d)  Building permit fees shall be established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-82. - Drawings and specifications. 
Whenever in the opinion of the building official, drawings and specifications are needed to show definitely the nature and character of the work for which the application is made, the applicant shall furnish such drawings and specifications. These drawings and specifications shall be drawn to scale and submitted in duplicate. If approved, one set shall be returned to the applicant marked "Reviewed for Code Compliance", and one set shall be retained and filed as a permanent record in the office of the building official. The applicant's approved set shall remain at all times on the job. Such information or drawings and specifications shall be specific, and the standard codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-83. - Examination of drawings. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith, and shall ascertain by such examination whether the work indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this article and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-84. - Action on application. 
(a)  If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith conform to the requirements of this article and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit therefore to the applicant. 
(b)  If the application for permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith describe work which does not conform to the requirements of this article or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the drawings to the applicant with his refusal to issue such a permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-85. - Conditions of permit. 
(a)  The building official shall act upon an application for a permit with plans as filed, or as amended, without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Once issued, a permit shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this article, nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this article. Any permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced; work shall be considered to be in active progress when the permit has received an approved inspection within 180 days. If work has commenced and the permit is revoked, becomes null and void or expires because of lack of progress or abandonment, a new permit covering the proposed construction shall be obtained before proceeding with the work. If a new permit is not obtained within 180 days from the date the initial permit became null and void, the building official is authorized to require that any work which has been commenced or completed be removed from the building site. Alternatively, a new permit may be issued on application, provided the work in place and required to complete the structure meets all applicable regulations in effect at the time the initial permit became null and void and any regulations which may have become effective between the date of expiration and the date of issuance of the new permit. provided, that for cause, one or more extensions of time for periods not exceeding 90 days each, may be allowed in writing by the building official. The fees for renewal, reissuance and extension of a permit shall be set forth by resolution. 
(b)  Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. 
(c)  Upon approval of the building official, the scope of work delineated in the building permit application and plan may be started prior to final approval and issuance of permit, provided any work completed is entirely at risk of the permit applicant and the work does not proceed past the first required inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-86. - Schedule of fees. 
(a)  No permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed in this article shall have been paid; nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fees, if any, shall have been paid. 
(b)  If any person commences any work before obtaining the necessary permit, he shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in this article. 
(c)  When application for permit is approved and before a permit is issued, a fee therefore shall be paid as established in a schedule of fees by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-87. - Inspections. 
(a)  Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the standard codes or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the City of Sebastian shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(b)  The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by the standard codes. He or she may accept reports of department inspectors, independent inspectors or of recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their licensure, qualifications and reliability. A certificate required by any provision of this code shall not be based on such reports unless the same are recorded by the building code inspector or the architect or engineer performing building code inspections in a manner specified by the building official. The building official shall ensure that all persons making such inspections shall be certified in accordance to Chapter 468, Florida Statutes. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by the standard codes. To the maximum extent feasible, scheduled inspections will be performed by the next working business day. 
(d)  Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with the standard codes. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(e)  The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-88. - Certificates of occupancy and completion 
(a)  No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the standard codes or of other ordinances of the City of Sebastian. 
(b)  The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. 
(c)  The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of the standard codes wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the standard codes. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-89. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(b)  The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. 
(c)  Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by section 1-10 (General penalty; continuing violations) and sections 2-194, 2-195 (Enforcement procedures) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-90—26-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENERGY CODE 
 
Secs. 26-111—26-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 26-136. - Construction to conform to article. 
No swimming pool shall be built or constructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article and with the Florida Building Code adopted in section 26-31 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-137. - Permit. 
(a)  Applications for a permit for the construction, installation, alteration or major repair of a swimming pool must be as set forth in the building code adopted by the city. 
(b)  No building permit shall be finalized and no pool placed in use until the requirements of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-138. - Enclosure required. 
Residential swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a permanently installed fence or barrier of not less than four feet in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Fences shall not be more than six feet in height. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Gates that provide access to the swimming pool must open outward away from the pool. The self-latching device shall be a minimum of 54 inches above the bottom of the gate; the release mechanism may be located on either side of the gate and so placed that it cannot be reached by a young child over the top or through any opening or gap from the outside. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. Residential swimming pool fence, barrier or enclosure that is new, removed, repaired, replaced or modified shall be made to meet the requirements of the Pool Safety Act in F.S. § 515. Each fence, barrier or screen enclosure must be approved by the building official. 
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-139. - Diving boards. 
No diving board shall be installed in a pool whose greatest depth is less than seven feet. No diving board shall be installed in a pool less than 30 feet long. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-140. - Ladders and ropes. 
Pools having a depth greater than three and one-half feet shall be provided with steps or ladder. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-141—26-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CONTRACTORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Application for permit means any permit application made under any building code or technical code contained in or adopted by reference in the Code of Ordinances of the city and the Land Development Code, as such have been, or may be, amended, including all documents submitted with any permit application. 
Apprentice plumbers and electricians Apprentice plumbers shall perform plumbing only under the direct supervision of a master plumber or under the direct supervision of a journeyman plumber. Apprentice electricians shall perform electrical work only under the direct supervision of a master electrician or under the direct supervision of a journeyman electrician. Direct supervision means that the respective supervision is performed on the job site in person by the respective supervisor. 
Board means the city construction board created under this article unless the context otherwise requires. 
Certificate means a certificate of competency issued by the board as provided in this article. 
Certification means the act of obtaining or holding a certificate of competency from the board as provided in this article. 
Contracting means, except as exempted by this article, engaging in business as a contractor. 
Contractor means any person who engages in business under expressed or implied contract in any of the trades as defined in this article or who undertakes or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake, or submits a bid to, or does himself, or by or through others, engage in the business of doing a trade, and who holds a certificate of competency as provided by this article to perform the work of the particular trade in which such person is engaged. 
(1)  General contractors are those whose services shall be unlimited as to the height, area and complexity of construction being undertaken. A general contractor shall have the knowledge gained by five years of experience in a supervisory capacity for a general contractor or building contractor or as a licensed building contractor for such period or shall have an education and experience equivalent thereto. A general contractor shall subcontract to a qualified contractor all work being the exclusive work of plumbing, electrical and HARV contractors, provided, however, on new site development work, site redevelopment work, mobile home parks and commercial properties, the obligation to subcontract shall not prohibit the general contractors from constructing the main sanitary sewer collection system and the main water distribution system not including the continuation of utility lines from the mains to the buildings, which utility lines shall be constructed by plumbing contractors. As to mobile home parks, the continuation of utility lines from the mains are to be considered a part of the main sewer collection and main water distribution systems. A general contractor may do, contract for, and take out permits for installing room air conditioners and for the work of any specialty contractor, excepting that of air conditioning contractors, refrigeration contractors, and elevator contractors. 
(2)  Building contractors are those whose services are limited to construction of commercial buildings and single or multiple dwelling residential buildings, neither to exceed three stories in height or 35 feet, and accessory use structures in connection herewith, or those whose services are limited to remodeling, repair, or improvement of any size building if the services do not affect the structural members of the building. A building contractor shall have the knowledge gained by not less than four years' experience in a supervisory capacity or shall have an education and experience equivalent thereto, as defined for a general contractor or a building contractor or have been a licensed residential building contractor for such period. A building contractor shall subcontract to a qualified contractor all work being the exclusive work of plumbing, electrical, and HARV contractors. A building contractor may take out permits for installing room air conditioners and for the work of any specialty contractor within the limits of work of a building contractor, except that of air conditioning contractors, refrigeration contractors, and elevator contractors. 
(3)  Residential building contractors are those whose services are limited to construction, remodeling, demolition, repair or improvement of one-, two- or three-family unit residences not exceeding two stories in height and accessory use structures in connection therewith. A residential building contractor shall have the experience, knowledge, and skill gained by not less than three years' experience in a supervisory capacity for a general, building or residential contractor or educational equivalent thereto, as defined in this section. A residential building contractor shall subcontract to a qualified contractor all work being the exclusive work of plumbing, electrical and HARV contractors. A residential building contractor may take out permits for installing room air conditioners, and for the work of any specialty contractor within the limits of work of a residential building contractor except that of air conditioning contractors, refrigeration contractors, and elevator contractors. 
(4)  Plumbing contractors are those who can qualify as master plumbers with a minimum of five years' experience, three of which shall have been as a journeyman plumber in a supervisory capacity with educational equivalency as defined in this section, who can assume responsible charge and direction of other persons in the installation of plumbing, which shall mean all work done in connection with the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances, appurtenances thereto and apparatus or equipment used in connection with a water supply and sewage disposal system; to install, maintain, repair, alter or extend any system of piping, tubing, vessels, containers, pump, apparatus and appurtenances in connection with such pressure piping used for the circulating, transporting, holding or processing of any vapor, fluid, liquid, semi-liquid or solids, inside of, or attached to, any building, lot or premises. A plumbing contractor shall subcontract to a qualified contractor all other work incidental to the work which is specified in this section as being the work of a trade other than that of a plumbing contractor. 
(5)  Electrical contractors are those who can qualify as master electricians with at least five years' experience, three of which shall have been as a journeyman electrician in a supervisory capacity, with educational equivalency as defined in this section, to assume responsible charge and direction of other persons in the installation of electrical work, which shall mean all work done in connection with the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of a system for electrical wiring for lights, heat or power and all appurtenances thereto and all apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith including that of a room air conditioning unit only, and all electrical specialties. An electrical contractor shall subcontract to a qualified contractor all other work of a trade other than that of an electrical contractor. 
(6)  HARV, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration, and ventilation contractors are those who can qualify by four years' experience in a supervisory capacity, or shall have an education and experience equivalent thereto, with the educational equivalency as defined in this section, to perform the following: install, maintain, repair, alter or extend air conditioning, refrigeration, heating, ventilation, unlimited in horsepower or tons, including all duct systems, boiler and unfired pressure vessel systems and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith; also piping, ductwork, insulation of pipes, vessels and ducts. A HARV contractor shall subcontract to a qualified contractor all other work incidental to the work which is specified in this section as being the work of a trade other than that of a HARV contractor. 
(7)  Specialty contractors are those who specialize in one or more crafts of the building construction and related contracting trades whose scope is less than those contractors defined above and as limited under the certificate of competency issued by the board to such specialty contractor. The board may further classify and define specialty contractors in such rules and regulations it promulgates in accordance with this article. All specialty contractors whose trade is tested by Prometric Services or other comparable testing agency must take such examination and receive a passing grade of at least 70 percent on the examination for their trade which is administered by the testing agency. 
(8)  Solar water heating contractors. Solar water heating contractor is a specialty contractor qualified to execute contracts requiring the skill, knowledge, ability and experience to size, install, alter, repair, maintain, relocate, replace or use solar water to include solar heating panels and all appurtenances, apparatus, or equipment to be used in connection therewith. A solar water heating contractor shall contract only to size, install, alter, repair, maintain, relocate or replace any and all solar hot water systems and solar swimming pool heaters. The solar water heating contractor shall have any work for which a local certificate of competency is required performed by someone holding a current and valid certificate of competency to perform that work, unless such contractor is himself certified in the applicable trade category. 
Department means the state department of business and professional regulation or, where applicable, the state construction industry licensing board. 
Investigator means an individual authorized by the city council to enforce the provisions of this article and who has the authority to issue citations. Investigator shall include the director of community development, the building official and code enforcement officers, as well as those individuals authorized by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time. 
Journeymen means those who qualify after four years' minimum experience, and shall only perform work in the plumbing and electrical trades while employed by, and serving under the supervision of, a certified plumbing or electrical contractor. 
Person means an individual, any business or non-business entity, corporation, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, trust, estate, club or society. 
State certification means the act of obtaining or holding a certificate of competency from the department as provided in F.S. ch. 489 (1989), as amended from time to time, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereto. 
State certified means any contractor who possesses a certificate of competency issued by the department and who is allowed to contract in any jurisdiction in the state without being required to fulfill the competency requirements of the city under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-162. - Purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the city council that, in order to safeguard the life, health, property and public welfare of its citizens, the business of construction and home improvements is a matter affecting the public interest, and any person engaging in such business shall be required to establish his competency and qualifications as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-163. - Application of article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article limits the power of the city to regulate the quality and character of work performed by contractors through a system of permits, fees and inspections which are designed to secure compliance with and aid in the implementation of state and local building laws or to enforce other local laws for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(b)  Nothing in this article limits the power of the city to collect business tax receipts and inspection fees for engaging in contracting. 
(c)  Nothing in this article limits the power of the city to adopt any system or permits requiring submission to and approval by the city of plans and specifications for work to be performed by contractors before commencement of the work. 
(d)  Any official authorized to issue building or other related permits shall ascertain that the applicant contractor is duly certified before issuing the permit. The evidence shall consist only of the exhibition to him of current evidence of certification. 
(e)  This article applies to any contractor performing work for the state, county or municipality as well as work for private persons. They are required to determine compliance with this article before giving a commencement order on any of its contracts for construction, improvement, remodeling or repair. 
(f)  If an incomplete contract exists at the time of death of a contractor, the contract may be completed or continued by any person even though not certified; however, an alternate contractor shall be qualified within a period of 90 days. Such person shall notify the board of his name and address within 30 days after the death of the contractor. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-164. - Exemptions. 
The exemptions provided by F.S. § 489.103(1989), as amended, shall also constitute exemptions from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-165. - Certification procedures. 
(a)  To obtain a certificate an applicant shall submit an application in writing to the construction board containing the statement that the applicant desires the issuance of a certificate and the class of certificate desired on a form containing the information prescribed by the construction board and shall be accompanied by the fee fixed by this article. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to issuance of a certificate, the board shall require the license holder to submit satisfactory evidence that he has obtained public liability insurance in the following amounts: 
(1)  General contractor, building contractor and residential building contractor: Not less than $100,000.00 property insurance; and not less than $300,000.00 personal liability insurance, 
(2)  All others: Not less than $50,000.00 property insurance; and not less than $100,000.00 personal liability insurance, together with evidence of workers' compensation insurance or certificate that he has complied with the state workers' compensation law. All evidence of insurance must be filed with the building official. Thereupon, the certificate shall be issued forthwith, but this subsection does not apply to the issuance or renewal of inactive certificates. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-166. - Certificates issued by reciprocal agreement 
(a)  The board may by reciprocity grant a certificate of competency to any applicant who has obtained a certificate of competency in any other county or city in the state having codes and conducting examinations which are, in the opinion of the board, substantially equal to those of the city, upon the applicant furnishing proof of insurance coverage required hereunder and payment of the applicant fee herein provided and furnishing to the board in writing all information as required by section 26-165. Certificates issued through reciprocity shall be subject to all of the other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-167. - Fees. 
Contractor licensing fees shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-168. - Renewal of certificate. 
(a)  Certificates shall expire annually at midnight at the end of the fiscal year of the city. 
(b)  Failure to renew the certificate during the last month of the fiscal year of the city shall cause the certificate to become inoperative, and it shall be unlawful from the beginning of the following fiscal year of the city for any persons to engage or offer to engage or hold himself out as engaging in contracting under a certificate unless the certificate is restored or reissued. 
(c)  A certificate which is inoperative because of failure to renew shall be restored on payment of the proper renewal fee. A penalty fee of ten percent shall be assessed if not renewed within 15 days from the date of expiration. A penalty of 20 percent shall be assessed if renewed within 180 days from the date of expiration. If the application for restoration is not made within the 180-day period but before the next fiscal year of the city, the fee for restoration shall be equal to the original application fee plus penalty. If the application for restoration is not made before the beginning of the next fiscal year of the city, the fee for restoration shall be double the original renewal fee and in addition the board may require reexamination of the applicant. A certificate which is not renewed within three full years after expiration may not be renewed, restored or reinstated thereafter except by reapplication and reexamination. 
(d)  A person who holds a valid certificate from the board may go on inactive status during which time he shall not engage in contracting but may retain his certificate on an inactive basis on payment of an annual renewal fee during the inactive period, as established by resolution of the city council. An inactive certificate can be activated only by application to and approval of the board, on the proper forms. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-169. - Payment and performance bonds. 
(a)  The board is authorized to require a contractor who holds a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article, including a corporation or other entity which the certificate holder has qualified, to obtain a payment and performance bond as a prerequisite to being able to obtain a building permit or other development order from the city if, after an evidentiary hearing thereon which provides due process to the adversely affected parties, the board finds that the contractor or the entity which such contractor has qualified presents a substantial risk of not being able or willing to fully complete a job or project for which a building permit or other development order is requested or needed to authorize the job or project. Evidence on which such a finding of the need for such a bond may be based shall consist of any one or more of the following findings of fact: 
(1)  A claim of lien in excess of $2,000.00 has been filed in connection with the real property the contractor or entity which the contractor has qualified is working on, whereby the claim of lien avers that the contractor or entity has not made proper payment to the lienor, and the claim of lien has not been released or satisfied within 60 days of the filing of such claim of lien with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(2)  The contractor or entity which the contractor has qualified has a judgment for money damages entered by a court of competent jurisdiction against such contractor or entity and the judgment is reasonably related to the type of work for which the requested building permit or other development order relates, and the judgment has not been released or otherwise satisfied. 
(3)  The contractor or entity which the contractor has qualified has failed to substantially complete performance of any other contract for work of the type that is the subject of the requested building permit or other development order and the failure to substantially complete performance of the contract is reasonably within the control of the contractor or the entity which the contractor has qualified. 
(4)  Any officer, director, shareholder, partner, joint venturer, trustee or employee of a business entity that is seeking the building permit or other development order was an officer, director, shareholder, partner, joint venturer, trustee or employee of another business entity at a time when the other entity violated any of the provisions of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section. 
(5)  For any other violation provided for in this section if the violation could reasonably render the contractor, or the entity which the contractor has qualified, at substantial risk of not being able to fully complete the job or project for which the building permit or other development order is required. 
(b)  The amount of the payment and performance bond shall be set by the board and may be in an amount equal to the contract price, if any, or the full estimated cost to complete the job or project for which the building permit or other development order pertains. 
(c)  The requirement to obtain a payment and performance bond may also be one of the conditions prescribed in subsection (a)(4) of this section, if such bond is reasonably related to the type of violation found by the board to have occurred. The board shall determine who shall be the beneficiary of any such bond. The authority to require a bond shall not be imposed, however, if the contractor or the entity which the contractor has qualified is certified in the specific trade by the department or other state agency, and if such state certification prohibits the imposition of a payment and performance bond as a matter of law under applicable state statutes. The burden of establishing that a state law preempts the imposition of a bond shall be upon the contractor or the entity which the contractor has qualified. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-170. - Records and examinations. 
(a)  All information provided to the board by any applicant for certification shall be a public record except to the extent exempted from the provisions of requiring public access to public records under the laws of the state. Any applicants for a certificate of competency shall be informed that their application, examination scores and other financial records which are received by the city shall become a public record. 
(b)  If a certificate holder changes his name style, address or employment from that which appears on his current certificate, he shall notify the board of the change within ten days after it occurs. 
(c)  All prior examinations shall be retained for a period of three years from the date of examination. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-171. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor without being a state certified contractor holding a state certification or being in lawful possession of a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person who possesses a current certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article or a state certification issued by the department to contract with or utilize the services of another person engaging in the business or acting in the capacity of a contractor where such other person does not hold a state certification or a certificate of competency for engaging in the type of contracting business that such other person operates in the corporate limits of the city. This prohibition shall be enforceable even if the unlicensed contractor does not have an office in the city, so long as the unlicensed contractor performs or contracts to perform the services of a contractor in the corporate limits of the city for the person holding a state certification or a certificate of authority issued by the board pursuant to this article. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person required to possess, but not possessing, a current certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article or a state certification issued by the department to advertise to the public in a newspaper, magazine, handbill, flyer, airwave transmission or telephone directory, or by issuance of a card or other communication or other advertising medium, that he is a contractor or is qualified to act in business as a contractor, pursuant to a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article or a state certification issued by the department. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a contractor who possesses a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article or a state certification issued by the department to fail to include his certificate of competency number or state certification or registration number in any publication which is primarily circulated, displayed, distributed or marketed within the city which advertisement identifies a contractor or entity offering services regulated by F.S. ch. 489, as amended from time to time, or by this article, unless the advertisement included the certificate of competency number or state certification or registration number issued to that contractor. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring that the publisher not publish any advertisement which does not include a certificate of competency number or a state certification or registration number, nor determine or investigate whether a certificate of competency number or a state certification or registration number is required, whether the license number given is accurate, nor determine or investigate whether the person whom the advertisement is published is state certified or holds a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-172. - Causes for disciplinary action. 
The following Acts constitute cause for disciplinary action under this article: 
(1)  Willful or deliberate disregard or violation of the applicable building codes of the city. 
(2)  Aiding or abetting a person who is not a state certified contractor or a contractor who possesses a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article to evade any provision of this article. Utilizing or contracting with an unlicensed contractor or subcontractor is prima facie evidence of engaging in such an Act. 
(3)  Knowingly combining or conspiring with an uncertified person with the intent to evade the provisions of this article. When a person holding a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article or a state certification allows his certificate or state certification to be used by one or more companies without having any active participation in the operations, management or control of such companies, this Act shall constitute prima facie evidence of an intent to evade the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Acting in the capacity of a contractor under any certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article or any state certification issued by the department, except in the name of the certificate holder as set forth on the issued certificate of competency or the state certification or in accordance with the personnel of the certificate holder as set forth in the application for the certificate or state certification, or as later changed as provided in this article or pursuant to F.S. ch. 489, as amended from time to time, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(5)  Diversion of funds or property received for the completion of a specified construction project or operation or as a result of the diversion the contractor is or will be unable to fill the terms of his obligation or contract. 
(6)  Failure in any material respect to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Failure to maintain insurance coverage as set by the board. 
(8)  Failure to provide proof of worker's compensation insurance to the building official or his designees upon demand for such proof. 
(9)  Falsification of application or testimony given before the board. 
(10)  Abandonment of a construction project in which the contractor is engaged or under contract as a contractor. A project is to be considered abandoned if the contractor terminates such project without notification to the prospective owner or current owner for at least 30 days without just cause, such as acts of God causing construction delay. 
(11)  Giving or offering to give, directly or indirectly, any city employee, council member, board member or the city manager anything of value, monetary or otherwise, with intent to influence such employee or board member in the discharge of his duties under the provisions of this article. 
(12)  Attempting or threatening to coerce or coercing through physical act, injury or damage to the city manager, or to any council member, board member, city employee or any family member or property of any board member or city employee, with intent to influence such board member or employee in the discharge of his duties under the provisions of this article. 
(13)  The filing of a petition in bankruptcy, either voluntarily or involuntarily, the making of an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver for a contractor or an entity which is qualified to engage in the business of a contractor by the holder of a certificate of competency issued by the board or a state certification issued by the department. Provided, however, that such act shall only empower the board to take such action as allowable under the laws of the state or the United States of America, or to the extent otherwise allowable pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-173. - Miscellaneous general provisions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be deemed supplemental to, and not in conflict with or in preemption of, the provisions of article VI, division 2 of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances concerning the code enforcement special magistrate. To the extent provided in such article, the special magistrate shall have concurrent jurisdiction over the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All rules and regulations established by the board shall require approval by the city council before such rules have force and effect. 
(c)  Any contractor who possesses a valid and active certificate of competency issued by Indian River County, Florida, as of July 10, 1991, shall be entitled to have a comparable certificate of competency issued by the board. In addition, any floor covering contractor who possesses a valid and active certificate of competency issued by Indian River County, Florida, on or before December 31, 1991, shall be entitled to have a comparable certificate of competency issued by the board. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-174. - Enforcement of article. 
Investigators under the direction of the director of community development or his designee are hereby charged with the enforcement responsibilities of this article. An investigator is authorized to issue citations for any violation under this article when, based upon personal investigation, the investigator has reasonable probable grounds to believe that a violation under any provision of this article has occurred. Investigators shall not have the power of physical arrest nor shall they be authorized pursuant to this article to bear arms. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to authorize or permit any investigator to perform any function or duty of a law enforcement officer other than as specified in this article. An investigator may also issue any person a notice of hearing in lieu of a citation whereby the alleged violator would then appear before the board in accordance with section 26-197(5). 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-175. - Penalties; appeals. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties that may be imposed and other remedies that may be available to the city which are provided for elsewhere in this section, any person who violates any provisions of section 26-171 or commits any of the acts constituting cause for disciplinary action as set forth in section 26-172 shall be guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-10 
(b)  In addition to the penalties and other remedies that may be imposed elsewhere in this section, the board may issue a cease and desist order to prohibit any person from engaging in the business of contracting who does not hold the required state certification or local certificate of competency for any work being performed by that person or his employees or agents under this article. 
(c)  If a state certified contractor or a contractor possessing a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article is found by the board, after a due process hearing, to be guilty of fraud or a willful building code violation in the city, or if the board possesses proof that such contractor, through a due hearing process, has been found guilty in another city or county within the 12-month period of fraud or a willful building code violation, and the board finds, after providing notice to the contractor, that such fraud or violation would have been fraud or a violation of a building code of the city if committed in the city, then the board may, in addition to the penalties that may be imposed, and other remedies that may be available to the city which are provided for elsewhere in this section, deny the issuance of a building permit to such contractor or issue a building permit with specific conditions which the board determines to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. The board shall provide notification of, and information concerning, any denial of a building permit pursuant to this provision to the department within 15 days after the board decides to deny such building permit. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties that may be imposed and other remedies that may be available to the city which are provided for elsewhere in this section, the board may impose an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, fines may include additional fees for investigative and legal costs incurred in the context of certain disciplinary cases heard by the board, which shall be recoverable by the board only in an action at law. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties that may be imposed and other remedies that may be available to the city which are provided for elsewhere in this section, the board is authorized to take the following disciplinary actions against the holder of a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article, where such holder has been found to violate section 26-171 or has engaged in any of the acts or omissions which constitute cause for disciplinary action pursuant to section 26-172. 
(1)  Suspend the certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article during the period fixed by the board, but the board may permit the certificate holder to complete any contracts then uncompleted; 
(2)  Revoke the certificate of competency previously issued by the board pursuant to this article; or 
(3)  Place the certificate holder on probation for a period fixed by the board, but not in excess of three years. 
(f)  In addition to the penalties that may be imposed and other remedies that may be available to the city which are provided for elsewhere in this section, the board shall be empowered to refuse to issue building permits or to issue building permits containing specific conditions to protect the public health, safety and general welfare to a contractor who is state certified or who holds a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article who has committed multiple violations of this article when such contractor has been disciplined for each of such violations by the board and when each disciplinary action has involved revocation or suspension of the state certification by the department or has involved revocation or suspension of the certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article, the imposition of an administrative fine of at least $1,000.00 or probation. Furthermore, the board shall be empowered to issue permits with specific conditions designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare to a state certified contractor or a contractor who holds a certificate of competency issued by the board pursuant to this article who, within the previous 12 months, has had final action taken against him by the department, or by the board when the board has reported such disciplinary action against the contractor to the department where the contractor has engaged in the business or acted in the capacity of a contractor without a license. 
(g)  In addition to the penalties that may be imposed and other remedies that may be available to the city which are provided for elsewhere in this section, the board shall be empowered to restrain any violation of this article by filing the appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief. 
(h)  Appeal shall be by certiorari. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-176. - Savings clause. 
It is the intent of the city that the provisions of this article be construed as being consistent with the inherent municipal powers of the city and supplemental to, and consistent with, the provisions of F.S. ch. 489 (1989), as amended from time to time. However, it is the intent of the city to reserve the power to regulate state certified contractors to the extent not inconsistent with the laws of the state, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-177—26-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD 
 
Sec. 26-191. - Membership; terms; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The city construction board shall be composed of seven members and, as far as practical, shall consist of two licensed or certified contractors (residential, building, general), one electrical contractor, one heating and ventilation contractor, one architect or engineer, one plumbing contractor, and one concerned citizen. The city council may also appoint one or two alternate members who shall serve as necessary to assemble a maximum of seven voting members of the board. It is preferred that the alternate members consist of one licensed or certified contractor and one concerned citizen. All members and alternate members shall be appointed by the city council, pursuant to section 2-170 of this Code. 
(b)  To be eligible for appointment, except as otherwise provided in this section, each contractor member shall be actively engaged in construction in the city, [or] have an established business in the city limits. 
(c)  Each member of the board shall currently or formerly hold a valid license or certificate issued by the board or the state in addition to having the qualifications required in subsection (b) of this section, excepting the one concerned citizen member and alternate concerned citizen. A member who formerly held a license or certificate, but retired with that license or certificate in good standing, may be considered qualified for an appropriate seat and is exempt from section (b) above. If any member of the board, at any time during his term, no longer possesses the required qualifications because of adverse action being taken against his/her license or certificate by a proper authority, such member shall be automatically suspended for 30 days; then, unless qualified within 30 days, shall be replaced. 
(d)  Of the regular members appointed to the board: 
(1)  Two members shall be appointed for an initial term of one year; 
(2)  Three members shall be appointed for an initial term of two years; and 
(3)  Two members shall be appointed for an initial term of three years. 
Thereafter all appointments shall be made for a term of three years. All terms of office shall expire on September 30 of the last year of the term. 
(e)  Each alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
(f)  Any member may be reappointed, subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12; Ord. No. O-18-09, § 1, 8-8-18)  
Sec. 26-192. - Meetings; quorum; officers; rules and regulations; budget. 
(a)  The board shall meet regularly as the need presents itself. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum. A majority of the members present shall be required to act. 
(b)  The board shall elect officers from its membership. Whenever possible, the person selected as the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the board shall have served two years as a regular member of the board and shall have attended at least 90 percent of the meetings of the board in which such member was not otherwise excused from attending by the individual serving as the chairperson of the board at such meetings. 
(c)  The board is authorized to adopt rules and regulations to carry out provisions of this article. The board may from time to time change, alter or amend the rules and regulations adopted. 
(d)  Special meetings of the board may be held as the board provides in its rules and regulations. 
(e)  All revenues received by the board shall be deposited with the city. The board shall annually submit a budget to the city council for its expenses. The board or any member thereof shall not receive any salary, expenses, or any other funds without approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-193. - Oaths and testimony. 
Any member of the board or duly appointed hearing officer designated by the board may administer oaths and take testimony about all matters within the jurisdiction of the board. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-194. - Seal. 
The board shall adopt a seal for its use containing the words "City of Sebastian Construction Board." 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-195. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall receive no salary or compensation for attendance at meetings, but may be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties in accordance with procedures established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-196. - Reserved.  
Sec. 26-197. - Powers and duties. 
The construction board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Advice to the city council. On its own initiative or whenever requested to do so by the city council, to give advice to the city council and to other public officials or employees with reference to any matter affecting contractors or the construction industry within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Reviewing city building and housing codes . To advise the city council concerning the city building and housing codes, their adoption, their amendment, and the revision of the minimum state building codes or any standard published code or technical regulation which constitutes all or part of such codes or of this chapter. 
(3)  Examination of contractor's license holders and applicants therefore. To examine or cause to be examined holders of contractor's licenses within the city or applicants for such license, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Review of violations of this article . On the motion of the board, on a notice of hearing issued by an investigator or on the verified written complaint of any person, the board may review the actions of any person, including a contractor that has been issued a certificate of competency by the board pursuant to this article or a state certified contractor, who has violated any provision of this article. The board may hold due process hearings and thereafter take appropriate disciplinary action as authorized pursuant to this article if the person, including a state certified contractor or a contractor holding a certificate of competency from the board pursuant to this article and including an entity qualified by a contractor who is state certified or holds a certificate of competency from the board pursuant to this article, is found to be in violation of one or more of the acts or omissions constituting a prohibited activity pursuant to section 26-171 or constituting cause for disciplinary action pursuant to section 26-172 to the extent not reserved to the department to the exclusion of the board. 
(5)  Coordinate investigations with other governmental agencies. To cooperate with other governmental agencies, local, state and federal, with reference to any matter affecting contractors or the construction industry within the corporate limits of the city. 
(6)  Subpoena powers . The board shall have the authority to subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. The city, the board or the alleged violator may request that witnesses and records be subpoenaed to any emergency or formal hearing. Subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as civil subpoenas are served under Florida Statutes and the Florida Civil Rules of Procedure. The chairman of the board shall provide the clerk with sufficient signed and blank witness subpoenas to be provided to alleged violators and the city attorney for the purpose of subpoenaing witnesses and records. 
(7)  Other. The board shall perform such other duties as may be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Sec. 26-198. - Administration. 
In order to carry out the intent of this article, the city council hereby appoints the following officials to assist the construction board in performing its duties: 
(1)  Building official. The building official, or his authorized representative, shall have the primary duty of enforcing the various codes and initiating disciplinary proceedings before the board, and shall make such recommendations or reports to the board as needed on each matter considered by it. 
(2)  Clerk. The building official shall appoint a city employee to be the board clerk. The clerk shall record all meetings of the board and shall prepare minutes of each meeting, which shall state all motions, the vote of each member upon each question or motion, and a statement as to any member who is absent or failing to vote. The minutes of the board may be in a summary or outline form, but shall accurately reflect the deliberations of the board. The clerk shall perform such other functions assigned to the clerk by the board. 
(3)  Legal counsel . The city attorney shall advise and be counsel to the board. The legal counsel shall be compensated as provided by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Secs. 26-199—26-209. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
Sec. 26-210. - Development agreements; generally. 
Upon compliance with the applicable provisions of the Florida Local Government Development Agreement Act, as set forth in F.S. § 163.3220 et seq., as amended from time to time, the city council shall have the authority, by resolution, to authorize the mayor or city manager to enter into a development agreement on behalf of the city with the owner of real property located in the city, which allows the property owner to proceed with the development of the owner's real property in accordance with existing laws and policies, subject to the terms and conditions of the development agreement. 
(Ord. No. O-12-08, § 1, 8-22-12)  
Chapter 30 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of finance director, § 2-109; alcoholic beverages establishments, ch. 10; amusements and entertainment, ch. 14; adult entertainment, § 14-26 et seq.; contractors, § 26-161 et seq.; vault companies and grave diggers, § 34-51 et seq.; alarm systems, ch. 30; manufacturing and industrial plants, fish houses, etc., prohibited in certain areas, § 50-3; secondhand goods, ch. 82; junk, § 86-46 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 106. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. O-95-11, § 1, adopted June 14, 1995, amended §§ 30-27—30-52 by replacing them with new §§ 30-27—30-51. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 14-2—14-19, 14-21—14-29 of the 1980 Code; Ord. No. O-92-22, § 1, 10-14-92. 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; alarm system licenses, § 39-29. 
State Law reference— Local occupation license taxes, F.S. ch. 205. 
 
Sec. 30-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person desiring to obtain a license under the provisions of this article. 
Business means any activity, enterprise, profession or occupation performed or engaged in by any person for gain, benefit, advantage or livelihood, and shall include all such activities or enterprises whether performed in one or more establishments by one or more organizational units, including departments of an establishment operated through leasing arrangements. For purposes of this article, a business not-for-profit shall be included within the terms of this definition unless otherwise exempted. 
Chief executive officer means the city manager and/or his designee. 
Classification means the business a person has been designated to fall within under the schedule provided for in this article. 
Contractor means any person: 
(1)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or structure requiring the use of building materials; 
(2)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts to do any paving or curbing on sidewalks or streets, public or private property, requiring the use of appropriate materials or any compositions; 
(3)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts to excavate earth, rock or material for foundations or any purpose; 
(4)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for building, remodeling, repairing, wrecking, razing or demolishing any structure; 
(5)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for moving any building; or 
(6)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for the installation, maintenance or repair of signs, air conditioning apparatus or equipment; whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contractor or subcontractor. Every person engaged in the business of accepting or offering to accept orders for contracts for doing any work on or in a building or premises, involving erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing or maintaining electrical lines, shall be deemed to be an electrical contractor. Every person engaging in the business of plumber or steamfitter shall be deemed to be a contractor. Every person engaged in the business of creating a building for the purpose of selling or renting such building, and making no contract with a duly licensed contractor for the erection of such building, whether or not such person contracts with one or more duly licensed contractors for one or more portions but does not contract with any one person for all the work of erecting any one of such buildings, shall be deemed to be a contractor if he shall build more than any one house in any one year. 
Farmer means those described in F.S. § 205.064. 
Local business tax means those charges established by the city council contained within the schedule of this article, as such charges may be amended from time to time by ordinance, and promulgated pursuant to the authority conferred upon the city by F.S. ch. 205, or any successor thereto, for the privilege of doing business in the city. 
Professional shall be any person whose occupation requires special and advanced education or skill, such as attorneys, physicians and dentists; and any person who offers services regulated by state or federal government who is required to demonstrate some level of competency as a condition to offering personal services. A person "offers services" for purposes herein if that person provides service directly to the customer client of the business in which that person is employed; if the person's labor is intended to directly benefit such customers or clients; or if that person is a principle in the business. 
Receipt means the document that is issued by the local governing authority which bear the words "Local Business Tax Receipt" and evidences that the person in whose name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of this article relating to the business tax. 
Temporary means to operate a business for a period of five days or less. 
Transitory means to be passing through or operating for a single purpose and not operating on a temporary basis. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-2001; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 1, 11-14-07) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-28. - Persons subject to local business tax. 
A tax for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city is hereby levied on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within its jurisdiction; 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction; and 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce where such tax is not prohibited in Section 8 of Article 1 of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 2, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-29. - Required. 
No person shall engage in any activities for which a local business tax receipt is required by this article, unless such person has a valid local business tax receipt issued by the city. No person shall knowingly make a false statement in the local business tax receipt application as to conditions or facts upon which the fee is based. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 3, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-30. - Disagreement as to classification; appeal. 
If there is a disagreement between the applicant and the city on the question of proper classification for any person or business taxed or to be taxed, the director of growth management shall decide the proper classification with the right of the applicant to appeal the decision to the city manager, whose decision upon the point shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 4, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-31. - Term of local business tax receipt; when tax due; delinquencies. 
(a)  All local business tax receipts shall be sold by the city beginning July 1 of each year, are due and payable on or before September 30 of each year, and expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. Local business tax receipts that are not renewed when due and payable are delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each subsequent month of delinquency until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty may not exceed 25 percent of the tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  Any person who engages in or manages any business, occupation, or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, if required, is subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the tax due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(c)  Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this chapter, who does not pay the required local business tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required local business tax receipt is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(d)  Any person who knowingly makes a false statement in the local business tax receipt application as to conditions or facts upon which the tax is based is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collections efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(e)  Any person who engages in or manages any business, occupation or profession covered in this chapter after revocation of the local business tax receipt for such business, occupation, or profession, is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 5, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-32. - Separate local business tax receipt for each business; falling into more than one classification. 
A separate local business tax receipt shall be obtained for each place of business conducted, operated, maintained or carried on by every person engaged in any business for which a local business tax receipt is required by the ordinances of the city, even though such separate business is conducted within or upon the same premises. 
When any occupation, business or profession shall fall into more than one of the classifications contained in the schedule set forth in section 30-51, such occupation, business or profession shall comply with the requirements of each classification. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 6, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-33. - Change of location; transfer of local business tax receipt to new owner; duplicate local business tax receipts; fees. 
Upon presentation of the original local business tax receipt, any tax receipt may be transferred from one location in the city to another location within the city upon completion of an application and payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual tax, but not less than $3.00. 
A local business tax receipt may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of a business upon payment of a transfer fee of ten percent of the annual tax, but not less than $3.00, and presentation of evidence of the sale and the original local business tax receipt. 
Duplicate receipts shall be issued upon written request and upon payment of a duplicate fee of ten percent of the annual license tax, but not less than $3.00. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 7, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-34. - Half-year tax. 
The tax for new licenses issued from April 1, through September 30, shall be one-half the regular annual tax. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 8, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-35. - Applications. 
(a)  All applicants for local business tax receipts shall submit their applications to the director of growth management not less than two weeks prior to the commencement of the proposed activity or function. 
(b)  Any person applying for a local business tax receipt to practice any profession regulated by the department of business and professional regulation, or any board or commission thereof, must provide proof of an active state certificate, registration, or license, or issuance of the same. 
(c)  Any person applying for a local business tax receipt or a transfer of an existing local business tax receipt must present a copy of the applicant's current fictitious name registration issued by the state division of corporations or a written statement signed by the applicant setting forth the reason that the applicant need not comply with the Fictitious Name Act. 
(d)  Any person applying for a local business tax receipt to operate a pharmacy must exhibit a current permit issued by the board of pharmacy. A local business tax receipt is not required in order to practice the profession of pharmacy. 
(e)  Any person applying for a local business tax receipt who will be operating a business subject to state and/or federal regulations shall furnish proof of licenses and/or permits and/or letter(s) of exemption to operate same. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 9, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-36. - Evidence of engaging in business. 
The advertisement of any business by sign, newspaper, magazine, telephone listing, or other public notice shall be conclusive evidence of the engaging in and carrying on of the business in the city so advertised and shall be required to obtain a local business tax receipt 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 10, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-37. - Exemptions. 
Any person entitled to exemption under the laws of the State of Florida shall be exempt from payment of the local business tax to the city. If a tax exemption provision applies, a local business tax receipt must still be applied for and approved. 
(1)  Veterans must be at least ten percent disabled to qualify for exemption. However, in no case shall a person be entitled to an exemption in excess of $50.00. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require any farmer to procure a local business tax receipt to sell farm, aqua cultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscultural or tropical fish farm products, or products manufactured therefrom, except intoxicating liquors, wine or beer, within the city, if such products were grown or produced by such farmer within the state. 
(3)  No local business tax receipt shall be required of any charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service or other such organization when the proceeds are used exclusively for the organization. 
(4)  Any person engaging in or managing a business, profession or occupation regulated by the department of business and professional regulation who has a permanent business location or branch office outside the city, who has paid a local business tax for the current year to the county or municipality where such permanent business location or branch offices maintained, and who performs work or services in the city on only a temporary or transitory basis shall be exempt from the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 11, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-38. - Renewal notices; nonreceipt of notice no defense. 
The director of growth management shall send out annual renewal notices to all holders of a local business tax receipt no later than July 1. Failure to receive such notice will not be considered a justifiable defense for nonpayment of any tax or late fee. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 12, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-39. - Duty of officers, agents of corporation; individual liability. 
It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of any corporation to ensure that such corporation complies with the provisions of this article and all officers of any corporation required by this article to pay the local business tax shall be personally subject to the penalties imposed by this article where any corporation fails to pay the tax and obtain a tax receipt required by this article. It shall be the responsibility of any real estate agency, brokerage house, or other firm of any description to ensure that each agent, salesperson or broker affiliated with such firm complies with timely payment of the individual tax as specified in this article. Failure to do so will subject the firm to fines as may be imposed by this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 13, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-40. - Duty of director of growth management to keep records. 
The director of growth management shall keep a complete record of all local business tax receipts issued, showing the nature of the local business tax receipt, the date of issuance, the date of expiration and to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 14, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-41. - Updating applications. 
The director of growth management is authorized to require updated local business tax receipt applications. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 15, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-42. - Preservation and display of local business tax receipt. 
All local business tax receipts granted by the city shall be carefully preserved and displayed in a conspicuous place and be visible in the place of business authorized to be conducted by such local business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 16, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-43. - Issuance of local business tax receipt not prima facie evidence of ability to conduct business. 
All businesses are subject to city zoning restrictions. The issuance of a local business tax receipt under this article does not constitute the only authorization required to conduct a business in the city. It shall not give a person the legal right and authority to conduct any business in violation of any law, and in such event, no refund of the local business tax shall be authorized. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 17, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-44. - No refund of tax; exception. 
No portion of any tax assessed by this article shall be refunded except when such tax is collected by mistake or error. Refunds shall not be made after the period for which the erroneous payment was made has expired. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 18, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-45. - Effect of preemption by state; obstruction of streets, sidewalks, public places. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to interfere with the regulation or taxation of any person in business against whom the right of taxation has been preempted by the state or as giving to any person the right to obstruct the streets, sidewalks, or other public places in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 30-46. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorney fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-2001)  
Sec. 30-47. - Recovery of attorney's fees, etc. 
If the city initiates legal proceedings against any person to enforce any provision of this article, including appellate proceedings, the city shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and such additional costs as the court shall deem appropriate.  
Sec. 30-48. - City not liable for damages for losses from revocation. 
The city shall not be liable for any loss, monetary or otherwise, due to the revocation of a local business tax receipt. Revocation of a local business tax receipt shall require the business to cease operation in the city. The revocation of a local business tax receipt shall continue until such time as the violations that caused the revocation are certified by the director of growth management as having been corrected. The following shall constitute grounds for revocation of a license. 
(1)  A determination by the director of growth management that any statement contained in the application for a local business tax receipt is false. 
(2)  The taxed business has violated city or county ordinances or laws of the state in the practice of business for which such license is issued. 
(3)  The taxed business fails to comply with zoning, fire prevention and code enforcement ordinances of the city after reasonable notice shall have been given to the taxed business to eliminate or correct any condition in violation of such ordinances of the taxed business premises. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 19, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-49. - Special requirements for carnivals, circuses and other amusement attractions. 
A carnival, circus, or any amusement attraction shall meet the additional requirements listed in this section before a local business tax receipt will be issued: 
(1)  File with the director of finance a sworn affidavit from the owner or lessee of the property upon which the attraction is to be held stating that permission has been granted to use the property for such purpose. 
(2)  Furnish a bond, collateral or other security in the amount of $2,500.00 for any expense the city may incur in cleaning all rubbish and debris from the premises used by the attraction. 
(3)  Obtain approval in writing of the zoning, fire prevention and code enforcement divisions of the city. 
(4)  File with the director of finance a written statement from the county health department that the facilities for selling food, foodstuffs or drinks for human consumption are satisfactory. 
(5)  File with the director of finance proof of active liability insurance in the amount of $100,000.00. 
(6)  Furnish the city police department a list of names of all managers, employees, and all other persons connected or working with all or any portion of the attractions, their permanent address, social security numbers and any other information requested by the police chief. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-2001; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 20, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-50. - Tax for businesses not specifically included in schedule. 
Every business, fixed or temporarily engaged in by any person, whether in a building or tent, or anywhere within the city not specifically designated in the article, shall pay a tax of $66.00. 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-01; Ord. No. O-03-08, § 1, 6-11-03; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 21, 11-14-07)  
Sec. 30-51. - Tax schedule. 
The schedule for local business tax charged in the city shall be as follows: 
AMUSEMENT/ENTERTAINMENT: 
Bars or restaurants with entertainment for patrons ..... $66.00 
Dance hall or ballroom (with council approval) ..... 66.00 
Entertainment establishment or facility (permanent) ..... 66.00 
Arcade operators, in addition to coin operated machine fee ..... 33.00 
Billiards, pool in addition to coin operated machine fee ..... 66.00 
Golf course ..... 66.00 
Golf driving range ..... 66.00 
Motion picture theater: ..... 66.00 
Museum ..... 66.00 
Sightseeing vehicles, per vehicle and transportation for hire (taxi, limo, boat) ..... 66.00 
Charter boat for fishing, diving, sightseeing, parasailing, water-taxi or similar watercraft activities or riding devices, other than coin-operated (per vehicle) ..... 33.00 
Rinks, skating ..... 110.00 
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES: 
Coin-operated machines, non-laundry, per unit 
Any person or firm who leases or rents or places under any kind of arrangement, and coin-operated machine, except checking lockers, toilet locks and U.S. stamp machines, shall pay a fee for each machine ..... 11.00 
Coin-operated machines, laundry, per unit 
Laundromat, self-service ..... 33.00 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: 
Banks ..... 66.00 
Credit association/union (firm or corporation) ..... 66.00 
Credit card company ..... 66.00 
Loan company, broker, person, firm or corporation ..... 66.00 
Savings & loans association ..... 66.00 
Each ATM not located on main premises ..... 33.00 
FOOD SERVICE ACTIVITIES: ..... 66.00 
Delicatessen: Merchant ..... 66.00 
Delicatessen, as part of another business such as a grocery store, etc. ..... 66.00 
Restaurants, must provide license from the division of hotels and restaurants, department of business and professional regulation ..... 66.00 
No seats (take out, deli, catering) 
Catering services ..... 66.00 
Snack bars and fast food services which maintain no seats ..... 66.00 
Mobile truck (food vendor) ..... 66.00 
Seating (in addition to the above fees) 
Seating one to 15 ..... 11.00 
Seating 16 to 40 ..... 22.00 
Seating 41 to 60 ..... 33.00 
Seating 61 to 120 ..... 44.00 
Seating 121 and over ..... 55.00 
GAS STATION: All gas stations, including those offering repairs and other accessory uses; does not include convenience stores 
Service station, gasoline ..... 66.00 
Per pump ..... 22.00 
HOSPITAL: Hospitals, sanitarium or nursing homes, adult congregate care facilities ..... 99.00 
INSURANCE: Companies writing any class of insurance upon any person or property residing or located within the city limits or risks occurring within the city limits 
Insurance or bonding agent ..... 66.00 
Insurance or bonding company ..... 66.00 
Insurance salesperson ..... 66.00 
Insurance adjuster ..... 66.00 
MANUFACTURING/PROCESSING: All manufacturing or processing business to include: 
Aircraft kit ..... 66.00 
Boat builder ..... 66.00 
Custom t-shirts ..... 66.00 
Factories ..... 66.00 
Manufacturing (manufacturing, producing, processing assembly of apparel and accessories, chemical and allied products, metals, glass, plastics, electronics, shell novelties and other manufacturing) ..... 66.00 
Tire and recapping service ..... 66.00 
NEWSPAPER OR MAGAZINE PUBLISHERS: News bureau (representing newspapers published outside of the city) ..... 66.00 
Daily publication 
Newspaper (four or more published per week) ..... 66.00 
Periodical publication 
Newspaper (weekly, biweekly or monthly) ..... 66.00 
RENTALS: 
Commercial property rental (mall, shopping center or any other property owner renting or leasing space to five or more commercial tenants, including booth tenants on a single parcel), per rental unit 
Apartment rental ..... 33.00 
Each individual rental ..... 3.30 
Storage and warehouse, public ..... 33.00 
Each additional unit ..... 3.30 
Office rentals ..... 33.00 
Each additional unit ..... 3.30 
Timeshare, per unit ..... 33.00 
Boardinghouses, hotels, motels, lodging house, guest house/bed and breakfast ..... 33.00 
Plus, per unit after first, per room ..... 3.30 
Campground or mobile home park or trailer camp ..... 66.00 
Each rental unit within the park ..... 5.50 
Tourist camps or courts ..... 66.00 
Each guest room (per unit) ..... 5.50 
Trailer camps, RV parks ..... 66.00 
Per space ..... 5.50 
Motor driven rental items (including mopeds, jet skis, tools) ..... 66.00 
Vehicles for hire (rent-a-car, courtesy car etc.) ..... 66.00 
Aircraft ..... 66.00 
Boat rental ..... 33.00 
Trailer, U-Haul ..... 66.00 
Non-motor driven rental items (including bicycles) ..... 66.00 
Equipment rental ..... 66.00 
RETAIL, MAIL ORDER OR WHOLESALE SALES: ..... 66.00 
Aircraft sales ..... 66.00 
Appliances: stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers, air-conditioners, heating, etc., dealers or agents and service ..... 66.00 
Art shops, supplies, lessons ..... 66.00 
Automobiles: 
New/used vehicles, agency/dealer, each location ..... 66.00 
Service station, does not include mechanic service 
Repair shop, per station ..... 66.00 
Automobile parking lot (parking space rental) ..... 66.00 
Auto parts, and accessories ..... 66.00 
Bait, live ..... 66.00 
Bakeries, retail or wholesale ..... 66.00 
Boat sales ..... 66.00 
Book agents or canvassers (taking orders or selling books or magazines) resident ..... 66.00 
Boot, shoe repair and shine shop ..... 66.00 
Bottled water sales distributor ..... 66.00 
Building materials or supply dealer ..... 66.00 
Business machines: Cash registers, typewriter, etc., sales, rentals and service only. Not to include office supplies ..... 66.00 
Ceramic shop ..... 66.00 
Check cashing stores ..... 66.00 
Fireworks, wholesale or retail ..... 66.00 
Florist ..... 66.00 
Furniture dealer ..... 66.00 
Gas distributors: bottled ..... 66.00 
Grocery store ..... 66.00 
Gunsmith: Repair and sales when in connection with another business with police department approval ..... 66.00 
Jewelry shop ..... 66.00 
Lumberyard ..... 66.00 
Mail order business, each person, company or firm, etc. ..... 66.00 
Marine supplies ..... 66.00 
Merchants, itinerant ..... 66.00 
Mobile home sales ..... 66.00 
Monument & tombstones (dealer or agent for) ..... 66.00 
Mower, dealer, rental and/or sales ..... 66.00 
Newsstand ..... 66.00 
Nursery (trees, plant, shrubbery, etc.) ..... 66.00 
Office supplies and/or office furniture (with business supplies sold as adjunct to) ..... 66.00 
Security: Security & guard service, electronic surveillance, alarm systems, etc. ..... 66.00 
Photo finishing ..... 66.00 
Photographers ..... 33.00 
Satellite systems/sales or service ..... 66.00 
Seafood dealers: 
Wholesale ..... 33.00 
Retail ..... 33.00 
Both ..... 66.00 
Secondhand dealers (to buy or sell secondhand merchandise, clothing, furniture, etc.) ..... 66.00 
Selling (when not specifically covered herein) persons selling magazines, bibles, encyclopedias, and other publications shall pay fee) ..... 66.00 
Sign shop ..... 66.00 
Television/VCR/stereo, etc. sales and repairs ..... 66.00 
Video sales and rentals ..... 66.00 
Water sales and dispenser rental ..... 66.00 
Window treatment sales and installation ..... 66.00 
SERVICES: 
Financial consultant ..... 66.00 
Laboratories dental, chemical, etc. ..... 66.00 
Massage therapist ..... 66.00 
Private investigator ..... 66.00 
Private/Charter school ..... 66.00 
Real estate appraiser ..... 66.00 
Real estate broker ..... 66.00 
Real estate salesperson ..... 33.00 
Schools (such as dancing, business or commercial, beauty or barber, music, physical education, riding, driving, telegraph, etc.) ..... 66.00 
Auditors ..... 66.00 
Bondsmen ..... 66.00 
Directory, city (to engage in compiling city directory), required to furnish all copies required by the city ..... 66.00 
Professionals (attorneys, architects, dentist, opticians, computer programmers, certified public accountants, electrologists, engineers, naturopaths, oculists, chiropractors, osteopaths, physician, electrotherapists, veterinarians, and any other State of Florida licensed professionals) by firm and per professional ..... 66.00 
Property management ..... 66.00 
Surveyor ..... 66.00 
Well driller ..... 66.00 
General service provider not listed in above, per business ..... 66.00 
Accounting/bookkeeping/auditing firm or person, certified or non-certified ..... 66.00 
Advertising: Agents or agencies writing advertisements for profit ..... 66.00 
Aircraft, flying schools or flight lessons ..... 66.00 
Aircraft service ..... 66.00 
Animal boarding, grooming or training ..... 66.00 
Answering service ..... 66.00 
Artists ..... 66.00 
Astronomers, where fee is charged ..... 66.00 
Auto vehicle wrecker service ..... 66.00 
Auto body shop ..... 66.00 
Auto repair shop ..... 66.00 
Bicycle repair ..... 33.00 
Blueprinting, photostat, map survey ..... 66.00 
Boat canvas sale/repair ..... 66.00 
Brass & copper refinishing ..... 66.00 
Business advisor or consultant ..... 66.00 
Business office ..... 66.00 
Cabinet, carpenter, upholstery shop ..... 66.00 
Carpet and upholstery cleaners ..... 66.00 
Child care, nurseries, preschool, day care centers ..... 66.00 
Claim and collection agencies ..... 66.00 
Computer services/sales ..... 66.00 
Contractor: ..... 66.00 
General building ..... 66.00 
Street paving ..... 66.00 
House moving & wrecking ..... 66.00 
Subcontractor: Including but not limited to carpentry, painting, roofing, sheet metal, electrical, concrete construction, masonry, plastering, lathing, clearing, grading, etc. ..... 66.00 
Copy service ..... 66.00 
Custom framing ..... 66.00 
Decorator, interior ..... 66.00 
Drafting service ..... 66.00 
Dressmaking shop/tailors ..... 66.00 
Employment agency ..... 66.00 
Delivery/Express companies ..... 66.00 
Exterminator, termite & pests ..... 66.00 
Fence sales and installation ..... 66.00 
Funeral home (including undertaking and embalming) ..... 66.00 
Glass, plate: Installation ..... 66.00 
Golf club sales and repair ..... 66.00 
Handyman ..... 66.00 
Hauling contractor: Per vehicle ..... 66.00 
Health center ..... 66.00 
Home nursing/daily living care (not professional) ..... 66.00 
House and condo sitting ..... 66.00 
Hypnotist: Therapeutic or other than therapeutic ..... 66.00 
Janitor, commercial/residential cleaning service ..... 66.00 
Jewelry repair ..... 66.00 
Land development ..... 66.00 
Lawn maintenance/landscaping: Except contractors, architects, engineers or florists paying a city license tax as such ..... 66.00 
Laundries, dry cleaners (with plant in city, pickup station with plant in city, pickup with plant out of city, or pickup service with plant out of city) ..... 66.00 
Locksmith or key smith, each ..... 66.00 
Machine shop and/or welder ..... 66.00 
Maid service ..... 66.00 
Mobile home set-up ..... 66.00 
Mobile truck: ..... 66.00 
Auto repair ..... 66.00 
Car/mobile home washing ..... 66.00 
Equipment repairs ..... 66.00 
Mower, repair only ..... 66.00 
Pressure cleaning ..... 66.00 
Printing, job printing ..... 66.00 
Printing, job printing agent (not otherwise licensed) ..... 66.00 
Reducing salon ..... 66.00 
Sanding and finishing of floors ..... 66.00 
Secretarial/typing service ..... 66.00 
Security systems/alarms sales and installation ..... 66.00 
Septic tank cleaners ..... 66.00 
Sewing machine/vacuum cleaner: Dealers and/or agents & service ..... 66.00 
Sign painters ..... 66.00 
Solicitors and canvassers, per year ..... 66.00 
Sprinkler systems, selling and/or installing ..... 66.00 
Stenographer, public and court reporter ..... 66.00 
Stocks & bonds, broker/firm or office ..... 66.00 
Stocks & bonds, per agent or salesperson ..... 66.00 
Taxidermist ..... 66.00 
Telegraph systems and companies ..... 66.00 
Tree surgery ..... 66.00 
Water, bottled ..... 66.00 
Window cleaning ..... 66.00 
Window tinting ..... 66.00 
Pawnbroker ..... 192.50 
Fortuneteller, astrologers, astrologists, clairvoyant, mind reader, etc. ..... 192.50 
Barbershop, beauty shop, manicurist shop, cosmetologist shop: 
The business owner ..... 33.00 
Each non-employee licensed barber ..... 33.00 
Each non-employee licensed beautician ..... 33.00 
Each non-employee licensed manicurist ..... 33.00 
Each non-employee licensed cosmetologist ..... 33.00 
Each chair/station ..... 3.30 
TRANSPORTATION (EXCLUDING TAXICABS AND PEDICABS) 
Airlines, railroad companies ..... 66.00 
Truck lines: Receiving and/or delivery, freight or express ..... 66.00 
Vehicles, including bus service and ambulance service ..... 165.00 
Ambulance service (not voluntary) ..... 99.00 
Bus company ..... 66.00 
Handicap transport ..... 99.00 
UTILITY/COMMUNICATIONS 
Telephone, gas, cable television, solid waste pickup, telegraph and similar utilities 
Cable television company ..... 49.50 
Electric light and power company ..... 66.00 
Gas companies: Natural and bottled gas ..... 99.00 
Telephone systems and companies ..... 49.50 
Television cable systems and companies ..... 49.50 
Water and sewer ..... 33.00 
Radio stations maintaining business office within city ..... 99.00 
NON-CLASSIFIED (not otherwise mentioned) ..... 66.00 
(Ord. No. O-95-11, § 1, 6-14-95; Ord. No. O-95-20, §§ 1—4, 8-9-95; Ord. No. O-95-27, §§ 1—4, 11-15-95; Ord. No. O-01-08, § 1, 4-25-2001; Ord. No. O-03-08, § 1, 6-11-03; Ord. No. O-07-14, § 22, 11-14-07) 
Cross reference— Regulatory license for adult entertainment establishment required, § 14-50(b); contractors, § 26-161 et seq.  
Secs. 30-52—30-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONVENIENCE STORES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Convenience store security, F.S. § 812.171 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Convenience store means any place of business that is engaging in the retail sale of groceries, including the sale of prepared foods, gasoline and services, that is regularly open for business at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., and that is attended during such hours by one employee. The term "convenience store" does not include a store which is solely or primarily a restaurant. 
(Code 1980, § 22-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-77. - Security. 
Each convenience store located within the city shall: 
(1)  Be equipped with a silent alarm that notifies local law enforcement or a private security agency that a robbery is taking place. 
(2)  Be equipped with a security camera system capable of retrieving an image to assist in the identification and apprehension of a robber. 
(3)  Be equipped with a drop safe or cash management device that provides minimum access to the facility's cash receipts. 
(4)  Be equipped with a lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of two footcandles per square foot with the uniformity ratio of no more than five to one at ten inches above the surface. 
(5)  Post a conspicuous sign in the convenience store entrance which states that the cash register contains $50.00 or less. 
(6)  Establish a cash management policy to limit the amount of available cash on hand between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. to $50.00 or less. 
(7)  Limit window signage so that there is a clear and unobstructed exterior view of the cash register and transaction area. 
(8)  Prohibit window tinting on the windows of the establishment if such tinting reduces exterior or interior viewing during the hours of operation to which this article is applicable. 
(9)  Install height markers at the inside of the entrance of the establishment which display height measurements from the floor. 
(Code 1980, § 22-2)  
Sec. 30-78. - Training of employees. 
(a)  The owner or principal operator of a convenience store shall provide proper robbery deterrents and safety training to all employees who work between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The city shall promulgate a program of minimum training for convenience store employees. 
(c)  The city's proposed training program shall be forwarded to the attorney general's office for approval, as required by Laws of Fla. ch. 90-346. 
(d)  The city shall have no liability for promulgating a minimum program of training required under this section. 
(e)  The city's program shall, at a minimum, require the training and familiarization of store employees with the store's security principles, devices and measures as required by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 22-3)  
Sec. 30-79. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(b)  The city may obtain injunctive relief to restrain or prohibit any violation of this article. 
(c)  The occupational license for any establishment may be revoked by the city council upon proof of willful violation of this article. 
(d)  In addition, failure to meet the requirements of this article within ten days after written notice of noncompliance by the city shall result in a fine not to exceed $5,000.00. Any fine imposed pursuant to this section may be recoverable through an action at law at any time after such fine is imposed. 
(e)  In addition, any willful or deliberate violation of the requirements of this article shall result in a fine of $5,000.00. Any fine imposed pursuant to this section shall be recoverable through an action at law at any time after such fine is imposed. 
(Code 1980, § 22-4)  
ARTICLE IV. - PAIN CLINIC AND PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS 
 
Sec. 30-80. - Recitations. 
(a)  The Sebastian Police Department made a PowerPoint presentation to the city council on May 12, 2010, describing the public health and crime issues relating to the proliferation and activities of pain clinics and pain management clinics which presentation is incorporated herein by this reference as if transcribed and fully set forth herein; and 
(b)  It is appropriate and in the best interest of the City of Sebastian to enact an ordinance prohibiting the issuance, duplication, transfer and renewal of local business tax receipts for certain pain clinics and pain management clinics. 
(Ord. No. O-10-03, § 1, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 30-81. - Application of chapter 30, article II. 
The provisions of chapter 30, article II of the code, with the specific exception of section 30-46 (penalty for violation of article), are applicable to this article IV. 
(Ord. No. O-10-03, § 1, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 30-82. - Legislative finding. 
The Sebastian City Council, in the exercise of its legislative discretion, hereby finds and determines that a public health emergency exists and the enactment of this article is necessary to forestall the proliferations and activities of certain pain clinics and pain management clinics within the municipal limits. 
(Ord. No. O-10-03, § 1, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 30-83. - Prohibition. 
(a)  No local business tax receipt shall be issued, duplicated, transferred, or renewed for certain pain clinics, or pain management clinics as defined herein. 
(b)  No person, firm, or corporation shall apply for a City of Sebastian business license, or the duplication, transfer or renewal thereof, for the purpose of establishing or operating a pain clinic or pain management clinic as defined herein. 
(c)  No person, firm, or corporation shall use a City of Sebastian business license receipt for the purpose of establishing or operating a pain clinic or pain management clinic as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. O-10-03, § 1, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 30-84. - Definitions, exceptions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions are used: 
(1)  "Pain clinics" or "pain management clinics" defined. The terms pain clinics or pain management clinics are defined as privately owned clinics, facilities or offices the primary business purposes of which are to prescribe or dispense pain mediation such as opioids including fentanyl, hydrocodone, morphine and oxycodone, or any controlled substance identified in Schedules II, III, and IV of F.S. § 893.03, 893.05 or 893.0355, as the same may be amended or renumbered from time to time. 
(2)  Exception. The definition of pain clinics or pain management clinics shall specifically exclude clinics, facilities or medical practioners' office that: 
a.  Are fully owned by one or more physicians, licensed by the State of Florida and who are board certified in pain management, and 
b.  Where all physicians employed by the practice, who spend the preponderance of their professional time prescribing controlled substances, are also board certified in pain management. 
(Ord. No. O-10-03, § 1, 6-9-10)  
Sec. 30-85. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Violations of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(b)  The city is authorized to seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief to restrain or prohibit any violation of this article. 
(c)  Any business tax license may be revoked by the city council upon proof of willful violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10-03, § 1, 6-9-10)  
Chapter 33 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Cablevision systems, 1.02(4). 
Cross reference— Cable television, LDC 20A-17.2(M), (N); franchise ordinances, app. A, art. IV. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Sebastian Cable Television Code". 
(Ord. No. O-94-01, § 1, 2-9-94)  
Sec. 33-2. - Authority; application. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the powers of the city to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic order of the community, by providing regulations for the installation, use, rates, and merchandising of cable television systems within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-94-01, § 1, 2-9-94)  
Sec. 33-3. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated below. Terms used in this chapter, but not defined below, which are defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as further amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, codified in 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., shall have the meanings set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522. 
Act means the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as further amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 
Applicant means all officers, agents, employees and representatives seeking an approval, grant or permit under this chapter. 
Application process means the method for acceptance, review, approval or denial of an application for a franchise award, transfer or renewal, or rate request, including staff action and action of the city council. 
City means the City of Sebastian, Indian River County, Florida. 
FCC means the Federal Communication Commission. 
Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is referred to as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system in the city. All franchises shall be nonexclusive. 
Franchisee means the person to whom a franchise is granted by the city under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person. 
Newspaper of general circulation means a newspaper appropriate for the placement of legal notices as defined by F.S. ch. 50. 
Subscriber means a person lawfully using or receiving cable services or other services from a cable operator. 
(Ord. No. O-94-01, § 1, 2-9-94)  
Sec. 33-4. - Reservations. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to the specific reservations of the city set forth herein, the city council hereby reserves unto the city the matters set forth in this section. 
(b)  Police powers. In accepting a franchise, the cable operator acknowledges that its rights thereunder are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances, resolutions, policies and practices necessary to the convenience, health, safety, welfare and economic order of the public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies and practices by the city pursuant to such power. Any inconsistency between, or ambiguity created by the relationship between, the provisions of this chapter and any other contemporaneous or future lawful exercise of the city's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the city's police power. 
(c)  The act. 
(1)  The city shall have all powers not otherwise preempted by the act, the regulations of the FCC, F.S. § 166.046, or other applicable federal or State of Florida laws or regulations, and shall have all powers conferred on a franchising authority or allowed by the act which are not addressed in this chapter. 
(2)  Should any amendment be made to the act or should any provision thereof be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction which materially affects the city's authority with respect to the regulation of this chapter, the city council shall have the right to amend this chapter to the extent it deems appropriate, and the existing franchise and license shall be subject to such amendment. 
(Ord. No. O-94-01, § 1, 2-9-94)  
Secs. 33-5—33-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RATE REGULATION 
 
Sec. 33-26. - Rate regulation. 
(a)  The city may regulate rates charged by cable television operators for the basic tier of cable television services and related equipment in a manner that is consistent with the act and the rules and regulations prescribed by the FCC pursuant to the act, all as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Should a franchisee desire to change any rate or charge, it shall submit a written application setting forth the proposed change in charges and effective date of such change to the city manager who shall evaluate the proposal in a manner consistent with FCC cable television rate regulation standards and report this evaluation to the city council. The city council is hereby authorized from time to time to set reasonable fees for the review of any rate change application. Application review fees shall be set by adoption of a resolution of the council. 
(c)  The city council shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether or not the rates or proposed rate increase(s) are reasonable and consistent with the act and regulations implementing the act. The city manager's report shall be placed before the city council at the public hearing. At such hearing, evidence shall be taken and received on whether the proposed rate or change is consistent with FCC standards. 
(d)  Notice of rate regulation proceeding. 
(1)  The city shall publish in a local newspaper of general circulation; post in a conspicuous place in the city hall; and mail by U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid to the cable operator, a public notice of the intent to conduct a rate regulation public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or charges for cable service related equipment. 
(2)  The franchisee shall notify each subscriber, in writing, at least 10 days prior to the rate regulation public hearing, of the proposed rate change and the public hearing. The franchisee shall use a form of notice prepared by the city clerk. 
(3)  Said public notice specified above in subsection (d)(1) and (2) shall include the time, date and place of the proceeding and shall explain, among other things, the nature of the rate review in question; that any subscriber or interested party has the right to participate in the proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the proceeding, describing how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any such views; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable television rates in question will be governed by applicable rules and regulations of the FCC; that the decision of the city is subject to review by the FCC; and that parties desiring to appeal any decision made as a result of the proceeding will need to ensure that a verbatim transcript is prepared which is the responsibility of the person seeking to appeal. 
(e)  The city shall ensure that any rate or charge established for cable television service, equipment, repair and installation shall be reasonable, just and fair. The city shall also ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties, including but not limited to the city, the cable operator, subscribers, and the residents of the franchise area. 
(f)  In determining whether a rate or charge is reasonable, just and fair, the city council shall apply the cable television rate regulation criteria established by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) by rule as amended from time to time. 
(g)  In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the city may request additional information from the cable operator that is, in the city's opinion, reasonably necessary to determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment charges. Any such additional information submitted to the city shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable operator who supervised the preparation of the response on behalf of the cable operator, and submitted by way of affidavit, under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate to the best of that person's knowledge and information formed after reasonable inquiry. The city may request proprietary information; provided, that the city shall consider a timely request from the cable operator that said proprietary information shall not be made available for public information, consistent with the procedures set forth in the FCC rules and regulations. Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate rate level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by the cable operator. The city may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence applicable to administrative proceedings under the Laws of the State of Florida to discover any information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding, including, but not limited to, subpoenas, interrogatories, production of documents and deposition. 
(h)  If the city council or the city manager cannot determine the reasonableness of the proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by the FCC rules and regulations, it may toll the effective date for the proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by the FCC rules and regulations, it may toll the effective date for the proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC rules and regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give public notice accordingly. 
(i)  Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the city council shall adopt and release a written decision as to the application. The city council shall adopt a resolution: 
(1)  Stating whether or not the rates or proposed rate increase(s) are reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy, including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and refunds; 
(2)  Approving, disapproving or modifying the proposed rate changes as authorized by FCC rate regulation standards; and 
(3)  Setting forth findings of fact and conclusions regrading the city council's determination. 
(j)  Consistent with FCC rules and regulations, the city's decision may be reviewed only by the FCC. 
(k)  The city shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in the course of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as necessary to exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the Act and the FCC rules and regulations. Any information submitted to the city shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable operator who supervised the preparation of the response on behalf of the cable operator, and submitted by way of affidavit, under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and accurate to the best of that person's knowledge and information, formed after reasonable inquiry. 
(l)  The cable operator shall have no vested, impairment-of-contract, or other right as against such rate regulation. 
(m)  Nonenforcement not a waiver. The cable operator shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter by any failure of the city on any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(n)  Should the city at some future date be allowed to regulate other than basic tier cable television service and equipment rates, all as provided in the act, the city may, in its sole discretion, institute such rate regulation as it deems appropriate. Any franchise agreement issued after February 15, 1994 shall be issued subject to this regulation, whether it shall so state or not. 
(Ord. No. O-94-01, § 1, 2-9-94)  
Chapter 34 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Florida Cemetery Act, F.S. ch. 497. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Applicability. 
The rules and regulations in this chapter shall be applicable in the municipal cemetery. 
(Code 1980, § 8-18)  
Sec. 34-2. - Trust fund. 
(a)  A cemetery trust fund is hereby established which will be administered by the finance director pursuant to the policies established by the city council. 
(b)  A permanent endowment, in the minimum amount of $375,000, is hereby established, the proceeds of which shall be used for the sole purpose of providing funding for the operation, care and maintenance of the cemetery. 
(c)  The proceeds from the sale of interment sites in the cemetery shall be deposited into the trust fund, one-half of which shall be added to the permanent endowment. Non-endowed funds will be used solely for capital expansion of the cemetery to provide for the plotting, acquisition, watering system installation and related costs incidental to providing additional interment sites for future sale. 
(d)  Funds in the cemetery trust fund shall not be used for any purpose, other than stated in (b) and (c) above and shall be invested in accordance with the city's investment policy. As a part of the consideration for the purchase of interment sites, the city obligates itself to use the proceeds of such sales for no other purpose than as stated in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 1, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O-01-20, § 1, 9-26-01) 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-86 et seq.  
Sec. 34-3. - Records. 
The cemetery sexton and office of the city clerk shall keep records as required. 
(Code 1980, § 8-19)  
Sec. 34-4. - Unlawful conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to break, or injure any tree or shrub, or vandalize or mar any landmark, marker or memorial, or in any way deface the grounds of the cemetery. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any type of alcoholic beverage within the cemetery grounds. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, stop or park a motor vehicle on any grass burial areas of the cemetery with the exception of commercial vehicles in preparation for interments and city staff equipment while maintaining cemetery grounds. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to engage in any kind of raucous activity within the cemetery. 
(Code 1980, § 8-18.1; Ord. No. O-14-03, § 1, 5-14-14)  
Sec. 34-5. - Hours; trespass. 
The cemetery shall be open daily from 7:00 a.m. until sunset. Any unauthorized person on the grounds after sunset will be a trespasser. 
(Code 1980, § 8-20)  
Sec. 34-6. - Speed limit. 
Speed of over 15 miles per hour on internal roads within the cemetery will not be permitted. 
(Code 1980, § 8-18.2; Ord. No. O-14-03, § 2, 5-14-14) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Sec. 34-7. - Locating of interment sites. 
All interment sites must be located by the sexton or other designated city official. 
(Code 1980, § 8-21; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 2, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-8. - Easement along in-ground interment sites. 
An easement is reserved along all in-ground interment site lines for water, sprinkler system, etc., as identified in recorded plats. 
(Code 1980, § 8-22; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 3, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-9. - Pauper's interment sites. 
Pauper in-ground interment sites and permanent markers for paupers may be permitted with approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 8-23; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 4, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-10. - Fee for opening or closing interment site. 
When an interment site must be located and market by the sexton or other authorized city employee for interment, the city shall charge a fee to the funeral home requesting the services, such fee as set by resolution of the city council, from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 8-24; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 5, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O-02-16, § 1, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 34-11. - Interment site prices; establishment of fees for Sebastian residents and individuals outside city limits, defining proof of residency. 
Fees for all internment sites, appurtenances, and services in the cemetery shall be uniformly set by resolution of the city council, from time to time. 
One set of fees shall be established for Sebastian residents and one set of fees shall be established for all others outside of city limits. For anyone who purchases a site and for anyone who is to be interred in a site, proof of city residency must be provided as set out below to receive the Sebastian resident rate. 
Anyone claiming city residency to receive the city resident rate must provide two proofs of residency at the time of sale and/or prior to interment from the following list: 
• Florida vehicle registration card or title 
• Voter registration card 
• Utility, telephone or cable/satellite TV bill 
• Checking or savings account statement 
• Property tax bill or receipt 
• Selective service cards 
• Mortgage account or proof of homeownership 
• Residential rental contract (apartment lease or other rental of real property) 
• Canceled check with imprinted name and address 
• First class mail from any government agency (to include the contents and envelope) 
• Major credit card bill 
• Installment loan contract from a bank or other financial institution 
(Code 1980, § 8-26; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 6, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O-02-16, § 2, 11-13-02; Ord. No. O-07-12, § 1, 7-25-07)  
Sec. 34-12. - Gratuities prohibited. 
The cemetery sexton or person in charge shall not accept gratuities from anyone. Any service that can be performed will be performed for all. 
(Code 1980, § 8-25)  
Sec. 34-13. - Sale of interment sites. 
No interment site owner shall allow interments in their interment sites for a remuneration, nor shall any transfer of interest therein be valid except by written consent of the city. No interment sites shall be bought or sold for speculation. 
(Code 1980, § 8-27; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 7, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-14. - Approval of work on interment sites required. 
No work of any kind may be done on interment sites except by the cemetery sexton or his designated representative, excepting opening and closing of in-ground interment sites by the vault company and installation of monuments or markers that meet with the cemetery sexton's approval in accordance with the rules and regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 8-28; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 8, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-15. - Vault or grave liner required. 
All interments in standard in-ground interment sites in the cemetery shall be required to have a concrete vault or other approved permanent type grave liner installed before burial. All cremains must be placed in a suitable approved permanent type container. 
(Code 1980, § 8-29; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 9, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-16. - Burial of human dead only; number of interment. 
All interment sites shall be used for the interment of human dead only. Number of interments per individual site is as follows: 
(1)  Standard in-ground interment sites. Only one interment shall be made in a standard 4' × 8' or 4' × 10' in-ground interment site except in the case of; a mother and infant; two children under one year of age, not necessarily in one coffin; one coffin and one cremain; and, two cremains. 
(2)  Cremains in-ground interment sites. Only one cremains interment shall be made in a 4' × 4' or 4' × 5' cremains in-ground interment site. 
(3)  Niches. Only one cremains interment shall be made in a single niche. 
(d)  Double niches. Only up to two cremains interments shall be made in a double niche. 
(Code 1980, § 8-30; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 10, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O-02-16, § 3, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 34-17. - Urn size requirement for niche interments. 
Urns for interment in single niches in unit 4 and double niches in unit 3 shall be determined and regulated by the cemetery sexton or his designee. 
(Code 1980, § 8-31; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 11, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O-02-16, § 4, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 34-18. - Interment site markers. 
(a)  Standard and cremains in-ground interment sites. 
(1)  Design. The following provisions shall apply to standard and cremains in-ground interment site markers: 
a.  Inscriptions. A marker may contain the full name of an individual, date of birth and date of death. In addition, symbolic floral carvings; family crests or emblems; religious marking; fraternal emblems; suitable epitaph; and designation as to relationship of the deceased (such as son, daughter, husband, father, etc.) may be used. 
b.  Veteran's markers. Those markers received from the Veterans' Administration may include such information as name, rank, serial number, date of death, and other information such as the Veterans' Administration from time to time places on such markers. 
(2)  Placement. All cemetery markers shall be either bronze, marble or granite, and shall be flush with the ground. No permanent attachments shall be above the marker. No slabs of any kind will be permitted; provided, however, to preserve the historic nature of Units 1 and 4 of the Sebastian Cemetery, and where there are existing slabs and aboveground markers, restoration of existing slabs and aboveground markers will be permitted. 
(3)  Size. The following size standards shall apply to site markers. 
a.  Flush markers. Flush markers are permitted in all sections of the cemetery. Flush markers for standard 4' × 8', 4' × 10', and 4' × 4' and 4' × 5' sites shall not exceed 36" in width and 18" in depth and shall be a minimum of 4" thick. A double marker for two adjoining (side by side) standard 4' × 8' and 4' × 4' sites shall not exceed 72" in width and 18" in depth and shall be a minimum of 6" thick. Bronze markers shall not exceed 24" × 24". 
b.  Above ground markers for standard 4' × 8' and 4' × 10' sites. Above ground markers are permitted in Units 1, 3 and 4 and shall not exceed 36" in width, 48" in height (from ground elevation), and 8" in thickness. These markers may be erected on a base which shall not exceed 36" in width, 8" in height, and 18" in thickness. A double marker for two adjoining (side by side) standard 4' × 8' and 4" × 10' sites shall not exceed 72" in width, 48" in height (from ground elevation), and 8" in thickness. These markers may be erected on a base which shall not exceed 72" in width, 8" in height, and 18" in thickness. Above ground markers are not permitted on 4' × 4' or 4' × 5' cremains sites. 
c.  In the event a family owns at least six 4' × 8' or 4' × 10' sites adjacent to one another, the Cemetery Sexton, at his discretion, may allow a larger marker in lieu of individual markers placed on each site. 
(4)  Alignment. All markers shall be in a line consistent with each other as determined by the cemetery sexton. Any unapproved marker shall be removed, repaired or realigned at the monument company's expense. 
(5)  Concrete foundation. All markers shall have a suitable concrete foundation provided by the monument company. 
(6)  Period for installment after burial. All markers shall be installed within 120 days after burial. Where this regulation renders a hardship or presents any special problems, such as an estate not settled, special consideration will be given. Request for special consideration should be made in writing to the Sebastian City Clerk, 1225 Main Street, Sebastian, Florida 32958. 
(b)  Niches. 
(1)  Design. All niche markers shall be bronze plaques, provided in the cost of the niche, engraved and installed by the City of Sebastian. 
a.  Inscription. The bronze marker shall include the full name, date of birth and death of the decedent. 
b.  Vases. If desired, all costs for vases and rings will be incurred by the niche owner. 
(Code 1980, §§ 8-32—8-34.1, 8-35; Ord. No. O-91-27, § 1, 10-23-91; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 12, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O-02-16, § 5, 11-13-02; Ord. No. O-15-09, § 1, 12-16-15)  
Sec. 34-19. - Artificial and fresh flowers, blankets. 
No more than two bouquets of artificial or fresh flowers will be allowed at any gravesite. Artificial flower arrangements will be permitted to remain until they become faded or unsightly. Fresh flowers will remain until unsightly. No glass or ceramic flower containers or ornaments shall be allowed, however, a plastic flower container no more than six inches deep, six inches wide and 24 inches long may remain in place unless broken or in decrepit condition. No wires shall be allowed to hold flower arrangements permanently in place at the interment site. Blankets are allowed to be placed prior to any holiday but must be removed within ten days following the holiday. 
(Code 1980, § 8-36; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 13, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O-02-16, § 6, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 34-20. - Use of living memorial tree or shrub. 
Whenever a living memorial tree or shrub is desired, arrangements must be made with the cemetery sexton as to size, type and placement as designated by the cemetery sexton, in a planting area designated by him. Grave blankets are allowed during holidays or special occasions and can remain for a maximum of ten days. 
(Code 1980, § 8-37; Ord. No. O-02-16, § 7, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 34-21. - Pruning and removal of vegetation. 
No trees, plants or shrubs shall be planted, pruned or removed except by the sexton or person in charge who shall have authority to do so upon any interment site when he/she may consider such planting, pruning or removal necessary. 
(Code 1980, § 8-38; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 14, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-22. - Enclosures and mounds prohibited. 
Enclosures of any nature such as fences, copings, hedges, ditches, etc., shall not be allowed around any in-ground interment sites. Earth mounds will not be permitted. 
(Code 1980, § 8-39; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 15, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-23. - Interments. 
Interments shall be permitted seven days a week. 
(Code 1980, § 8-40)  
Sec. 34-24. - No liability. 
The city is not responsible for theft or damage to anything placed on any interment site. 
(Code 1980, § 8-13.3; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 16, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-25. - Violations of article; penalties. 
A violation of any of the rules and regulations contained in this article shall be considered a violation of the ordinances of the city, and any person adjudicated in violation of such rules and regulations shall, in addition to any penalty imposed by court not exceeding $500.00 fine and/or not exceeding 90 days imprisonment, be denied the right to do further business in the cemetery of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 8-41)  
Sec. 34-26. - Rule violations; procedures. 
If any of the rules contained in this chapter are violated, the sexton or other city employee should bring the matter to the attention of the city clerk for the specific interment site involved. The city clerk will then notify the owner of the interment site or his estate or last known relative by certified or registered mail. The clerk shall send a copy of the rules and regulations with the specific items underlined in reference to the alleged violations; and a brief letter notifying them of the appropriate action against the violator should the violation remain uncorrected beyond a reasonable period of time. 
(Code 1980, § 8-59; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 17, 6-23-93)  
Secs. 34-27—34-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VAULT COMPANIES AND GRAVEDIGGERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
 
Sec. 34-51. - Copy of chapter to be given. 
The vault company and/or contractor (gravedigger) shall be given a copy of this chapter and be guided by all requirements therein. 
(Code 1980, § 8-51)  
Sec. 34-52. - Inspection and approval of excavations and closings. 
The cemetery sexton or person in charge shall inspect and approve excavations and closings by the vault company and/or contractor (gravedigger). 
(Code 1980, § 8-52)  
Sec. 34-53. - Notification of clerk of problems encountered. 
The vault company and/or contractor (gravedigger) shall notify the city clerk or other official of any problems that may be encountered. 
(Code 1980, § 8-53)  
Sec. 34-54. - Minimum depth for standard in-ground interments. 
Interments in standard in-ground interment sites must be excavated to at least five feet deep at the shallowest point. Cremain urns interred in standard or cremains in-ground interment sites must be covered by a minimum of ten inches of soil. 
(Code 1980, § 8-54; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 18, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-55. - Liability for damages. 
The vault company and/or contractor (gravedigger) shall exercise care to protect all gravemarkers, monuments, sprinklers, etc., and shall be held liable for any damage incurred. 
(Code 1980, § 8-55)  
Sec. 34-56. - Use of vehicles on platted in-ground interment sites. 
The vault company and contractor (gravedigger) shall exercise care in driving a vehicle from cemetery roads onto platted in-ground interment sites to haul fill for a vault. Adequate protection by use of timbers, plywood and other approved devices shall be provided to adjacent in-ground interment sites. The vehicle shall remain in low gear while on platted in-ground interment sites and proceed slowly in and out to the roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 8-56; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 19, 6-23-93) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Sec. 34-57. - Removal of tent after burial. 
The vault company or contractor (gravedigger) shall remove his tent as soon as practicable after completion of the ceremony and interment. 
(Code 1980, § 8-57; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 20, 6-23-93)  
Sec. 34-58. - Removal of excess dirt. 
The vault company or contractor (gravedigger) shall remove all dirt from adjacent gravemarkers, monuments, etc., as he completes interment. Surplus dirt shall be hauled to the spoil site as designated by the sexton or other designated city official. 
(Code 1980, § 8-58; Ord. No. O-93-12, § 21, 6-23-93)  
Chapter 38 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, art. IV. 
Cross reference— City council, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Electors and elections, F.S. ch. 97 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Declaration of intent by candidates; form of ballot. 
At any regular or special election held in the city for the purpose of electing the elective officers of the city, the city council shall cause to be printed upon the official ballots to be voted at such election, the name of any qualified elector who has declared an intent to be a candidate for any such office and who has filed a written oath or affirmation as provided in section 4.02 of the charter and has paid a filing fee as prescribed in section 38-2. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1; Ord. No. O-94-08, § 1, 6-8-94)  
Sec. 38-2. - Forms of petition; filing fee. 
The city clerk shall furnish oaths as prescribed in section 38-1. Each candidate shall pay a qualifying fee of $25.00 to the city clerk at the time written acceptance is filed with the city clerk. Such filing fee shall not be refundable and shall be deposited into the general funds of the city to help defray election expenses. The oath together with the filing fee and other forms or documents required to be filed by candidates under Florida law shall be filed with the city clerk, not less than 60 days prior to the election date. 
(Code 1980, § 9-2; Ord. No. O-08-09, § 1, 9-24-08) 
State Law reference— State assessment fee, F.S. § 99.093.  
Chapter 39 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 39-1—39-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-99-15, §§ 1—18, adopted Nov. 3, 1999, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as set out in §§ 39-26—39-43. Formerly, such article pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. O-91-20, adopted Apr. 22, 1992. 
Cross reference— Business, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Electrical and alarm system contracting, F.S. § 489.501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 39-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city manager to administer, control and review alarm applications, permits and alarm dispatch requests. 
Alarm business means the business, by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity meeting the requirements of F.S. chapter 489, of maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in an alarm site. 
Alarm dispatch request means a notification to the police by the alarm business that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
Alarm review board means the city's special magistrate will serve as an alarm review board and perform the functions of that board. 
Alarm site means a single premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multitenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with radio frequency signals, which are designed to discourage crime, by emitting or transmitting a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition. Alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; or 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does not have a sounding device which can be heard on the exterior of the alarm site. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who [which] uses an alarm system at its alarm site. 
Chief means the chief of police of the city or an authorized representative. 
Conversion means the transaction or process by which one alarm business begins monitoring of an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm business. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a crisis situation requiring police response. 
False alarm dispatch means an alarm dispatch request to the police department, when the responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. An alarm dispatch request which is canceled by the alarm business or the alarm user prior to the time the responding officer reaches the alarm site shall not be considered a false alarm dispatch. 
False alarm user awareness class means a class operated by either the police department or sheriff's office for the purpose of educating alarm users about the problems created by false alarm dispatches and in the responsible use of their alarm system. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Keypad means a device that allows control of an alarm system by the manual entering of a coded sequence of numbers or letters. 
Monitoring means the process by which an alarm business receives signals from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the city for the purpose of summoning police response to the alarm site. 
One plus duress alarm means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (Normal code = 1234 One Plus Duress Code = 1235). 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system which was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
Verify means an attempt, by the alarm business, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, before requesting a police dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 1, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-27. - Permit requirement. 
(a)  No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit issued by the alarm administrator. A separate permit is required for each alarm site. 
A special classification shall be required for an alarm system equipped for duress alarm. 
(b)  The application fee for a permit for a residential or commercial alarm site is $10.00; no refund of a permit fee will be made. This permit fee must be submitted to the alarm administrator within 15 days after the alarm installation or alarm takeover. Failure by the alarm company to provide information to the user that registration by the user is required will result in a $90.00 fine to that alarm company. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed application form and the permit fee, the alarm administrator shall issue an alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant has: 
(1)  Failed to pay a fine assessed under section 39-38; or 
(2)  Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
(d)  Each permit application, either new construction or existing structure, must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial or apartment; 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system, i.e., burglary, holdup, duress, or other; 
(4)  Signed certification from the alarm user and the alarm business stating: 
a.  The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm system, whichever is applicable; 
b.  The name, address, and phone number of the alarm business performing the alarm system installation, conversion or alarm system takeover and responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system; 
c.  The name, address, and phone number of the alarm business monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing alarm business; 
d.  That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have been left with the applicant; and 
e.  That the alarm business has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms. 
(5)  Classification of the alarm site as being equipped or non-equipped for duress alarm. 
(e)  Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit and shall fall under section 39-43, Violations, and subject to fine. 
(f)  Alarm users are responsible for informing the alarm administrator of any changes that alter any information listed on the permit application within thirty (30) calendar days of such change(s). 
(g)  All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(h)  An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person and no portion of the permit fees are refundable. 
(i)  Information contained in permit applications shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city with access to such information. 
(j)  Existing valid alarm permits issued prior to the effective date of this section shall remain valid through June 30, 2000. The alarm user under such existing permits shall be entitled to issuance of a new annual permit in accordance with these provisions, without payment of the alarm application fee, upon submittal of a new permit application. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 2, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-28. - Individual apartment alarms. 
(a)  If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an apartment complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a representative of the apartment owner or property manager who can grant access to the apartment to the alarm business which is providing the monitoring service. 
(b)  A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain an alarm permit from the alarm administrator before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. The annual fee for this permit or the renewal of this permit shall be the same as the fee for a residential or commercial alarm site. 
(c)  For purposes of enforcing this article against an individual residential unit, the tenant is responsible for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 3, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-29. - Complex-wide apartment alarms. 
(a)  If the owner or property manager of an apartment complex provides alarm systems in each residential unit as an amenity, then the owner or property manager of the apartment complex shall obtain a master alarm permit from the alarm administrator. The initial fee for this permit shall be $100.00 and $10.00 per each residential unit. All this, whether occupied or not, shall be included in calculating the required fee. This fee will be charged in lieu of the $10.00 per residential permit. 
(b)  For purposes of assessing fines and enforcing this article, the master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of fines for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm systems in residential units. 
(c)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant areas and office, storage and equipment areas. An annual fee for such a permit shall be the same as the fee for a residential alarm site. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 4, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-30. - Permit duration and renewal. 
A permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee to the alarm administrator. There shall be no fee for renewal of an active and valid permit renewal fee if there has been no false alarm at the alarm site during the previous twelve months; otherwise the renewal fee shall be $10.00. The alarm administrator will endeavor to notify each alarm user of the need to renew 30 days prior to the expiration of their permit; however, it is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a non-permitted alarm system, and citations and penalties shall be assessed and, if notice of renewal was sent, there shall be no waiver of said penalty. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 5, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-31. - System operation and maintenance. 
(a)  An alarm user shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches; and 
(2)  Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within one hour when notified by the city to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises; and 
(3)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(4)  Provide a "swinger shut-down" option for active zones within the premises. 
(b)  An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated. 
(c)  An alarm user shall have a properly licensed alarm business inspect his alarm system after two false alarm dispatches in a one-year period. After a third false alarm dispatch, the alarm user must have a properly licensed alarm business modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant and/or provide additional user training, as appropriate. The alarm user shall provide the alarm administrator with a corrective action report signed by the qualifying agent for the alarm company; a copy will be forwarded to the police department. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 6, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-32. - Monitoring. 
(a)  An alarm business performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Operate in full compliance with Florida Statutes; 
(2)  Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator; 
(3)  Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress or hold-up alarm activation before requesting a police response to an alarm signal; 
(4)  Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the city in a manner and form approved by the alarm administrator; 
(5)  Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the city in a manner approved by the alarm administrator; 
(6)  Ensure that all users of alarm systems equipped with duress alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the duress alarm. 
(b)  The alarm administrator shall: 
(1)  Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; 
(2)  Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. 
(c)  A second request to respond to the same premises within a 24-hour period, except for response to a duress or hold up alarm activation, will require the response of a key holder. It is the duty of the alarm monitoring company to contact the key holder before this second dispatch request is made. If a key holder cannot be contacted, the police department will not be requested to respond. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 7, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-33. - Duties of alarm businesses. 
(a)  After January 1, 2000, alarm businesses shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Alarm businesses may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with this feature prior to January 1, 2000. However, after January 1, 2000, when performing a takeover or conversion, an alarm business must remove the one plus duress alarm capability from the alarm system being taken over or converted. 
(b)  After January 1, 2000, alarm businesses shall not install a devices for activating a hold-up alarm which is a single action non-recessed button. 
(c)  Any alarm company service technician that fails to place a system on "test" and causes a false alarm dispatch, shall be assessed a $100.00 fine; a copy of the fine and notification from the alarm administrator shall be sent to the alarm company owner/manager. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 8, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-34. - Operating instructions. 
An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 9, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-35. - Dispatch records. 
(a)  The officer responding to an alarm dispatch request shall record such information as necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited, to the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the permit number for the alarm site; 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site; 
(3)  Arrival time at the alarm site and dispatch received time; 
(4)  Date and time; 
(5)  Weather conditions; 
(6)  Area and/or sub-area of premise involved; 
(7)  Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any; 
(8)  Identification of the responsible alarm business; and/or 
(9)  Unable to locate the address. 
(b)  The responding police officer shall indicate on the dispatch record whether the dispatch was caused by a criminal offense, an attempted criminal offense, or was a false alarm dispatch. A copy will be provided by the police department to the respective alarm company for informational purposes. 
(c)  In the case of an assumed false alarm dispatch, the responding police officer shall leave notice at the alarm site that the police department has responded to a false alarm dispatch. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of police response to the false alarm dispatch; 
(2)  The identification number of the responding police officer, and; 
(3)  A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid fines per the ordinance. 
(d)  Alarm businesses which perform monitoring services must maintain for a period of at least one year following request for police dispatch to an alarm site, records relating to the dispatch. Records must include the name, address and phone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s) or point(s) activated, the time of request for police dispatch and evidence that an attempt to verify was made to the alarm site prior to the request for police dispatch. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for individually named alarm users. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 10, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-36. - Performance review. 
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm business responsible for the repair of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 11, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-37. - User's awareness class. 
The administrator shall oversee the creation and implementation of a false alarm user awareness class. The two-hour program shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarm dispatches and teach alarm users how to operate their alarm systems without generating false alarm dispatches. The special magistrate, when reviewing false alarm cases, may waive fines and recommend the awareness class, if deemed appropriate. These classes will be held at different times and locations by the police department and sheriff's office to facilitate attendance and to minimize scheduling conflicts. There shall be a $35.00 administrative fee charged to attend an alarm users' class. The fee will cover costs associated with conducting the course, including all informational materials and handouts. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 12, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-38. - Fines. 
(a)  An alarm user or the master permit holder for an apartment complex shall be subject to fines, warnings and suspension or revocation of permit depending on the number of false alarm dispatches emitted from an alarm system within a 12-month period based upon the following schedule: 
Number of False Alarm Dispatches 	Action Taken 	Fines 
1st 	On-site written notice 	None 
2nd 	On-site written notice and warning letter 	None 
3rd 	On-site written notice and mailed citation 	$ 50.00 
		(Fine may be waived if user class attended) 
4th 	On-site written notice and mailed citation 	  100.00 
		(Mandatory attendance of user class) 
5th or more 	On-site written notice of revocation of permit 	 250.00 
 
(b)  In addition, any person, operating a non-permitted alarm system, whether revoked, suspended or never acquired and whether the alarm proves to be real or false will be subject to a citation and fine per the following schedule: 
Number of False Alarm Dispatches 	Action Taken 	Fines 
1st 	Written notice to register alarm 	$ 50.00 
2nd 	On-site written notice 	  50.00 
3rd 	On-site written notice 	 100.00 
4th 	On-site written notice 	 150.00 
5 or more 	On-site written notice 	 250.00 
 
For the first such dispatch, the alarm administrator shall waive this additional fine for a nonpermitted system, unless the system permit has been revoked pursuant to subsection (a) above, if the alarm user applies for a permit within 30 calendar days after such violation. Any subsequent false alarm dispatches will continue to be fined per the schedule in subsection (a), above. 
(c)  An alarm user may register for a false alarm user awareness class prior to having any false alarm dispatchers, as a means to educate themselves and help prevent false alarm dispatches. 
(d)  Alarm dispatch requests, caused by actual criminal offense or with evidence of a criminal attempt, shall not be counted as a false alarm dispatch. 
(e)  The alarm administrator may reinstate a suspended permit upon receipt of acceptable evidence that the cause has been addressed and appropriate corrective action has been taken as per section 39-42. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 13, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-39. - Appeals of determinations and fines. 
(a)  An alarm user may appeal the determination of a false alarm dispatch or assessment of a fine to the special magistrate by filing a written request for hearing setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 10 calendar days after receipt of the fine. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the special magistrate stays the assessment of the fine until the special magistrate makes a final decision. 
(b)  The special magistrate shall conduct a formal hearing and consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The special magistrate shall make its decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing including, but not limited to, evidence that a false alarm dispatch was caused by a defective part that has been repaired or replaced or that an alarm dispatch request was caused by a criminal offense. The special magistrate shall reserve the right to call upon the respective alarm company to provide a representative in order to verify attempts to correct/not correct a failed system. The special magistrate shall hear the matter within forty-five (45) calendar days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The special magistrate shall affirm, reverse or modify the assessment of the fine and/or include attendance at a false alarm awareness class. The decision of the special magistrate is final as to administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 14, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-40. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  In addition to suspension or revocation pursuant to section 39-38, the alarm administrator may suspend or revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit; or 
(2)  The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of any fee assessed hereunder. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the chief may refuse police response to an alarm dispatch request at an alarm site for which the alarm permit is revoked. 
(d)  If the alarm permit is reinstated pursuant to section 39-42, the alarm administrator may revoke the alarm permit if it is determined that two subsequent false alarm dispatches occur within 60 calendar days after the reinstatement date. 
(e)  The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator to the special magistrate by filing a written request for a review to the special magistrate setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 20 calendar days after receipt of the notice from the alarm administrator. A copy of the request will be sent to the police department for notification and processing. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 15, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-41. - Appeals of permit denial, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  If the alarm administrator denies the issuance or renewal of a permit, or suspends or revokes a permit, he or she shall send written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the applicant for alarm use and the alarm business. The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator to the special magistrate by filing with the city clerk a written request for a review of the decision, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within 20 calendar days after receipt of the notice from the alarm administrator. An alarm business may submit the request for review on behalf of an alarm user. A copy of the request shall be sent by the alarm user to the police department for notification and processing. Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator suspending or revoking a permit until the special magistrate has completed its review. If a request for appeal is not made within the 20-calendar-day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. 
(b)  The special magistrate shall conduct a formal hearing and consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The special magistrate shall make its decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing including, but not limited to, that a defective part has been repaired or replaced, or that the cause of the false alarm has been otherwise determined and corrected. The special magistrate reserves the right to summon a representative of the alarm company to verify the above, protecting both the alarm user and the alarm company from any misrepresentation. The special magistrate must hear the appeal within 45 calendar days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The special magistrate shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the alarm administrator. The decision of the special magistrate is final as to administrative remedies with the city. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 16, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-42. - Reinstatement. 
A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit if the person: 
(1)  Submits an updated application; and 
(2)  Pays, or otherwise resolves, all citations and fines; and 
(3)  Submits a notarized certification from an alarm business that complies with the requirements of this article, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm business; and 
(4)  Certification that alarm users have been retrained. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 17, 11-3-99)  
Sec. 39-43. - Violations. 
A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission any provision of this article that imposes upon him a duty or responsibility and is subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. O-99-15, § 18, 11-3-99)  
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26; fireworks, § 70-4. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 42-26. - Volunteer fire department. 
The city may support and assist a volunteer fire department. Such support and assistance may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  The furnishing of city fire trucks, firefighting equipment and supplies for any use by the volunteer fire department. 
(2)  Payments to volunteer firemen for attendance at volunteer fire department meetings or for answering fire alarms and calls. 
(3)  The payment of premiums on life insurance and hospitalization insurance policies covering volunteer firemen. 
(Code 1980, § 11-1)  
Secs. 42-27—42-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; refusal of building permit due to fire hazard, § 26-36. 
 
Sec. 42-46. - Adoption of fire prevention codes. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by reference the Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1996 edition, as adopted by the Southern Building Code Congress International, the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Pamphlet 1, 1987 edition, and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101, Life Safety Code, 1994 edition, subject to only specific additions, deletions or amendments set out in the Code of Ordinances, and except insofar as such provisions, by their very nature, could have no application in the city. Future editions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code shall be presented to the city council for consideration of adoption and incorporation herein within 90 days of publication thereof. 
(b)  One copy of such edition or revision is on file at the city hall. 
(c)  After a new edition or revision of the fire prevention code goes into effect, the modifications which may be contained in this article shall remain in effect until revised by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 11-18; Ord. No. 0-92-17, § 3, 10-14-92; Ord. No. O-96-15, § 1, 8-28-96) 
State Law reference— Fire prevention code, F.S. § 553.73.  
Sec. 42-47. - Life Safety Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted the 1994 edition of the Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, as published by the National Fire Protection Association. One copy is on file in the city clerk's office. Future editions of the Life Safety Code shall be presented to the city council for consideration of adoption within 90 days of publication thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-96-15, § 2, 8-28-96) 
State Law reference— Life Safety Code to be adopted, F.S. § 633.025.  
Sec. 42-48. - Control of open burning. 
(a)  Open burning restrictions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning except as provided herein. No person shall fail or refuse to take all reasonable and necessary steps and precautions to prevent open burning upon any premises owned, occupied or under control of such person. No person shall fail or refuse to take all reasonable and necessary steps and precautions to prevent open burning upon any premises owned, occupied or under control of such person. No person shall fail or refuse to take all reasonable and necessary steps and precautions to extinguish or otherwise terminate and abate any open burning which has originated through any cause whatsoever upon any premises owned, occupied or under the control of such person or upon premises upon which such person is carrying out any operation or activity. 
(b)  [Exceptions.] The following are exceptions and restrictions against open burning: 
(1)  Campfires used solely for recreational purposes, warming fires for outdoor workers, fires for noncommercial cooking, and small fires for ceremonial purposes are allowed anywhere within the city without any permit from any governmental body provided that the fire does not create excessive smoke or cause a nuisance in any manner. Small household trash and household paper product fires are prohibited. 
(2)  Open burning of vegetation and wood materials resulting from land clearing. Open burning of wood and vegetation piled up during a land clearing operation may be permitted provided all of the following conditions are complied with: 
a.  The burning shall first be approved by the division of forestry, the fire chief and city council; in order to approve a request to allow open burning under this subsection, the city council must find that it is in the public interest; 
b.  All of the requirements of chapter 17-5 of the Florida Administrative Code must be met; 
c.  An air curtain incinerator permitted by the state and county must be utilized in connection with burning of materials; 
d.  The fire shall be at least 1,500 feet from the nearest occupied building and at least 150 feet from the nearest public road, unless the council finds that a lesser distance is both reasonably necessary and safe; 
e.  The piles of materials to be burned shall burn out completely one hour before sunset; 
f.  Burning shall be conducted only on days of low pollution potential, when the drought index is below 500, and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on such days; 
g.  Smoke shall not blow over a road to obstruct vehicular traffic; 
h.  Air traffic shall not be obstructed; 
i.  Prior authorization shall be obtained from the division of forestry, the chief of the fire department and the city building official; 
j.  Only clean fuel not containing garbage, rubber, plastics or other refuse shall be allowed for the start-up of fires; and 
k.  The burning of tires, other rubber materials, roofing materials, plastics and creosoted wood are prohibited. 
(3)  Open burning shall be allowed by governmental agencies when necessary to accomplish a police-power purpose, upon notice to the city. 
(c)  Cancellation of fires. Any police officer, fire department officer or code enforcement officer of the city may order the immediate termination of any outdoor fire within the city limits if weather conditions change, whereby a fire may constitute a danger of wildfire, air pollution or other nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 11-19; Ord. No. O-96-16, § 1, 10-9-96; Ord. No. O-99-37, 12-1-99; Ord. No. O-03-15, § 1, 11-12-03) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Chapter 46 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-11, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2012, effective Dec. 4, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 46, §§ 46-1—46-28. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 46 as set out herein. The former Ch. 46 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from O-11-03, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 13, 2011. This chapter shall apply to all applications for development, including building permit applications and subdivisions proposals, submitted on or after December 4, 2012. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance" of the City of Sebastian, hereinafter referred to as "this chapter." 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-3. - Intent. 
The purposes of this chapter and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-4. - Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
This chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-5. - Warning. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-6. - Disclaimer of liability. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City Council of the City of Sebastian or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 46-7. - General. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-8. - Areas to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Sebastian, as established in section 46-9. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-9. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
The Flood Insurance Study for Indian River County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated December 4, 2012, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this chapter and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Office of Community Development, City Hall, City of Sebastian, 1225 Main Street, Sebastian, Florida. 
(1)  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to Article I, Division 5 of this chapter the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this chapter and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
b.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-10. - Other laws. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-11. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This chapter shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-12. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 3. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 46-13. - Designation. 
The building official is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-14. - General. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this chapter without the granting of a variance pursuant to Article I, Division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-15. - Applications and permits. 
The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this chapter is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-16. - Determinations for existing buildings and structures. 
For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this chapter is required. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-17. - Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Article I, Division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-18. - Notices and orders. 
The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-19. - Inspections. 
The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in Article I, Division 6 of this chapter for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-20. - Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 46-16 of this chapter; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this chapter and the Florida Building Code and this chapter to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Sebastian are modified; and 
(6)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-21. - Floodplain management records. 
Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this chapter; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the office of Community Development, City Hall, City of Sebastian, 1225 Main St., Sebastian, Florida. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 46-22. - Permits required. 
Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this chapter, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-23. - Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(1)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this chapter: 
a.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
b.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
c.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
d.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
e.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
f.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
g.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
h.  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
i.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-24. - Application for a permit or approval. 
To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in Article I, Division 5 of this chapter. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-25. - Validity of permit or approval. 
The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this chapter, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-26. - Expiration. 
A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-27. - Suspension or revocation. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-28. - Other permits required. 
Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The St. Johns River Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 5. - SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 
 
Sec. 46-29. - Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where flood hazard areas, base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with section 46-30 of this chapter. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 46-30(1) or (2) of this chapter. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Delineation of the Coastal Construction Control Line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(8)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(9)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-30. - Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). 
Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source; or 
(2)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to develop base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(3)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-31. - Additional analyses and certifications. 
As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 46-32 of this chapter and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, a floodway encroachment analysis which demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 46-32 of this chapter. 
(4)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-32. - Submission of additional data. 
When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 46-33. - General. 
Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(1)  Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(2)  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
a.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 46-30(2)b of this chapter, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
b.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 46-33(2)a of this chapter. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. The building official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 7. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 46-34. - General. 
The board of adjustment as established by the city council shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this chapter. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the board of adjustment shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-35. - Appeals. 
The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-36. - Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
The board of adjustment shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 46-39 of this chapter, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 46-40 of this chapter, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The board of adjustment has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter. 
(1)  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 46-31 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-37. - Historic buildings. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-38. - Functionally dependent uses. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this chapter, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 46-36(1), is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-39. - Considerations for issuance of variances. 
In reviewing requests for variances, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this chapter, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-40. - Conditions for issuance of variances. 
Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the board of adjustment that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 46-41. - Violations. 
Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-42. - Authority. 
For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-43. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-10 (General penalty; continuing violations) and section 2-194 (Enforcement procedures) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-44. - Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-45. - Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. 
Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-46. - Terms not defined. 
Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
[Sec. 46-46.5. - Definitions.] 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood. A flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1—V30, VE, or V. [ Note: The FBC, B defines and uses the term "flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" and the FBC, R uses the term "coastal high hazard areas."] 
Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before April 9, 1980. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 9, 1980. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this chapter. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
Letter of Map Change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
(1)  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
(2)  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
(3)  Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
(4)  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this chapter, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
New construction. For the purposes of administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after April 9, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 9, 1980. 
Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [Defined in F.S. § 320.01(b).] 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1—A30, AE, A99, AH, V1—V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT  
DIVISION 1. - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 46-47. - Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to section 46-23(1) of this chapter, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of Article III, Division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-48. - Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. 
If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building, Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in § 161.54, F.S., shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this chapter and ASCE 24. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 46-49. - Minimum requirements. 
Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-50. - Subdivision plats. 
Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 46-30(1) or (2) of this chapter; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of Article III, Division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 3. - SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 
 
Sec. 46-51. - Minimum requirements. 
All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-52. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-53. - Water supply facilities. 
All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-54. - Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 46-31(1) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-55. - Limitations on placement of fill. 
Subject to the limitations of this chapter, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-56. - Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 46-31(4) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 46-76 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 4. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 46-57. - General. 
All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-58. - Foundations. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazards areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322.2 and this chapter. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322.3 and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-59. - Anchoring. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-60. - Elevation. 
Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with section 46-60(1) or section 46-60(2) of this chapter, as applicable. 
(1)  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of section 46-60(2) of this chapter, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
(2)  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 46-60(1) of this chapter, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
a.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
b.  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-61. - Enclosures. 
Fully enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-62. - Utility equipment. 
Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 5. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS 
 
Sec. 46-63. - Temporary placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-64. - Permanent placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 46-63 of this chapter for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Article III, Division 4 of this chapter for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 6. - TANKS 
 
Sec. 46-65. - Underground tanks. 
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-66. - Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 46-67 of this chapter shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-67. - Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-68. - Tank inlets and vents. 
Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
DIVISION 7. - OTHER DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 46-69. - General requirements for other development. 
All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 46-54 of this chapter if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-70. - Fences in regulated floodways. 
Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 46-54 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-71. - Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. 
Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 46-54 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-72. - Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. 
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 46-54 of this chapter. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 46-31(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-73. - Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four inches. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-74. - Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of 12 inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-75. - Other development in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Sec. 46-76. - Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. O-12-11, § 2, 11-14-12, eff. 12-4-12)  
Chapter 50 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; solid wastes, ch. 86; refuse disposal and waterways of the city prohibited, § 110-3; health and sanitation rules regarding watercraft, § 110-38; required equipment for excrement, waste, and refuse disposal for watercraft, § 110-40. 
State Law reference— Public health, F.S. ch. 381 et seq.; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. ch. 386. 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Septic tanks as minimum requirements for sewage disposal; permits; placement of. 
(a)  The minimum requirements for sewage disposal of all sewage in the city which shall be composed in whole or in part of excretions from the human body, shall be that the sewage shall be discharged into a septic tank constructed and maintained, and the effluent therefrom disposed of, all in accordance with and as provided by the state sanitary code. 
(b)  Prior to the installation of a septic tank, a permit must be secured from the city in addition to the permit required by the county board of health. 
(c)  No septic tank shall be installed in the rear of a building or residence. All septic tanks shall be installed in front or on the front side of a building or residence. If this is not possible, the septic tank shall be located as directed by the building official. 
(Code 1980, § 13-2) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 102; individual sewage disposal systems prohibited where sanitary sewers services available, § 102-31.  
Sec. 50-2. - Surface closets; maintaining restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any surface closet used for the deposit of human excreta within the corporate limits of the city, unless such surface closet is flyproof in construction and is maintained in strict conformity with the rules and regulations of the state division of health. 
(Code 1980, § 13-4)  
Sec. 50-3. - Manufacturing and industrial plants, fish houses, etc., prohibited in certain area. 
The establishment, maintenance and operation of industrial plants, manufacturing plants, fish houses and houses and establishments engaged in the processing, handling and shipping of fish and seafood in the area south of Main Street and east of Central Avenue in the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 13-3) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority for this section, F.S. § 381.0016.  
Sec. 50-4. - Certain mulching machines prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to operate within the city limits any tub grinder, or any other mulching machine, having a tub or otherwise exposed chopping area with a diameter in excess of four feet. 
(Ord. No. O-01-17, § 1, 8-8-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-0-17, adopted Aug. 8, 2001, enacted provisions pertaining to certain mulching machines being prohibited, designated as § 50-54. Such section has been redesignated by the editor as § 50-4, in order to maintain consecutive section numbers.  
Sec. 50-5. - Florida-friendly fertilizer use on urban landscapes. 
(a)  Findings. As a result of impairment to the City of Sebastian's surface waters caused by excessive nutrients, or, as a result of increasing levels of nitrogen in the surface and/or ground water within the aquifers or springs within the boundaries of the City of Sebastian, the city council has determined that the use of fertilizers on lands within the City of Sebastian creates a contributing risk that adversely effects surface and/or ground water. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. This section regulates the proper use of fertilizers by any applicator; requires proper training of commercial and institutional fertilizer applicators; establishes training and licensing requirements; establishes a prohibition application period; specifies allowable fertilizer application rates and methods, fertilizer-free zones, low maintenance zones, and exemptions. The ordinance requires the use of Best Management Practices which provide specific management guidelines to minimize negative secondary and cumulative environmental effects associated with the misuse of fertilizers. These secondary and cumulative effects have been observed in and on the City of Sebastian's natural and constructed stormwater conveyances, rivers, creeks, canals, springs, lakes, estuaries and other water bodies. Collectively, these water bodies are an asset critical to the environmental, recreational, cultural and economic well-being of the City of Sebastian's residents and the health of the public. Overgrowth of algae and vegetation hinder the effectiveness of flood attenuation provided by natural and constructed stormwater conveyances. Regulation of nutrients, including both phosphorus and nitrogen contained in fertilizer, will help improve and maintain water and habitat quality. 
(c)  Definitions. For this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
"Administrator" means the city manager, or any other city official designated by the city manager. 
"Application" or "apply" means the actual physical deposit of fertilizer to turf or landscape plants. 
"Applicator" means any person who applies fertilizer on turf and/or landscape plants in the City of Sebastian. 
"Board" or "governing board" means City Council of the City of Sebastian. 
"Best Management Practices" means turf and landscape practices or combinations of practices based on research, field-testing, and expert review, determined to be the most effective and practicable on-location means, including economic and technological considerations, for improving water quality, conserving water supplies and protecting natural resources. 
"Commercial fertilizer applicator" , except as provided in F.S. § 482.1562(9), means any person who applies fertilizer for payment or other consideration to property not owned by the person or firm applying the fertilizer or the employer of the applicator. 
"Fertilize", "fertilizing", or "fertilization" means the act of applying fertilizer to turf, specialized turf, or landscape plants. 
"Guaranteed analysis" means the percentage of plant nutrients or measures of neutralizing capability claimed to be present in a fertilizer. 
"Institutional applicator" means any person, other than a private, non-commercial or a commercial applicator (unless such definitions also apply under the circumstances), that applies fertilizer for the purpose of maintaining turf and/or landscape plants. Institutional applicators shall include, but shall not be limited to, owners, managers or employees of public lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business sites and any residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common ownership. 
"Landscape plant" means any native or exotic tree, shrub or groundcover (excluding turf). 
"Low maintenance zone" means an area a minimum of ten feet wide adjacent to water courses which is planted and managed in order to minimize the need for fertilization, watering, mowing, etc. 
"Person" means any natural person, business, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, association, club, organization, an/or any group of people acting as an organized entity. 
"Prohibited application period" means June 1 through September 30 or the time period during which a flood watch or warning, or a tropical storm water or warning, or a hurricane watch or warning is in effect for any portion of the City of Sebastian, issued by the National Weather Service, or if heavy rainfall is likely. 
"Sebastian Approved Management Practices Training Program" means a training program approved per F.S. § 403.9338, or any more stringent requirements set forth in this Chapter that includes the most current version of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection's "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of water Resources by the Green Industries, 2008" as revised and approved by the administrator. 
"Saturated soil" means a soil in which the voids are filled with water. Saturation does not require flow. For the purpose of this section, soils shall be considered saturated if standing water is present or the pressure of a person standing on the soil causes the release of free water. 
"Slow release" , "controlled release" , "timed release" , "slowly available" or "water insoluble nitrogen" means nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for plant uptake and use after application, or which extends its availability to the plant longer than a reference rapid or quick release product. 
"Turf" , "sod" , or "lawn" means a piece of grass-covered soil held together by the roots of the grass. 
"Urban landscape" means pervious areas on residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, highway right-of-way, or other nonagricultural lands that are planted with turf or horticultural plants. For the purposes of this section, agriculture has the same meaning as in F.S. § 570.02. 
(d)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to and shall regulate all applicators of fertilizer and areas of application of fertilizer within the City of Sebastian unless such applicator is specifically exempted by the terms of this section from the regulatory provision of this section. This section shall be prospective only, and shall not impair any existing contracts. 
(e)  Timing of fertilizer application. No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus to turf and/or landscape plants during the prohibited application period, or to saturated soils. 
(f)  Fertilizer free zones. Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten feet of any pond, stream, watercourse, lake, canal, or wetland as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (Chapter 62-340, Florida Administrative Code) or from the top of a seawall. If more stringent City of Sebastian Code regulations apply, this provision does not relieve the requirement to adhere to the more stringent regulations. Newly planted turf and/or landscape plants may be fertilized in this zone only for a 60-day period beginning 30 days after planting if need to allow the plants to become well established. Caution shall be used to prevent direct deposition of nutrients into the water. 
(g)  Low maintenance zones. A voluntary ten-foot low maintenance zone is strongly recommended, but not mandated, from any pond, stream, water course, lake, wetland or from the top of a seawall. A swale/berm system is recommended for installation at the landward edge of this low maintenance zone to capture and filter runoff. If more stringent City of Sebastian Code regulations apply, this provision does not relieve the requirement to adhere to the more stringent regulations. No mowed or cut vegetative material may be deposited or left remaining in this zone or deposited in the water. Care should be taken to prevent the over-spray of aquatic weed products in this zone. 
(h)  Fertilizer content and application rates. 
(1)  No fertilizer containing phosphorous shall be applied to turf or landscape plants in the City of Sebastian unless a soil or plant tissue deficiency is verified by a University of Florida, Institute of Food and Agriculture Sciences, approved testing methodology. In the case that a deficiency has been verified, the application of a fertilizer containing phosphorous shall be in accordance with the rates and directions for the Central Region of Florida as provided by Rule 5E-1.003(2), Florida Administrative Code. Deficiency verification shall be no more than two years old. However, recent application of compost, manure, or top soil shall warrant more recent testing to verify current deficiencies. 
(2)  The nitrogen content of fertilizer applied to turf or landscape plants within the City of Sebastian shall contain at least 50 percent slow release nitrogen per guaranteed analysis label. 
(3)  Fertilizers applied to an urban lawn or turf within the City of Sebastian shall be applied in accordance with requirements and directions set forth on the label or tag for packaged fertilizer products, or in the printed information accompanying the delivery of bulk fertilizer products, as provided by Rule 5E-1.003(2), Florida Administrative Code, Labeling Requirements For Urban Turf Fertilizers. All packaged and bulk fertilizer products sold in the City of Sebastian shall be sold in packages with labels or tags, or, if sold in bulk, be accompanied by printed information, which complies with the requirements of Rule 5E-1.003(2), Florida Administrative Code. 
(4)  Fertilizer containing nitrogen or phosphorus shall not be applied before seeding or sodding a site, and shall not be applied for the first 30 days after seeding or sodding, except when hydro-seeding for temporary or permanent erosion control in an emergency situation (wildfire, etc.), or in accordance with the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan for that site. 
(i)  Application practices. 
(1)  Spreader deflector shields are required when fertilizing via rotary (broadcast) spreaders. Deflectors must be positioned such that fertilizer granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces, fertilizer-free zones and water bodies, include wetlands. 
(2)  Fertilizer shall not be applied, spilled or otherwise deposited on any impervious surfaces. 
(3)  Any fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed to the greatest extent practicable. 
(4)  Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or any other legal site, or returned to the original or other appropriate container. 
(5)  In no case shall fertilizer be washed, swept, or blown off impervious surfaces into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, or water bodies. 
(j)  Management of grass clipping and vegetative matter. In no case shall grass clippings, vegetative material, and/or vegetative debris be washed, swept, or blown off into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, water bodies, wetlands, or sidewalks or roadways. Any material that is accidentally so deposited shall be immediately removed to the maximum extent practicable. 
(k)  Exemptions. The provisions set forth in the chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Bona fide farm operations as defined in the Florida Right to Farm Act, F.S. § 823.14; 
(2)  Other properties not subject to or covered under the Florida Right to Farm Act that have pastures used for grazing livestock; 
(3)  Any lands used for bona fide scientific research, including, but not limited to, research on the effects of fertilizer use on urban stormwater, water quality, agronomics, or horticulture. 
(4)  Golf courses when landscaping is performed within the provisions of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection document, "Best Management Practices for the Enhancement of Environmental Quality on Florida Golf Courses", these provisions shall be followed when applying fertilizer to golf course practice and play areas; 
(5)  Athletic fields at public parks and school facilities that apply the concepts and principles embodied in the Florida Green BMPs, while maintaining the health and function of their specialized turf areas; 
(6)  Vegetable gardens owned by individual property owners or a community, and trees grown for their edible fruit. 
(l)  Training. 
(1)  All commercial and institutional applicators or fertilizer within the City of Sebastian, shall abide by and successfully complete the six-hour training program in the "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" offered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of Florida Extension "Florida-Friendly Landscapes" program, or an approved equivalent. 
(2)  Private, non-commercial applicators are encouraged to follow the recommendations of the University of Florida IFAS Florida Yards and Neighborhoods program when applying fertilizers. 
(m)  Licensing of commercial applicators. 
(1)  Prior to January 1, 2014, all commercial applicators of fertilizer with the City of Sebastian, shall abide by and successfully complete training and continuing education requirements in the "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries", offered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of Florida IFAS "Florida-Friendly Landscapes" program, or an approved equivalent program, prior to obtaining a City of Sebastian Local Business Tax Receipt for any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants. 
(2)  After December 31, 2013, all commercial applicators of fertilizer within the City of Sebastian, shall have and carry in their possession at all times when applying fertilizer, evidence of certification by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services as a Commercial Fertilizer Applicator per 5E-14.117(18) F.A.C. 
(3)  All businesses applying fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants (including but not limited to residential lawns, golf courses, commercial properties, and multi-family and condominium properties) must ensure that at least one employee has a "Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries" training certificate prior to the business owner obtaining a local business tax receipt. Owners for any category of occupation which may apply and fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants shall provide proof of completion of the program to the City of Sebastian. 
(n)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section may be enforced pursuant to any method provided for by the Code or Ordinances or general law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-06, § 1, 5-9-12; Ord. No. O-14-02, § 1, 3-26-14)  
Sec. 50-6. - E-cigarette sales and use. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings given herein: 
City means the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
E-cigarette means any electronic device composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and electronic circuits that provides a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances mixed with propylene glycol to the user that he or she inhales in simulation of smoking. This term shall include such devices whether they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes or under any other product name. 
Liquid nicotine means any liquid product composed either in whole or part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and manufactured for use with e-cigarettes. 
Open display unit, in the context of the retail sale of e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine, means any device, furniture or furnishing within or upon which e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine are displayed to customers, and includes but is not limited to any case, rack, shelf, counter, table, desk, kiosk, booth, stand and other surface. 
Person means any natural person or artificial entity capable of suing and being sued in the State of Florida. 
Self-service merchandising, in the context of the retail sale of e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine, means the open display of e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and handling prior to purchase without the intervention or assistance of the retailer or the retailer's owner, employee or agent. Such open display includes the use of an open display unit. 
Smoking means smoking as defined in F.S. § 386.203, as the same may be amended from time to time and any successor thereto. 
Use of an e-cigarette means the heating or ignition of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances mixed with propylene glycol to the user that he or she can inhale in simulation of smoking. 
(b)  Sale of e-cigarettes to minors prohibited. It is prohibited for any person to sell or offer for sale e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine within the city to a person under 18 years of age. 
(c)  Use of an e-cigarette where smoking prohibited. The use of an e-cigarette is prohibited at all locations within the city at which smoking is prohibited under F.S. ch. 386. 
(d)  Self-service merchandising prohibited. 
(1)  No person engaged in the retail sale of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine shall sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine by means of self-service merchandising. 
(2)  No person engaged in the retail sale of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine shall place e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine in an open display unit unless the same is located in an area that is inaccessible to customers. 
(Ord. No. O-13-12, § 2, 11-13-13)  
Chapter 54 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Sebastian Land Development Code, adopted by Ord. No. O-85-14 on Aug. 28, 1985, effective Sept. 9, 1985, containing the city's zoning and subdivision regulations, landscape and tree ordinances, sign ordinance, and related provisions, has been set out in a separate volume and is incorporated in this Code by reference. 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; posting signs, accessory to poles, § 6-1; municipal airport, 22-26 et seq.; building regulations generally, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; flood damage prevention, § 46-26 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 50; manufactured and mobile homes, ch. 62; City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan, § 78-26; street construction repair, § 90-31 et seq; waterways, ch. 110. 
 
Chapter 58 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; obstructing officers, § 70-6; forfeiture of vehicles under state law, § 70-8; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Police department, § 3.06 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 58-26. - Organization and duties generally. 
(a)  The police force of the city shall be organized in accordance with this article, and all members shall familiarize themselves with this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the force to: 
(1)  Prevent as well as to detect and punish crime; 
(2)  Obey laws and ordinances as well as to enforce them; 
(3)  Observe official orders and not to communicate them except as directed; 
(4)  Combine courtesy with efficiency; 
(5)  Protect the city and the person and property of its citizens; and 
(6)  Not merely to produce revenue or make a record for number of arrests. 
(c)  Technical or minor infractions may be passed with a friendly warning where no wrong is intended, no injury or damage results, and no dangerous custom or habit is encouraged or involved, but partiality is not to be practiced, nor disrespect for law encouraged, in any way. Weapons shall be used only in self-defense, or in case of necessity in making arrests or preventing escape, and then only with care and discretion. 
(d)  Information and aid shall be freely furnished to travelers, transients and citizens alike, and the principle of equality before the law faithfully observed. 
(e)  Policemen shall be prompt in reporting, loyal in service, honest in their actions, courteous in their conduct, discreet in their conversation, and courageous in the performance of duty. 
(Code 1980, § 21-20)  
Sec. 58-27. - Stolen automobiles, bicycles and personal property—Seizure by police department; storage. 
The police department is hereby authorized and directed to seize and take possession of in the name and on behalf of the city any stolen automobile, bicycle or other personal property which may be found upon any of the public streets or public property of the city and to remove and store the property on such place as shall be provided and designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1980, § 21-4) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Procedure for unclaimed evidence, F.S. § 705.105.  
Sec. 58-28. - Same—Notice; repossession by owner upon payment of charges. 
Upon taking possession of stolen property as provided in section 58-27, the police department shall make every effort to determine the owner of such property and upon such determination to notify the owner that the property is held by the city. The city, upon request by any owner submitting proof of ownership satisfactory to the police department, shall deliver possession of such property to the owner upon payment to the city of all of its costs, charges and expenses connected with the seizure, storage and search for ownership. 
(Code 1980, § 21-5)  
Secs. 58-29—58-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLICE OFFICERS' RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2015, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, § 58-46, pertained to police officers' pension plan, and derived from Code 1980, § 2-120; Ord. No. O-92-03, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 11, 1992; Ord. No. O-99-38, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1999; Ord. No. O-02-07, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 22, 2002; Ord. No. O-10-04, § 1, adopted August 25, 2010; Ord. No. O-12-02, § 2, adopted April 11, 2012; Ord. No. O-12-09, § 2, adopted Sept. 26, 2012. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; employee benefits, § 2-136 et seq.; casualty insurance premium tax levied for police officers retirement fund, § 94-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 58-46. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used herein, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions without interest. For those members who purchase credited service with interest or at no cost to the system, any payment representing the amount attributable to member contributions based on the applicable member contribution rate, and any payment representing interest and any required actuarially calculated payments for the purchase of such credited service, shall be included in accumulated contributions. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit or amount of equal value, based upon the RP 2000 Combined Healthy Unisex Mortality Table and an interest rate equal to the investment return assumption set forth in the last actuarial valuation report approved by the board. This definition may only be amended by the city pursuant to the recommendation of the board using the assumptions adopted by the board with the advice of the plan's actuary, such that actuarial assumptions are not subject to city discretion. 
Average final compensation means one-twelfth of the average salary of the five best years of the last ten years of credited service prior to retirement, termination, or death, or the career average as a full-time police officer, whichever is greater. A year shall be 12 consecutive months. 
Beneficiary means the person or persons entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect, or if no person so designated is living, at the time of death of the member, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the member. 
Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the system herein provided and serve as trustees of the fund. 
City means City of Sebastian, Florida. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
Credited service means the total number of years and fractional parts of years of service as a police officer with member contributions, when required, omitting intervening years or fractional parts of years when such member was not employed by the city as a police officer. A member may voluntarily leave his accumulated contributions in the fund for a period of five years after leaving the employ of the police department pending the possibility of being reemployed as a police officer, without losing credit for the time that he was a member of the system. If a vested member leaves the employ of the police department, his accumulated contributions will be returned only upon his written request. If a member who is not vested is not reemployed as a police officer with the police department within five years, his accumulated contributions, if less than $1,000.00 shall be returned. If a police officer who is not vested is not reemployed within five years, his Accumulated Contributions, if $1,000.00 or more, will be returned only upon the written request of the police officer and upon completion of a written election to receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount on forms designated by the Board. Upon return of a member's accumulated contributions, all of his rights and benefits under the system are forfeited and terminated. Upon any reemployment, a police officer shall not receive credit for the years and fractional parts of years of service for which he has withdrawn his accumulated contributions from the fund, unless the police officer repays into the fund the contributions he has withdrawn, with interest, as determined by the board, within 90 days after his reemployment. 
The years or fractional parts of a year that a member performs "Qualified Military Service" consisting of voluntary or involuntary "service in the uniformed services" as defined in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) (P.L.103-353), after separation from employment as a police officer with the city to perform training or service, shall be added to his years of credited service for all purposes, including vesting, provided that: 
(1)  The member is entitled to reemployment under the provisions of USERRA. 
(2)  The member returns to his employment as a police officer within one year from the earlier of the date of his military discharge or his release from active service, unless otherwise required by USERRA. 
(3)  The maximum credit for military service pursuant to this paragraph shall be five years. 
(4)  This paragraph is intended to satisfy the minimum requirements of USERRA. To the extent that this paragraph does not meet the minimum standards of USERRA, as it may be amended from time to time, the minimum standards shall apply. 
In the event a member dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing USERRA Qualified Military Service, the beneficiaries of the member are entitled to any benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) as if the member had resumed employment and then died while employed. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, to the extent required by section 414(u)(12) of the code, an individual receiving differential wage payments (as defined under section 3401(h)(2) of the code) from an employer shall be treated as employed by that employer, and the differential wage payment shall be treated as compensation for purposes of applying the limits on annual additions under section 415(c) of the code. This provision shall be applied to all similarly situated individuals in a reasonably equivalent manner. 
Leave conversions of unused accrued paid time off shall not be permitted to be applied toward the accrual of credited service either during each plan year of a member's employment with the city or in the plan year in which the member terminates employment. 
Fund means the trust fund established herein as part of the system. 
Member means an actively employed police officer who fulfills the prescribed membership requirements. Benefit improvements which, in the past, have been provided for by amendments to the system adopted by city ordinance, and any benefit improvements which might be made in the future shall apply prospectively and shall not apply to members who terminate employment or who retire prior to the effective date of any ordinance adopting such benefit improvements, unless such ordinance specifically provides to the contrary. 
Plan year means the 12-month period beginning October 1 and ending September 30 of the following year. 
Police officer means an actively employed full-time person, employed by the city, including his initial probationary employment period, who is certified as a police officer as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 943.1395, who is vested with authority to bear arms and make arrests, and whose primary responsibility is the prevention and detection of crime or the enforcement of the penal, traffic, or highway laws of the State of Florida. 
Retiree means a member who has entered retirement status. 
Retirement means a member's separation from city employment with eligibility for immediate receipt of benefits under the system (or entry into the deferred retirement option plan). 
Salary means the total compensation for services rendered to the city as a police officer reportable on the member's W-2 form plus all tax deferred, tax sheltered, or tax exempt items of income derived from elective employee payroll deductions or salary reductions but excluding accrued sick leave and vacation pay. For service earned on or after July 1, 2011, salary shall not include more than 300 hours of overtime per calendar year. Provided however, in any event, payments for overtime in excess of 300 hours per year accrued as of July 1, 2011 and attributable to service earned prior to the July 1, 2011, may still be included in salary for pension purposes even if the payment is not actually made until on or after July 1, 2011. In any event, with respect to unused sick leave and unused annual leave accrued prior to July 1, 2011, salary will include the lesser of the amount of sick or annual leave time accrued on July 1, 2011 or September 6, 2013, whichever is less. Should the sick leave or the annual leave accruals decrease below the capped amount, accruals used for the pension calculation shall not increase and the lower accrual amount will be used in the pension calculation formula based on the rate of pay in effect on July 1, 2011. 
Compensation in excess of the limitations set forth in Section 401(a)(17) of the Code as of the first day of the plan year shall be disregarded for any purpose, including employee contributions or any benefit calculations. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining benefits or employee contributions for any plan year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, may not exceed $200,000, as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with Code Section 401(a)(17)(B). Compensation means compensation during the fiscal year. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. If the determination period consists of fewer than 12 months, the annual compensation limit is an amount equal to the otherwise applicable annual compensation limit multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the short determination period, and the denominator of which is 12. If the compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a member's contributions or benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable annual compensation limit in effect for that prior period. The limitation on compensation for an "eligible employee" shall not be less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account hereunder as in effect on July 1, 1993. "Eligible employee" is an individual who was a member before the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1995. 
Spouse means the member's or retiree's spouse under applicable law at the time benefits become payable. 
System means the City of Sebastian Police Officers' Retirement System as contained herein and all amendments thereto. 
(b)  Masculine gender. The masculine gender, where used herein, unless the context specifically requires otherwise, shall include both the feminine and masculine genders. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15; Ord. No. O-16-07, § 1, 9-28-16; Ord. No. O-17-03, § 1, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-47. - Membership. 
(a)  Conditions of eligibility. All police officers as of October 1, 1989, and all future new police officers, shall become members of this system as a condition of employment. 
(b)  Designation of beneficiary. Each police officer shall complete a form prescribed by the board designating a beneficiary or beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-48. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of and responsibility for the proper operation of the system and for making effective the provisions of this ordinance is hereby vested in a board of trustees. The board is hereby designated as the plan administrator. The board shall consist of five trustees, two of whom, unless otherwise prohibited by law, shall be legal residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the Sebastian City Council, and two of whom shall be members of the system, who shall be elected by a majority of the police officers who are members of the system. The fifth trustee shall be chosen by a majority of the previous four trustees as provided for herein, and such person's name shall be submitted to the Sebastian City Council. Upon receipt of the fifth person's name, the Sebastian City Council shall, as a ministerial duty, appoint such person to the board as its fifth trustee. The fifth trustee shall have the same rights as each of the other four trustees appointed or elected as herein provided and shall serve a four-year term unless he sooner vacates the office. Each resident trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of four years, unless he sooner vacates the office or is sooner replaced by the Sebastian City Council at whose pleasure he shall serve. Each member trustee shall serve as trustee for a period of four years, unless he sooner leaves the employment of the city as a police officer or otherwise vacates his office as trustee, whereupon a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the departing trustee. Each trustee may succeed himself in office. DROP participants can be elected as but not vote for elected trustees. The board shall establish and administer the nominating and election procedures for each election. The board shall meet at least quarterly each year. The board shall be a legal entity with, in addition to other powers and responsibilities contained herein, the power to bring and defend lawsuits of every kind, nature, and description. 
(b)  The trustees shall, by a majority vote, elect a chairman and a secretary. The secretary of the board shall keep a complete minute book of the actions, proceedings, or hearings of the board. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by law. 
(c)  Each trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the board. Three affirmative votes shall be necessary for any decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. A trustee shall abstain from voting as the result of a conflict of interest and shall comply with the provisions of F.S. § 112.3143. 
(d)  The board shall engage such actuarial, accounting, legal, and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the system. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the system shall be paid from the fund at such rates and in such amounts as the board shall agree. In the event the board chooses to use the city's legal counsel, actuary or other professional, technical or other advisors, it shall do so only under terms and conditions acceptable to the board. 
(e)  The duties and responsibilities of the board shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To construe the provisions of the system and determine all questions arising thereunder. 
(2)  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and membership. 
(3)  To determine and certify the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder. 
(4)  To establish uniform rules and procedures to be followed for administrative purposes, benefit applications and all matters required to administer the system. 
(5)  To distribute to members, at regular intervals, information concerning the system. 
(6)  To receive and process all applications for benefits. 
(7)  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, of approved benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the system and fund. 
(8)  To have performed actuarial studies and valuations, at least as often as required by law, and make recommendations regarding any and all changes in the provisions of the system. 
(9)  To perform such other duties as are required to prudently administer the system. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15; Ord. No. O-17-03, § 2, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-49. - Finances and fund management. 
Establishment and operation of fund. 
(a)  As part of the system, there is hereby established the fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the system, including the assets of the prior police officers' retirement system. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund (and assets thereof) shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent but only upon written authorization from the board. 
(c)  All funds of the police officers' retirement system may be deposited by the board with the finance director of the city, acting in a ministerial capacity only, who shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as he is liable for the safekeeping of funds for the city. However, any funds so deposited with the finance director of the city shall be kept in a separate fund by the finance director or clearly identified as such funds of the police officers' retirement system. In lieu thereof, the board shall deposit the funds of the police officers' retirement system in a qualified public depository as defined in F.S. § 280.02, which depository with regard to such funds shall conform to and be bound by all of the provisions of F.S. ch. 280. In order to fulfill its investment responsibilities as set forth herein, the board may retain the services of a custodian bank, an investment advisor registered under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 or otherwise exempt from such required registration, an insurance company, or a combination of these, for the purposes of investment decisions and management. Such investment manager shall have discretion, subject to any guidelines as prescribed by the board, in the investment of all fund assets. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the system may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis, and 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements, and 
(3)  Benefit payments, and 
(4)  Current amounts clearly reflecting all monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city, and 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains (or losses) whatsoever, and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  An audit shall be performed annually by a certified public accountant for the most recent fiscal year of the system showing a detailed listing of assets and a statement of all income and disbursements during the year. Such income and disbursements must be reconciled with the assets at the beginning and end of the year. Such report shall reflect a complete evaluation of assets on both a cost and market basis, as well as other items normally included in a certified audit. 
(f)  The board shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board shall be vested with full legal title to said fund, subject, however, and in any event to the authority and power of the Sebastian City Council to amend or terminate this fund, provided that no amendment or fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under this system, except as otherwise provided herein. All contributions from time to time paid into the fund, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(2)  All monies paid into or held in the fund shall be invested and reinvested by the board and the investment of all or any part of such funds shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Notwithstanding any limitation provided for in F.S. ch. 185, to the contrary (unless such limitation may not be amended by local ordinance) or any limitation in prior city ordinances to the contrary, all monies paid into or held in the fund may be invested and reinvested in such securities, investment vehicles or property wherever situated and of whatever kind, as shall be approved by the board, including but not limited to common or preferred stocks, bonds, and other evidences of indebtedness or ownership. In no event, however, shall more than 25 percent of the assets of the fund at market value be invested in foreign securities. 
b.  The board shall develop and adopt a written investment policy statement setting forth permissible types of investments, goals and objectives of investments and setting quality and quantity limitations on investments in accordance with the recommendations of its investment consultants. The investment policy statement shall be reviewed by the board at least annually. 
c.  In addition, the board may, upon recommendation by the board's investment consultant, make investments in group trusts meeting the requirements of Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 81-100, Revenue Ruling 2011-1, IRS Notice 2012-6 and Revenue Ruling 2014-24 or successor rulings or guidance of similar import, and operated or maintained exclusively for the commingling and collective investment of monies, provided that the funds in the group trust consist exclusively of trust assets held under plans qualified under section 401(a) of the code, individual retirement accounts that are exempt under section 408(e) of the code, eligible governmental plans that meet the requirements of section 457(b) of the code, and governmental plans under 401(a)(24) of the code. For this purpose, a trust includes a custodial account or separate tax favored account maintained by an insurance company that is treated as a trust under section 401(f) or under section 457(g)(3) of the code. While any portion of the assets of the fund are invested in such a group trust, such group trust is itself adopted as a part of the system or plan. 
1.  Any collective or common group trust to which assets of the fund are transferred pursuant to subsection c. shall be adopted by the board as part of the plan by executing appropriate participation, adoption agreements, and/or trust agreements with the group trust's trustee. 
2.  The separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan pursuant to subsection c. shall not be used for, or diverted to, any purpose other than for the exclusive benefit of the members and beneficiaries of the plan. 
3.  For purposes of valuation, the value of the separate account maintained by the group trust for the plan shall be the fair market value of the portion of the group trust held for the plan, determined in accordance with generally recognized valuation procedures. 
(3)  At least once every three years, and more often as determined by the board, the board shall retain a professionally qualified independent consultant, as defined in F.S. § 185.06, to evaluate the performance of all current investment managers and make recommendations regarding the retention of all such investment managers. These recommendations shall be considered by the board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(4)  The board may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5)  Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the fund. 
(7)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(8)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power contained herein. 
(9)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city, or any other entity, of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member, retiree or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, retiree or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. Overpayments shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction or collected in another manner if prudent. Underpayments shall be made up from the fund in a prudent manner. 
(11)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits provided for herein. 
(12)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the board shall be a necessary party, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(13)  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times maintains continuous supervision over the acts of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to said fund shall always remain in the board. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15; Ord. No. O-16-07, § 2, 9-28-16)  
Sec. 58-50. - Contributions. 
(a)  Member contributions. 
(1)  Amount. Effective on the date of the adoption of the ordinance adopting this amendment each member of the system shall be required to make regular contributions to the fund in the amount of eight percent of his salary. Police officer contributions withheld by the city on behalf of the member shall be deposited with the board immediately after each pay period. The contributions made by each member to the fund shall be designated as employer contributions pursuant to Section 414(h) of the Code. Such designation is contingent upon the contributions being excluded from the members' gross income for Federal Income Tax purposes. For all other purposes of the system, such contributions shall be considered to be member contributions. 
(2)  Method. Such contributions shall be made by payroll deduction. 
(b)  State contributions. Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the State of Florida, for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for police officers of the city shall be deposited in the fund comprising part of this system immediately and under no circumstances more than five days after receipt by the city. 
(c)  City contributions. So long as this system is in effect, the city shall make quarterly contributions to the fund in an amount equal to the required city contribution, but in no event less than fourteen and two-tenths (14.2) percent of payroll, as shown by the applicable actuarial valuation of the system. 
(d)  Other. Private donations, gifts and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15; Ord. No. O-16-07, § 3, 9-28-16; Ord. No. O-17-03, § 3, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-51. - Benefit amounts and eligibility. 
(a)  Normal retirement age and date. A member's normal retirement age is the earlier of the attainment of age 55 and the completion of ten years of credited service or the attainment of age 52 and the completion of 25 years of credited service. Each member shall become 100 percent vested in his accrued benefit at normal retirement age. A member's normal retirement date shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date the member retires from the city after attaining normal retirement age. 
(b)  Normal retirement benefit. 
(1)  The amount of the monthly retirement income payable to a member hired prior to October 1, 2011 who retires on or after his normal retirement date shall be an amount equal to the number of years of credited service multiplied by three percent of his average final compensation. 
(2)  For members hired on or after October 1, 2011, the amount of the monthly retirement income payable to a member who retires on or after his normal retirement date shall be an amount equal to the number of years of credited service multiplied by two percent of his average final compensation for the years of credited service beginning on or after April 11, 2012 and ending October 1, 2016 and three percent of average final compensation for all credited service before April 11, 2012 and after October 1, 2016. 
(c)  Early retirement date. A member may retire on his early retirement date which shall be the first day of any month coincident with or next following the attainment of age 50 and the completion of ten years of credited service. Early retirement under the system is retirement from employment with the city on or after the early retirement date and prior to the normal retirement date. 
(d)  Early retirement benefit. A member retiring hereunder on his early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit payable in the same form as for normal retirement as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on what would have been his normal retirement date had he continued employment as a police officer and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The amount of each such deferred monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement on his normal retirement date except that credited service and average final compensation shall be determined as of his early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter. The benefit payable shall be as determined in paragraph (1) above, determined as if he had remained employed, reduced by three percent for each year by which the commencement of benefits precedes the date which would have been the police officer's normal retirement date had he continued employment as a police officer. 
(e)  Required distribution date. The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(f)  Cost-of-living adjustment. Future retirees with a minimum of 15 years of credited service shall receive a one percent automatic cost-of-living adjustment beginning on the first October 1 following the attainment of age 58. The COLA is applicable to all forms of retirement, including normal and early retirement, terminated vested, disability retirees and pre-retirement death beneficiaries. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15; Ord. No. O-16-07, § 4, 9-28-16; Ord. No. O-17-03, § 4, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-52. - Pre-retirement death. 
(a)  Prior to vesting or eligibility for retirement. The beneficiary of a deceased member who was not receiving monthly benefits or who was not yet vested or eligible for early or normal retirement shall receive a refund of 100 percent of the member's accumulated contributions. 
(b)  Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement with spouse as beneficiary. This subsection (b) applies only when the member's spouse is the sole designated beneficiary. The spouse beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement, shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
(1)  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the date that the deceased member would have been eligible for early or normal retirement, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. The spouse beneficiary may also elect to receive an immediate benefit, payable for ten years, which is actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the early retirement date. 
(2)  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the spouse beneficiary shall receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death or at the deceased member's otherwise early or normal retirement date, at the option of the spouse beneficiary. The benefit shall be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced as for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3)  A spouse beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, however, the board may elect to make a lump sum payment pursuant to section 58-55(g). 
(4)  A spouse beneficiary may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in (1) or (2) above, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(5)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, in any event, distributions to the spouse beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date selected pursuant to the above provisions in this section that must be on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained 70½. 
(6)  If the surviving spouse beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsection (1) or (2) above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the spouse beneficiary's estate in a lump sum. 
(c)  Deceased members vested or eligible for retirement with non-spouse beneficiary. This subsection applies only when the member's spouse is not the beneficiary or is not the sole designated beneficiary, but there is a surviving beneficiary. The beneficiary of any member who dies and who, at the date of his death was vested or eligible for early or normal retirement, shall be entitled to a benefit as follows: 
(1)  If the member was vested, but not eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten years. The benefit will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation and actuarially reduced to reflect the commencement of benefits prior to the normal retirement date. 
(2)  If the deceased member was eligible for normal or early retirement, the beneficiary will receive a benefit payable for ten years, beginning on the first day of the month following the member's death. The benefit will be calculated as for normal retirement based on the deceased member's credited service and average final compensation as of the date of his death and reduced for early retirement, if applicable. 
(3)  A beneficiary may not elect an optional form of benefit, however the board may elect to make a lump sum payment pursuant to section 58-55(g). 
(4)  A beneficiary, may, in lieu of any benefit provided for in (1) or (2) above, elect to receive a refund of the deceased member's accumulated contributions. 
(5)  If a surviving beneficiary commences receiving a benefit under subsection (1) or (2) above, but dies before all payments are made, the actuarial value of the remaining benefit will be paid to the surviving beneficiary's estate by December 31 of the calendar year of the beneficiary's death in a lump sum. 
(6)  If there is no surviving beneficiary as of the member's death, and the estate is to receive the benefits, the actuarial equivalent of the member's entire interest must be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
(7)  The Uniform Lifetime Table in Treasury Regulations § 1.401(a)(9)-9 shall determine the payment period for the calendar year benefits commence, if necessary to satisfy the regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-53. - Disability. 
(a)  Disability benefits in-line of duty. Any member who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, which disability was directly caused by the performance of his duty as a police officer, shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to the benefit accrual rate calculated pursuant to section 58-51, benefit amounts and eligibility, subsection (b), normal retirement benefit, but in any event the minimum amount paid to the member shall be 42 percent of the average final compensation of the police officer. Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the city for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within 30 days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(b)  In-line of duty presumptions. 
(1)  Presumption. Any condition or impairment of health of a member caused by hypertension or heart disease shall be presumed to have been suffered in line of duty unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence, provided that such member shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering into such service, including cardiogram, which examination failed to reveal any evidence of such condition; and provided further, that such presumption shall not apply to benefits payable or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(2)  Additional presumption. The presumption provided for in this paragraph (2) shall apply only to those conditions described in this paragraph (2) that are diagnosed on or after January 1, 1996. 
a.  Definitions. As used in this subsection (b)(2), the following definitions apply: 
1.  "Body fluids" means blood and body fluids containing visible blood and other body fluids to which universal precautions for prevention of occupational transmission of blood-borne pathogens, as established by the Centers for Disease Control, apply. For purposes of potential transmission of meningococcal meningitis or tuberculosis, the term "body fluids" includes respiratory, salivary, and sinus fluids, including droplets, sputum, and saliva, mucous, and other fluids through which infectious airborne organisms can be transmitted between persons. 
2.  "Emergency rescue or public safety member" means any member employed full time by the city as a firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical technician, law enforcement officer, or correctional officer who, in the course of employment, runs a high risk of occupational exposure to hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis and who is not employed elsewhere in a similar capacity. However, the term "emergency rescue or public safety member" does not include any person employed by a public hospital licensed under F.S. ch. 395, or any person employed by a subsidiary thereof. 
3.  "Hepatitis" means hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, hepatitis C, or any other strain of hepatitis generally recognized by the medical community. 
4.  "High risk of occupational exposure" means that risk that is incurred because a person subject to the provisions of this subsection, in performing the basic duties associated with his employment: 
i.  Provides emergency medical treatment in a non-health-care setting where there is a potential for transfer of body fluids between persons; 
ii.  At the site of an accident, fire, or other rescue or public safety operation, or in an emergency rescue or public safety vehicle, handles body fluids in or out of containers or works with or otherwise handles needles or other sharp instruments exposed to body fluids; 
iii.  Engages in the pursuit, apprehension, and arrest of law violators or suspected law violators and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids; or 
iv.  Is responsible for the custody, and physical restraint when necessary, of prisoners or inmates within a prison, jail, or other criminal detention facility, while on work detail outside the facility, or while being transported and, in performing such duties, may be exposed to body fluids. 
5.  "Occupational exposure," in the case of hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, means an exposure that occurs during the performance of job duties that may place a worker at risk of infection. 
b.  Presumption. Any emergency rescue or public safety member who suffers a condition or impairment of health that is caused by hepatitis, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis, that requires medical treatment, and that results in total or partial disability or death shall be presumed to have a disability suffered in the line of duty, unless the contrary is shown by competent evidence; however, in order to be entitled to the presumption, the member must, by written affidavit as provided in F.S. § 92.50, verify by written declaration that, to the best of his knowledge and belief: 
1.  In the case of a medical condition caused by or derived from hepatitis, he has not: 
i.  Been exposed, through transfer of bodily fluids, to any person known to have sickness or medical conditions derived from hepatitis, outside the scope of his employment; 
ii.  Had a transfusion of blood or blood components, other than a transfusion arising out of an accident or injury happening in connection with his present employment, or received any blood products for the treatment of a coagulation disorder since last undergoing medical tests for hepatitis, which tests failed to indicate the presence of hepatitis; 
iii.  Engaged in unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior, as identified by the Centers for Disease Control or the Surgeon General of the United States or had sexual relations with a person known to him to have engaged in such unsafe sexual practices or other high-risk behavior; or 
iv.  Used intravenous drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
2.  In the case of meningococcal meningitis, in the ten days immediately preceding diagnosis he was not exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known to have meningococcal meningitis or known to be an asymptomatic carrier of the disease. 
3.  In the case of tuberculosis, in the period of time since the member's last negative tuberculosis skin test, he has not been exposed, outside the scope of his employment, to any person known by him to have tuberculosis. 
c.  Immunization. Whenever any standard, medically recognized vaccine or other form of immunization or prophylaxis exists for the prevention of a communicable disease for which a presumption is granted under this section, if medically indicated in the given circumstances pursuant to immunization policies established by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Public Health Service, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required by the city to undergo the immunization or prophylaxis unless the member's physician determines in writing that the immunization or other prophylaxis would pose a significant risk to the member's health. Absent such written declaration, failure or refusal by an emergency rescue or public safety member to undergo such immunization or prophylaxis disqualifies the member from the benefits of the presumption. 
d.  Record of exposures. The city shall maintain a record of any known or reasonably suspected exposure of an emergency rescue or public safety member in its employ to the disease described in this section and shall immediately notify the member of such exposure. An emergency rescue or public safety member shall file an incident or accident report with the city of each instance of known or suspected occupational exposure to hepatitis infection, meningococcal meningitis, or tuberculosis. 
e.  Required medical tests; preemployment physical. In order to be entitled to the presumption provided by this section: 
1.  An emergency rescue or public safety member must, prior to diagnosis, have undergone standard, medically acceptable tests for evidence of the communicable disease for which the presumption is sought, or evidence of medical conditions derived therefrom, which tests fail to indicate the presence of infection. This paragraph does not apply in the case of meningococcal meningitis. 
2.  On or after June 15, 1995, an emergency rescue or public safety member may be required to undergo a preemployment physical examination that tests for and fails to reveal any evidence of hepatitis or tuberculosis. 
(c)  Disability benefits not-in-line of duty. Any member with ten years or more credited service who shall become totally and permanently disabled to the extent that he is unable, by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment, to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, which disability is not directly caused by the performance of his duties as a police officer shall, upon establishing the same to the satisfaction of the board, be entitled to a monthly pension equal to the benefit accrual rate calculated pursuant to section 58-51, benefit amounts and eligibility, subsection (b), normal retirement benefit. In no event, however, shall the benefit be less than the greater of two percent of average final compensation for each year of credited service or 25 percent of average final compensation. Terminated persons, either vested or non-vested, are not eligible for disability benefits. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a member is terminated by the city for medical reasons, the terminated person may apply for a disability benefit if the application is filed with the board within 30 days from the date of termination. If a timely application is received, it shall be processed and the terminated person shall be eligible to receive a disability benefit if the board otherwise determines that he is totally and permanently disabled as provided for above. 
(d)  Conditions disqualifying disability benefits. Each member who is claiming disability benefits shall establish, to the satisfaction of the board, that such disability was not occasioned primarily by: 
(1)  Excessive or habitual use of any drugs, intoxicants or narcotics. 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots or civil insurrections or while committing a crime. 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in any branch of the Armed Forces. 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained by the member after his employment as a police officer with the City of Sebastian shall have terminated. 
(5)  Injury or disease sustained by the member while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such employment. 
(e)  Physical examination requirement. A member shall not become eligible for disability benefits until and unless he undergoes a physical examination by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons, who shall be selected by the board for that purpose. The board shall not select the member's treating physician or surgeon for this purpose except in an unusual case where the board determines that it would be reasonable and prudent to do so. 
Any retiree receiving disability benefits under provisions of this article may be required by the board to submit sworn statements of his condition accompanied by a physician's statement (provided at the retiree's expense) to the board annually and may be required by the board to undergo additional periodic re-examinations by a qualified physician or physicians and/or surgeon or surgeons who shall be selected by the board, to determine if such disability has ceased to exist. If the board finds that the retiree is no longer permanently and totally disabled to the extent that he is unable to render useful and efficient service as a police officer, the board shall recommend to the city that the retiree be returned to performance of duty as a police officer, and the retiree so returned shall enjoy the same rights that he had at the time he was placed upon pension. In the event the retiree so ordered to return shall refuse to comply with the order within 30 days from the issuance thereof, he shall forfeit the right to his pension. 
The cost of the physical examination and/or re-examination of the member claiming or the retiree receiving disability benefits shall be borne by the fund. All other reasonable costs as determined by the board incident to the physical examination, such as, but not limited to, transportation, meals and hotel accommodations, shall be borne by the fund. 
If the retiree recovers from disability and reenters the service of the city as a police officer, his service will be deemed to have been continuous, but the period beginning with the first month for which he received a disability retirement income payment and ending with the date he reentered the service of the city will not be considered as credited service for the purposes of the system. 
The board shall have the power and authority to make the final decisions regarding all disability claims. 
(f)  Disability payments. The monthly benefit to which a member is entitled in the event of the member's disability retirement shall be payable on the first day of the first month after the board determines such entitlement. However, the monthly retirement income shall be payable as of the date the board determined such entitlement, and any portion due for a partial month shall be paid together with the first payment. The last payment will be: 
(1)  If the retiree recovers from the disability, the payment due next preceding the date of such recovery, or 
(2)  If the retiree dies without recovering from disability, the payment due next preceding his death or the 120th monthly payment, whichever is later. 
Provided, however, the disability retiree may select, at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin, an optional form of benefit payment as described in section 58-55, subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2), which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of benefit. 
(g)  Benefit offsets. When a retiree is receiving a disability pension and workers' compensation benefits pursuant to F.S. ch. 440 or Social Security disability benefits for the same disability, and the total monthly benefits received from both exceed 100 percent of the member's average monthly wage, as defined in F.S. ch. 440, the disability pension benefit shall be reduced so that the total monthly amount received by the retiree does not exceed 100 percent of such average monthly wage. The amount of any lump sum workers' compensation payment shall be converted to an equivalent monthly benefit payable for ten years certain by dividing the lump sum amount by 83.9692. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the disability pension benefit be reduced below the greater of 42 percent of average final compensation or two percent of average final compensation times years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-54. - Vesting. 
If a member terminates his employment as a police officer, either voluntarily or by discharge, and is not eligible for any other benefits under this system, the member shall be entitled to the following: 
(a)  If the member has less than ten years credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a refund of his accumulated contributions or the member may leave it deposited with the fund. 
(b)  If the member has ten or more years of credited service upon termination, the member shall be entitled to a monthly retirement benefit, determined in the same manner as for normal or early retirement and based upon the member's credited service, average final compensation and the benefit accrual rate as of the date of termination, payable to him commencing at the member's otherwise normal or early retirement date, determined as if he had remained employed, provided he does not elect to withdraw his accumulated contributions and provided the member survives to his otherwise normal or early retirement date. If the member does not withdraw his accumulated contributions and does not survive to his otherwise normal or early retirement date, his designated beneficiary shall be entitled to a benefit as provided herein for a deceased member, vested or eligible for retirement under pre-retirement death. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-55. - Optional forms of benefits. 
(a)  In lieu of the amount and form of retirement income payable in the event of normal or early retirement as specified herein, a member, upon written request to the board, may elect to receive a retirement income or benefit of equivalent actuarial value payable in accordance with one of the following options: 
(1)  A retirement income of a monthly amount payable to the retiree for his lifetime only. 
(2)  A retirement income of a modified monthly amount, payable to the retiree during the lifetime of the retiree and following the death of the retiree, 100 percent, 75 percent, 66 2/3 percent or 50 percent of such monthly amount payable to a joint pensioner for his lifetime. Except where the retiree's joint pensioner is his spouse, the payments to the joint pensioner as a percentage of the payments to the retiree shall not exceed the applicable percentage provided for in the applicable table in the Treasury Regulations. (See Q & A-2 of 1.401(a)(9)-6) 
(3)  If a member retires prior to the time at which social security benefits are payable, he may elect to receive an increased retirement benefit until such time as social security benefits shall be assumed to commence and a reduced benefit thereafter in order to provide, to as great an extent as possible, a more level retirement allowance during the entire period of retirement. The amounts payable shall be as recommended by the actuaries for the system, based upon the social security law in effect at the time of the member's retirement. 
(4)  For members who do not participate in the DROP pursuant to section 58-70.3, the member may elect a percentage of benefit in a lump sum as follows: 
a.  Five percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining 95 percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2) or (3) above. 
b.  Ten percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining 90 percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2) or (3) above. 
c.  Fifteen percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining 85 percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2) or (3) above. 
d.  Twenty percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining 80 percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2) or (3) above. 
e.  Twenty-five percent of the total actuarial equivalent value of the benefit paid as a lump sum with the remaining 75 percent paid under the normal form or as per (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(b)  The member, upon electing any option of this section, will designate the joint pensioner (subsection (a)(2) above) or beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, payable under the system in the event of member's death, and will have the power to change such designation from time to time. Such designation will name a joint pensioner or one or more primary beneficiaries where applicable. A member may change his beneficiary at any time. If a member has elected an option with a joint pensioner and member's retirement income benefits have commenced, member may thereafter change his designated beneficiary at any time, but may only change his joint pensioner twice. Subject to the restriction in the previous sentence, a member may substitute a new joint pensioner for a deceased joint pensioner. In the absence of good health of joint pensioner being replaced, the actuary will assume that the joint pensioner has deceased for purposes of calculating the new payment. 
(c)  The consent of a member's or retiree's joint pensioner or beneficiary to any such change shall not be required. The rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive benefits under the system shall thereupon cease. 
(d)  Upon change of a retiree's joint pensioner in accordance with this section, the amount of the retirement income payable to the retiree shall be actuarially redetermined to take into account the age of the former joint pensioner, the new joint pensioner and the retiree and to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the retiree's then-current benefit at the time of the change. Any such retiree shall pay the actuarial recalculation expenses. Each request for a change will be made in writing on a form prepared by the board and on completion will be filed with the board. In the event that no designated beneficiary survives the retiree, such benefits as are payable in the event of the death of the retiree subsequent to his retirement shall be paid as provided in section 58-56. 
(e)  Retirement income payments shall be made under the option elected in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  If a member dies prior to his normal retirement date or early retirement date, whichever first occurs, no retirement benefit will be payable under the option to any person, but the benefits, if any, will be determined under section 58-52. 
(2)  If the designated beneficiary (or beneficiaries) or joint pensioner dies before the member's retirement under the system, the option elected will be canceled automatically and a retirement income of the normal form and amount will be payable to the member upon his retirement as if the election had not been made, unless a new election is made in accordance with the provisions of this section or a new beneficiary is designated by the member prior to his retirement. 
(3)  If both the retiree and the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by member or retiree die before the full payment has been effected under any option providing for payments for a period certain and life thereafter, made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a), the board may, in its discretion, direct that the commuted value of the remaining payments be paid in a lump sum and in accordance with section 58-56. 
(4)  If a member continues beyond his normal retirement date pursuant to the provisions of section 58-51(a), and dies prior to his actual retirement and while an option made pursuant to the provisions of this section is in effect, monthly retirement income payments will be made, or a retirement benefit will be paid, under the option to a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) designated by the member in the amount or amounts computed as if the member had retired under the option on the date on which his death occurred. 
(5)  The member's benefit under this section must begin to be distributed to the member no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(f)  A retiree may not change his retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his first retirement check. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the board in its discretion, may elect to make a lump sum payment to a member or a member's beneficiary in the event that the total commuted value of the monthly income payments to be paid do not exceed $1,000.00. Any such payment made to any person pursuant to the power and discretion conferred upon the board by the preceding sentence shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to such member and shall not be subject to review by anyone, but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15; Ord. No. O-17-03, § 5, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-56. - Beneficiaries. 
(a)  Each member or retiree may, on a form provided for that purpose, signed and filed with the board, designate a beneficiary (or beneficiaries) to receive the benefit, if any, which may be payable in the event of his death. Each designation may be revoked or changed by such member or retiree by signing and filing with the board a new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a), or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree, shall be paid to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-57. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-58. - Reports to division of retirement. 
Each year and no later than March 15, the board shall file an annual report with the Division of Retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 185.221. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-59. - Roster of retirees. 
The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this article in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date of termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-60. - Maximum pension. 
(a)  Basic limitation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this system to the contrary, the member contributions paid to, and retirement benefits paid from, the system shall be limited to such extent as may be necessary to conform to the requirements of Code Section 415 for a qualified retirement plan. Before January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the limits specified in Code Section 415(b), subject to the applicable adjustments in that section. On and after January 1, 1995, a plan member may not receive an annual benefit that exceeds the dollar amount specified in Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) ($160,000.00), subject to the applicable adjustments in Code Section 415(b) and subject to any additional limits that may be specified in this system. For purposes of this section, "limitation year" shall be the calendar year. 
For purposes of Code Section 415(b), the "annual benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) without regard to the benefit attributable to after-tax employee contributions (except pursuant to Code Section 415(n) and to rollover contributions (as defined in Code Section 415(b)(2)(A)). The "benefit attributable" shall be determined in accordance with Treasury Regulations. 
(b)  Adjustments to basic limitation for form of benefit. If the benefit under the plan is other than the annual benefit described in subsection (a), then the benefit shall be adjusted so that it is the equivalent of the annual benefit, using factors prescribed in Treasury Regulations. If the form of the benefit without regard to any automatic benefit increase feature is not a straight life annuity or a qualified joint and survivor annuity, then the preceding sentence is applied by either reducing the Code Section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date or adjusting the form of benefit to an actuarially equivalent amount (determined using the assumptions specified in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415(b)-1(c)(2)(ii)) that takes into account the additional benefits under the form of benefit as follows: 
(1)  For a benefit paid in a form to which Section 417(e)(3) of the Code does not apply (generally, a monthly benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greater of: 
a.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the member under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as the form of benefit to the member, or 
b.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the form of benefit payable to the member, computed using a five percent interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables described in Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Rulings 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code); or 
(2)  For a benefit paid in a form to which Section 417(e)(3) of the Code applies (generally, a lump sum benefit), the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity benefit that is the greatest of: 
a.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using the interest rate and mortality table, or tabular factor, specified in the plan for actuarial experience; 
b.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable, computed using a 5.5 percent interest assumption (or the applicable statutory interest assumption) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code); or 
c.  The annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the particular form of benefit payable (computed using the applicable interest rate for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(3) (the 30-year Treasury rate) (prior to January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the month prior to retirement, and on and after January 1, 2007, using the rate in effect for the first day of the plan year with a one-year stabilization period)) and (i) for years prior to January 1, 2009, the applicable mortality tables for the distribution under Treasury Regulation Section 1.417(e)-1(d)(2) (the mortality table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 or any subsequent Revenue Ruling modifying the applicable provisions of Revenue Ruling 2001-62), and (ii) for years after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality tables described in Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code (Notice 2008-85 or any subsequent Internal Revenue Service guidance implementing Section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code), divided by 1.05. 
(3)  The actuary may adjust the 415(b) limit at the annuity starting date in accordance with subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(c)  Benefits not taken into account. For purposes of this section, the following benefits shall not be taken into account in applying these limits: 
(1)  Any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income benefits; 
(2)  Any other benefit not required under Section 415(b)(2) of the Code and regulations thereunder to be taken into account for purposes of the limitation of Code Section 415(b)(1); and 
(3)  That portion of any joint and survivor annuity that constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity. 
(d)  COLA effect. Effective on and after January 1, 2003, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b) (the "limit"), the following will apply: 
(1)  A member's applicable limit will be applied to the member's annual benefit in the member's first limitation year of benefit payments without regard to any automatic cost of living adjustments; 
(2)  Thereafter, in any subsequent limitation year, a member's annual benefit, including any automatic cost of living increases, shall be tested under the then applicable benefit limit including any adjustment to the Code Section 415(b)(1)(A) dollar limit under Code Section 415(d), and the regulations thereunder; but 
(3)  In no event shall a member's benefit payable under the system in any limitation year be greater than the limit applicable at the annuity starting date, as increased in subsequent years pursuant to Code Section 415(d) and the regulations thereunder. 
Unless otherwise specified in the system, for purposes of applying the limits under Code Section 415(b), a member's applicable limit will be applied taking into consideration cost of living increases as required by Section 415(b) of the Code and applicable Treasury Regulations. 
(e)  Other adjustments in limitations. 
(1)  In the event the member's retirement benefits become payable before age 62, the limit prescribed by this section shall be reduced in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the provisions of Code Section 415(b) of the Code, so that such limit (as so reduced) equals an annual straight life benefit (when such retirement income benefit begins) which is equivalent to a $160,000.00 annual benefit beginning at age 62. 
(2)  In the event the member's benefit is based on at least 15 years of credited service as a full-time employee of the fire or police department of the city, the adjustments provided for in (e)(1) above shall not apply. 
(3)  The reductions provided for in (e)(1) above shall not be applicable to disability benefits pursuant to section 58-53, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 58-52. 
(4)  In the event the member's retirement benefit becomes payable after age 65, for purposes of determining whether this benefit meets the limit set forth in subsection (a) herein, such benefit shall be adjusted so that it is actuarially equivalent to the benefit beginning at age 65. This adjustment shall be made in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate. 
(f)  Less than ten years of participation. The maximum retirement benefits payable under this section to any member who has completed less than ten years of participation shall be the amount determined under subsection (a) of this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of participation and the denominator of which is ten. The reduction provided by this subsection cannot reduce the maximum benefit below ten percent of the limit determined without regard to this subsection. The reduction provided for in this subsection shall not be applicable to pre-retirement disability benefits paid pursuant to section 58-53, or pre-retirement death benefits paid pursuant to section 58-52. 
(g)  Participation in other defined benefit plans. The limit of this section with respect to any member who at any time has been a member in any other defined benefit plan as defined in Code Section 414(j) maintained by the city shall apply as if the total benefits payable under all city defined benefit plans in which the member has been a member were payable from one plan. 
(h)  Ten thousand dollar limit; less than ten years of service. Notwithstanding anything in this section 58-60, the retirement benefit payable with respect to a member shall be deemed not to exceed the limit set forth in this subsection (h) of section 58-60 if the benefits payable, with respect to such member under this system and under all other qualified defined benefit pension plans to which the city contributes, do not exceed $10,000.00 for the applicable limitation year and for any prior limitation year and the city has not any time maintained a qualified defined contribution plan in which the member participated; provided, however, that if the member has completed less than ten years of credited service with the city, the limit under this subsection (h) of section 58-60 shall be a reduced limit equal to $10,000.00 multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of the member's years of credited service and the denominator of which is ten. 
(i)  Reduction of benefits. Reduction of benefits and/or contributions to all plans, where required, shall be accomplished by first reducing the member's benefit under any defined benefit plans in which member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be determined by the board and the plan administrator of such other plans, and next, by reducing or allocating excess forfeitures for defined contribution plans in which the member participated, such reduction to be made first with respect to the plan in which member most recently accrued benefits and thereafter in such priority as shall be established by the board and the plan administrator for such other plans provided, however, that necessary reductions may be made in a different manner and priority pursuant to the agreement of the board and the plan administrator of all other plans covering such member. 
(j)  Service credit purchase limits. 
(1)  Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, if a member makes one or more contributions to purchase permissive service credit under the system, as allowed in sections 58-70.1 and 58-70.2, then the requirements of this section will be treated as met only if: 
a.  The requirements of Code Section 415(b) are met, determined by treating the accrued benefit derived from all such contributions as an annual benefit for purposes of Code Section 415(b), or 
b.  The requirements of Code Section 415(c) are met, determined by treating all such contributions as annual additions for purposes of Code Section 415(c). 
For purposes of applying subparagraph (j)(1)a., the system will not fail to meet the reduced limit under Code Section 415(b)(2)(C) solely by reason of this subparagraph, and for purposes of applying subparagraph (j)(1)b. the system will not fail to meet the percentage limitation under Section 415(c)(1)(B) of the Code solely by reason of this subparagraph. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection the term "permissive service credit" means service credit: 
a.  Recognized by the system for purposes of calculating a member's benefit under the plan, 
b.  Which such member has not received under the plan, and 
c.  Which such member may receive only by making a voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined under the system, which does not exceed the amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service credit. 
Effective for permissive service credit contributions made in limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, such term may, if otherwise provided by the system, include service credit for periods for which there is no performance of service, and, notwithstanding clause (j)(2)b., may include service credited in order to provide an increased benefit for service credit which a member is receiving under the system. 
(k)  Contribution limits. 
(1)  For purposes of applying the Code Section 415(c) limits which are incorporated by reference and for purposes of this subsection (k), only and for no other purpose, the definition of compensation where applicable will be compensation actually paid or made available during a limitation year, except as noted below and as permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulations. Unless another definition of compensation that is permitted by Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2, or successor regulation, is specified by the system, compensation will be defined as wages within the meaning of Code Section 3401(a) and all other payments of compensation to an employee by an employer for which the employer is required to furnish the employee a written statement under Code Sections 6041(d), 6051(a)(3) and 6052 and will be determined without regard to any rules under Code Section 3401(a) that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed (such as the exception for agricultural labor in Code Section 3401(a)(2). 
a.  However, for limitation years beginning after December 31, 1997, compensation will also include amounts that would otherwise be included in compensation but for an election under Code Sections 125(a), 402(e)(3), 402(h)(1)(B), 402(k), or 457(b). For limitation years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the gross income of the employee by reason of Code Section 132(f)(4). 
b.  For limitation years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation for the limitation year will also include compensation paid by the later of two and one-half months after an employee's severance from employment or the end of the limitation year that includes the date of the employee's severance from employment if: 
1.  The payment is regular compensation for services during the employee's regular working hours, or compensation for services outside the employee's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential), commissions, bonuses or other similar payments, and, absent a severance from employment, the payments would have been paid to the employee while the employee continued in employment with the employer; or 
2.  The payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave that the employee would have been able to use if employment had continued. 
c.  Back pay, within the meaning of Treasury Regulations Section 1.415(c)-2(g)(8), shall be treated as compensation for the limitation year to which the back pay relates to the extent the back pay represents wages and compensation that would otherwise be included under this definition. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the board may modify a request by a member to make a contribution to the system if the amount of the contribution would exceed the limits provided in Code Section 415 by using the following methods: 
a.  If the law requires a lump sum payment for the purchase of service credit, the board may establish a periodic payment deduction plan for the member to avoid a contribution in excess of the limits under Code Sections 415(c) or 415(n). 
b.  If payment pursuant to subparagraph (k)(2)a. will not avoid a contribution in excess of the limits imposed by Code Section 415(c), the board may either reduce the member's contribution to an amount within the limits of that section or refuse the member's contribution. 
(3)  If the annual additions for any member for a limitation year exceed the limitation under Section 415(c) of the Code, the excess annual addition will be corrected as permitted under the Employee Plans Compliance Resolution System (or similar IRS correction program). 
(4)  For limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 2009, a member's compensation for purposes of this subsection (k) shall not exceed the annual limit under Section 401(a)(17) of the Code. 
(l)  Additional limitation on pension benefits. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary: 
(1)  The normal retirement benefit or pension payable to a retiree who becomes a member of the system and who has not previously participated in such system, on or after January 1, 1980, shall not exceed 100 percent of his average final compensation. However, nothing contained in this section shall apply to supplemental retirement benefits or to pension increases attributable to cost-of-living increases or adjustments. 
(2)  No member of the system shall be allowed to receive a retirement benefit or pension which is in part or in whole based upon any service with respect to which the member is already receiving, or will receive in the future, a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan. This restriction does not apply to social security benefits or federal benefits under Chapter 1223, Title 10, U.S. Code. 
(m)  Effect of direct rollover on 415(b) Limit. If the plan accepts a direct rollover of an employee's or former employee's benefit from a defined contribution plan qualified under Code Section 401(a) which is maintained by the employer, any annuity resulting from the rollover amount that is determined using a more favorable actuarial basis than required under Code Section 417(e) shall be included in the annual benefit for purposes of the limit under Code Section 415(b). 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15; Ord. No. O-16-07, § 5, 9-28-16)  
Sec. 58-61. - Minimum distribution of benefits. 
(a)  General rules. 
(1)  Effective date. Effective as of January 1, 1989, the plan will pay all benefits in accordance with a good faith interpretation of the requirements of Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations in effect under that section, as applicable to a governmental plan within the meaning of Code Section 414(d). Effective on and after January 1, 2003, the plan is also subject to the specific provisions contained in this section. The provisions of this section will apply for purposes of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning with the 2003 calendar year. 
(2)  Precedence. The requirements of this section will take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the Plan. 
(3)  TEFRA Section 242(b)(2) Elections. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section other than this subsection (a)(3), distributions may be made under a designation made before January 1, 1984, in accordance with Section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the plan that related to Section 242(b)(2) of TEFRA. 
(b)  Time and manner of distribution. 
(1)  Required beginning date. The member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no later than the member's required beginning date which shall not be later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of the calendar year in which the member attains age 70½ or the calendar year in which the member terminates employment with the city. 
(2)  Death of member before distributions begin. If the member dies before distributions begin, the member's entire interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed no later than as follows: 
a.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary, then distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died, or by a date on or before December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have attained age 70½, if later, as the surviving spouse elects. 
b.  If the member's surviving spouse is not the member's sole designated beneficiary, then, distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
c.  If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death. 
d.  If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this subsection (b)(2), other than subsection (b)(2)a., will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member. 
For purposes of this subsection (b)(2) distributions are considered to begin on the member's required beginning date or, if subsection (b)(2)d. applies, the date of distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a. If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member's required beginning date (or to the member's surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under subsection (b)(2)a.) the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence. 
(3)  Death after distributions begin. If the member dies after the required distribution of benefits has begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest must be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution before the member's death. 
(4)  Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with this section. If the member's interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury Regulations. Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual account described in Section 414(k) of the Code will be distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Treasury Regulations that apply to individual accounts. 
(c)  Determination of amount to be distributed each year. 
(1)  General requirements. If the member's interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the Plan, payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements: 
a.  The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year. 
b.  The member's entire interest must be distributed pursuant to section 58-51, section 58-52, section 58-54, or section 58-55 (as applicable) and in any event over a period equal to or less than the member's life or the lives of the member and a designated beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or of the member and a designated beneficiary. The life expectancy of the member, the member's spouse, or the member's beneficiary may not be recalculated after the initial determination for purposes of determining benefits. 
(2)  Amount required to be distributed by required beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin, the date distributions are required to begin under section 58-52) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., monthly. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals ending on or after the member's required beginning date. 
(3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues. 
(d)  General distribution rules. 
(1)  The amount of an annuity paid to a member's beneficiary may not exceed the maximum determined under the incidental death benefit requirement of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G), and effective for any annuity commencing on or after January 1, 2008, the minimum distribution incidental benefit rule under Treasury Regulation Section 1.401(a)(9)-6, Q & A-2. 
(2)  The death and disability benefits provided by the plan are limited by the incidental benefit rule set forth in Code Section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation Section 1.401-1(b)(1)(I) or any successor regulation thereto. As a result, the total death or disability benefits payable may not exceed 25 percent of the cost for all of the members' benefits received from the retirement system. 
(e)  Definitions. 
(1)  Designated beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the beneficiary under the Plan and is the designated beneficiary under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q & A-4, of the Treasury Regulations. 
(2)  Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions are required to begin pursuant to subsection (b)(2). 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-62. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Interest of members in system. All assets of the fund are held in trust, and at no time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under the system with respect to retirees and members and their spouses or beneficiaries, shall any part of the corpus or income of the fund be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for their exclusive benefit. 
(b)  No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council of the City of Sebastian which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(c)  Qualification of system. It is intended that the system will constitute a qualified public pension plan under the applicable provisions of the Code for a qualified plan under Code Section 401(a) and a governmental plan under Code Section 414(d), as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. Federal Tax Laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(d)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to reduce future city contributions. 
(e)  Prohibited transactions. Effective as of January 1, 1989, a board may not engage in a transaction prohibited by Code Section 503(b). 
(f)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by Code Section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "credited service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(g)  Vesting. 
(1)  Member will be 100 percent vested in all benefits upon attainment of the plan's age and service requirements for the plan's normal retirement benefit; and 
(2)  A member will be 100 percent vested in all accrued benefits, to the extent funded, if the plan is terminated or experiences a complete discontinuance of employer contributions. 
(h)  Electronic forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the Code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. However, where applicable, the board shall comply with Treasury Regulations Section 1.401(a)-21. 
(i)  Compliance with Chapter 185, Florida Statutes. It is intended that the system will continue to qualify for funding under F.S. § 185.08. Accordingly, unless otherwise required by law, any provision of the system which violates the requirements of F.S. ch. 185, as amended from time to time, shall be superseded by and administered in accordance with the requirements of such chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-63. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefitting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting (100 percent) of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be non-forfeitable. 
(c)  The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the city if additional assets are required, in which event the city shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
(2)  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each police officer entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection (3). 
(3)  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection (2) involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the police officer's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the police officer. 
(4)  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection (3), and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the city, less return to the state of the state's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the city and the state to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the city and the state. 
(5)  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection (2), the amounts determined under subsection (3). 
If, after 24 months after the date the plan terminated or the date the board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the city or the board of the fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the Florida Department of Management Services will effect the termination of the fund in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-64. - Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from execution, non-assignability. 
(a)  Domestic relations orders. 
(1)  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
(2)  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the city, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the city, to make payment to insurance companies for insurance premiums as permitted by F.S. ch. 185 and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(c)  Exemption from execution, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this article are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-65. - Pension validity. 
The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person hereafter granted a pension under this article if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-66. - Forfeiture of pension. 
(a)  Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this system, except for the return of his accumulated contributions as of the date of termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
(1)  The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds; 
(2)  The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from employer; 
(3)  Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee; 
(4)  Any felony specified in F.S. ch. 838; 
(5)  The committing of an impeachable offense; 
(6)  The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to defraud the public or the public agency, for which he acts or in which he is employed, of the right to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or employment position; or 
(7)  The committing on or after October 1, 2008, of any felony defined in F.S. § 800.04, against a victim younger than 16 years of age, or any felony defined in F.S. ch. 794, against a victim younger than 18 years of age, by a public officer or employee through the use or attempted use of power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment position. 
(b)  Conviction shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or a nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the senate of an impeachable offense. 
(c)  Court shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be afforded the right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(d)  Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated contributions after member's rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions. The board may implement all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-67. - Conviction and forfeiture; false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the system. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083. 
(c)  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection (a), a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-68. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the city shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of same, herein referred to as "claims", against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The city reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this section waive any provision of law affording the city immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the city may have. 
(c)  This section shall not apply nor shall the city be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-69. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions; elimination of mandatory distributions. 
(a)  Rollover distributions. 
(1)  General. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. Effective January 1, 2002, any portion of any distribution which would be includible in gross income as after-tax employee contributions will be an eligible rollover distribution if the distribution is made to an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a); to an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b); to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible; or on or after January 1, 2007, to a qualified defined benefit plan described in Code Section 401(a) or to an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred (and earnings thereon), including separately accounting for the portion of the distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion of the distribution that is not so includible. 
b.  Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Code; an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Code; an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code; effective January 1, 2002, an eligible deferred compensation plan described in Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by an eligible employer described in Section 457(e)(1)(A) of the Code and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan; effective January 1, 2002, an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code; a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Code; or effective January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA described in Section 408A, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. This definition shall also apply in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse. 
c.  Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or former employee. It also includes, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse. Effective January 1, 2007, it further includes a non-spouse beneficiary who is a designated beneficiary as defined by Code Section 401(a)(9)(E). However, a non-spouse beneficiary may rollover the distribution only to an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity established for the purpose of receiving the distribution and the account or annuity will be treated as an "inherited" individual retirement account or annuity. 
d.  Direct rollover: A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(b)  Rollovers or transfers into the fund. On or after January 1, 2002, the system will accept, solely for the purpose of purchasing credited service as provided herein, permissible police officer requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans, member rollover cash contributions and/or direct cash rollovers of distributions made on or after January 1, 2002, as follows: 
(1)  Transfers and direct rollovers or member rollover contributions from other plans. The system will accept either a direct rollover of an eligible rollover distribution or a member contribution of an eligible rollover distribution from a qualified plan described in Section 401(a) or 403(a) of the Code, from an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Code or from an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state. The system will also accept legally permissible member requested transfers of funds from other retirement or pension plans. 
(2)  Member rollover contributions from IRAs. The system will accept a member rollover contribution of the portion of a distribution from an individual retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or 408(b) of the Code that is eligible to be rolled over. 
(c)  Elimination of mandatory distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, in the event this plan provides for a mandatory (involuntary) cash distribution from the plan not otherwise required by law, for an amount in excess of $1,000.00, such distribution shall be made from the plan only upon written request of the member and completion by the member of a written election on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or to rollover the lump sum amount. 
(Ord. No. O-15-01, § 1(Att.), 2-25-15)  
Sec. 58-70. - Supplemental benefit component for special benefits; Chapter 185 Share Accounts. 
There is hereby established an additional plan component to provide special benefits in the form of a supplemental retirement, termination, death and disability benefits to be in addition to the benefits provided for in the previous Sections of this Plan, such benefit to be funded solely and entirely by F.S. Chapter 185, premium tax monies for each plan year which are allocated to this supplemental component as provided for in F.S. § 185.35. Amounts allocated to this supplemental component ("Share Plan"), if any, shall be further allocated to the members as follows: 
(a)  Individual member share accounts. The board shall create individual "member share accounts" for all actively employed plan members and maintain appropriate books and records showing the respective interest of each member hereunder. Each member shall have a member share accounts for his share of the F.S. Chapter 185 tax revenues described above, forfeitures and income and expense adjustments relating thereto. The board shall maintain separate member share accounts, however, the maintenance of separate accounts is for accounting purposes only and a segregation of the assets of the trust fund to each account shall not be required or permitted. 
(b)  Share account funding. 
(1)  Individual member share accounts shall be established as of September 30, 2015 for all members who were actively employed as of October 1, 2014. Individual member share accounts shall be credited with an allocation as provided for in the following subsection (c) of any premium tax monies which have been allocated to the share plan for that plan year, beginning with the plan year ending September 30, 2015. 
(2)  Any forfeitures as provided in subsection (d), shall be used as part of future allocations to the individual member share accounts in accordance with the formula set forth in subsection (c)(1). 
(c)  Allocation of monies to share accounts. 
(1)  Allocation of Chapter 185 Contributions. 
a.  Effective as of September 30, 2015, the amount of any premium tax monies allocated to the share plan shall be allocated to individual member share accounts as provided for in this subsection. Members retiring on or after October 1, 2014 and prior to September 30, 2015 shall receive an allocation. In addition, all premium tax monies allocated to the share plan in any subsequent plan year shall also be allocated as provided for in this subsection. Available premium tax monies shall be allocated to individual member share accounts at the end of each plan year on September 30 (a "valuation date"). 
b.  On each valuation date, each current member of the plan, and each retiree who retires in the plan year ending on the valuation date (including each disability retiree), or beneficiary of a deceased member (not including terminated vested persons) who is otherwise eligible for an allocation as of the valuation date shall receive a share allocation as follows: 
c.  The total funds subject to allocation on each valuation date shall be allocated to each member share account of those eligible for an allocation in an amount equal to a fraction of the total amount, the numerator of which shall be the individual's total years and fractional parts of years of credited service as of the valuation date, and the denominator of which shall be the sum of the total years and fractional parts of years of credited service as of the valuation date of all individuals to whom allocations are being made. Beneficiaries shall receive an allocation based on the years of credited service of the deceased member. 
d.  Re-employed retirees shall be deemed new employees and shall receive an allocation based solely on the credited service in the reemployment period. 
(2)  Allocation of investment gains and losses. On each valuation date, each individual member share account shall be adjusted to reflect the new earnings or losses resulting from investments during the year. The net earnings or losses allocated to the individual member share accounts shall be the same percentage which is earned or lost by the total plan investments, including realized and unrealized gains or losses, net of brokerage commissions, transaction costs and management fees. 
Net earnings or losses are determined as of the last business day of the fiscal year, which is the valuation date, and are debited or credited as of such date. 
For purposes of calculating net earnings or losses on a member's share account pursuant to this subsection, brokerage commissions, transaction costs, and management fees for the immediately preceding fiscal year shall be determined for each year by the investment consultant pursuant to contracts with fund managers as reported in the custodial statement. The investment consultant shall report these annual contractual fees to the board. The investment consultant shall also report the net investment return for each manager and the net investment return for the total plan assets. 
(3)  Allocation of costs, fees and expenses. On each valuation date, each individual member share account shall be adjusted to allocate its pro rata share of the costs, fees and expenses of administration of the share plan. These fees shall be allocated to each individual member share account on a proportionate basis taking the costs, fees and expenses of administration of the share plan as a whole multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the total assets in each individual member share account (after adding the annual investment gain or loss) and the denominator of which is the total assets of the fund as a whole as of the same date. 
(4)  No right to allocation. The fact of allocation or credit of an allocation to a member's share account by the board shall not vest in any member, any right, title, or interest in the assets of the trust or in the Chapter 185 tax revenues except at the time or times, to the extent, and subject to the terms and conditions provided in this Section. 
(5)  [Statements.] Members shall be provided annual statements setting forth their share account balance as of the end of the plan year. 
(d)  Forfeitures. Any member who has less than ten years of service credit and who is not otherwise eligible for payment of benefits after termination of employment with the city as provided for in subsection (e) shall forfeit his individual member share account. Forfeited amounts shall be included and used as part of the Chapter 185 tax revenues for future allocations to individual member share accounts on each valuation date in accordance with the formula set forth in subsection (c)(1). 
(e)  Eligibility for benefits. Any member (or his beneficiary) who terminates employment as a police officer with the city or who dies, upon application filed with the board, shall be entitled to be paid the value of his individual member share account, subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Retirement benefit. 
a.  A member shall be entitled to 100 percent of the value of his share account upon normal or early retirement pursuant to section 58-51. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (f). 
(2)  Termination benefit. 
a.  In the event that a member's employment as a police officer is terminated by reason other than retirement, death or disability, he shall be entitled to receive the value of his share account only if he is vested in accordance with section 58-54. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (f). 
(3)  Disability benefit. 
a.  In the event that a member is determined to be eligible for either an in-line of duty disability benefit pursuant to section 58-53, subsection (a) or a not-in-line of duty disability benefit pursuant to section 58-53, subsection (c), he shall be entitled to 100 percent of the value of his share account. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (f). 
(4)  Death benefit. 
a.  In the event that a member dies while actively employed as a police officer, 100 percent of the value of his member share account shall be paid to his designated beneficiary as provided in section 58-52. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (f). 
(f)  Payment of benefits. If a member terminates employment for any reason or dies and he or his beneficiary is otherwise entitled to receive the balance in the member's share account, the member's share account shall be valued by the plan's actuary on the next valuation date as provided for in subsection (c) above, following termination of employment. Payment of the calculated share account balance shall be payable as soon as administratively practicable following the valuation date, but not later than 150 days following the valuation date and shall be paid in one lump sum payment. No optional forms of payments shall be permitted. 
(g)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable under this section 58-70 shall be paid only from the assets accounted for in individual member share accounts. Neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish any additional funds, securities or other assets to fund share account benefits. Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention, or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the member share account balances, except due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. All investments shall be made by the board subject to the restrictions otherwise applicable to fund investments. 
(h)  Notional account. The member share account is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the share distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the system. There is no change in the system's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from employment. The member has no control over the investment of the share account. 
(i)  No employer discretion. The share account benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
(j)  Maximum additions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, annual additions under this section shall not exceed the limitations of section 415(c) of the code pursuant to the provisions of section 58-60, subsection (k). 
(k)  IRC limit. The share account distribution, along with other benefits payable from the system, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b). 
(Ord. No. O-16-07, § 1, 9-28-16)  
Sec. 58-70.1. - Military service prior to employment. 
The years or fractional parts of years that a police officer serves or has served on active duty in the military service of the Armed Forces of the United States, the United States Merchant Marine or the United States Coast Guard, voluntarily or involuntarily and honorably or under honorable conditions, prior to first and initial employment with the city police department shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement, in one year increments, upon the completion of five years of credited service. 
(3)  Payment by the member of the required amount shall be made within six months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section shall be four years. 
(5)  Credited service purchased pursuant to this section shall count for all purposes, except vesting. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 6, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-70.2. - Prior police service. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, and except as provided for in section 58-46, the years or fractional parts of years that a member previously served as a full-time police officer with the city during a period of previous employment and for which period accumulated contributions were withdrawn from the fund, or the years and fractional parts of years that a member served as a full-time police officer or the years and fractional parts of years that a member served as a police officer for any other municipal, county or state law enforcement department in the State of Florida shall be added to his years of credited service provided that: 
(1)  The member contributes to the fund the sum that he would have contributed, based on his salary and the member contribution rate in effect at the time that the credited service is requested, had he been a member of the system for the years or fractional parts of years for which he is requesting credit plus amounts actuarially determined such that the crediting of service does not result in any cost to the fund plus payment of costs for all professional services rendered to the board in connection with the purchase of years of credited service. 
(2)  Multiple requests to purchase credited service pursuant to this section may be made at any time prior to retirement, in one year increments, upon the completion of five years of credited service. 
(3)  Payment by the police officer of the required amount shall be made within six months of his request for credit, but not later than the retirement date, and shall be made in one lump sum payment upon receipt of which credited service shall be given. 
(4)  The maximum credit under this section for service other than with the City of Sebastian shall be four years of credited service and shall count for all purposes, except vesting. There shall be no maximum purchase of credit for prior service with the City of Sebastian and such credit shall count for all purposes, including vesting. 
(5)  In no event, however, may credited service be purchased pursuant to this section for prior service with any other municipal, county or state law enforcement department police department, if such prior service forms or will form the basis of a retirement benefit or pension from a different employer's retirement system or plan as set forth in section 58-60(l)(2). 
(6)  For purposes of determining credit for prior service as a police officer as provided for in this section, in addition to service as a police officer in this state, credit may be purchased by the member in the same manner as provided above for federal, other state, county or municipal service if the prior service is recognized by the Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission within the Department of Law Enforcement, as provided under Chapter 943, Florida Statutes, or the police officer provides proof to the board that such service is equivalent to the service required to meet the definition of a police officer under section 58-46, above. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 7, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-70.3. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section 58-70.3, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  DROP means the City of Sebastian Deferred Retirement Option Plan. 
(2)  DROP account means the account established for each DROP participant under subsection (c). 
(b)  Participation. 
(1)  Eligibility to participate. In lieu of terminating his employment as a police officer, any member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system and who is not on unpaid leave status may elect to defer receipt of such service retirement pension and to participate in the DROP. 
(2)  Election to participate. A member's election to participate in the DROP must be made in writing in a time and manner determined by the board and shall be effective on the first day of the first calendar month which is at least 15 business days after it is received by the board. 
(3)  Period of participation. A member who elects to participate in the DROP under subsection (b)(2), shall participate in the DROP for a period not to exceed 60 months beginning at the time his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. An election to participate in the DROP shall constitute an irrevocable election to resign from the service of the city not later than the date provided for in the previous sentence. A member may participate only once. 
(4)  Termination of participation. 
a.  A member's participation in the DROP shall cease at the earlier of: 
1.  The end of his permissible period of participation in the DROP as determined under subsection (b)(3); or 
2.  Termination of his employment as a police officer. 
b.  Upon the member's termination of participation in the DROP, pursuant to subsection 1. above, all amounts provided for in subsection (c)(2), including monthly benefits and interest, shall cease to be transferred from the system to his DROP account. Any amounts remaining in his DROP account shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) when he terminates his employment as a police officer. 
c.  A member who terminates his participation in the DROP under this subsection (b)(4) shall not be permitted to again become a participant in the DROP. 
(5)  Effect of DROP participation on the system. 
a.  A member's credited service and his accrued benefit under the system shall be determined on the date his election to participate in the DROP first becomes effective. For purposes of determining the accrued benefit, the member's salary for the purposes of calculating his average final compensation shall include an amount equal to any lump sum payments which would have been paid to the member and included as salary as defined herein, had the member retired under normal retirement and not elected DROP participation. Member contributions attributable to any lump sums used in the benefit calculation and not actually received by the member shall be deducted from the first payments to the member's DROP account. The member shall not accrue any additional credited service or any additional benefits under the system (except for any supplemental benefit payable to DROP participants or any additional benefits provided under any cost-of-living adjustment for retirees in the system) while he is a participant in the DROP. After a member commences participation, he shall not be permitted to again contribute to the system nor shall he be eligible for disability or pre-retirement death benefits. 
b.  No amounts shall be paid to a member from the system while the member is a participant in the DROP. Unless otherwise specified in the system, if a member's participation in the DROP is terminated other than by terminating his employment as a police officer, no amounts shall be paid to him from the system until he terminates his employment as a police officer. Unless otherwise specified in the system, amounts transferred from the system to the member's DROP account shall be paid directly to the member only on the termination of his employment as a police officer. 
(c)  Funding. 
(1)  Establishment of DROP account. A DROP account shall be established for each member participating in the DROP. A member's DROP account shall consist of amounts transferred to the DROP under subsection (c)(2), and interest on those amounts. 
(2)  Transfers from retirement system. 
a.  As of the first day of each month of a member's period of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefit he would have received under the system had he terminated his employment as a police officer and elected to receive monthly benefit payments thereunder shall be transferred to his DROP account, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (b)(4)b. A member's period of participation in the DROP shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4), but in no event shall it continue past the date he terminates his employment as a police officer. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(4)b., a member's DROP account under this subsection (c)(2) shall be credited with interest at an effective rate of one and three-tenths percent per annum compounded monthly determined on the last business day of the prior month's ending balance and credited to the member's DROP account as of such date. 
c.  A member's DROP account shall only be credited with interest and monthly benefits while the member is a participant in the DROP. A member's final DROP account value for distribution to the member upon termination of participation in the DROP shall be the value of the account at the end of the month immediately preceding termination of participation plus any monthly periodic additions made to the DROP account subsequent to the end of the previous month, and prior to distribution. If a member fails to terminate employment after participating in the DROP for the permissible period of DROP participation, then beginning with the member's first month of employment following the last month of the permissible period of DROP participation, the member's DROP account will no longer be credited with interest, nor will monthly benefits be transferred to the DROP account. All such non-transferred amounts shall be forfeited and continue to be forfeited while the member is employed by the police department, and no cost-of-living adjustments shall be applied to the member's credit during such period of continued employment. A member employed by the police department after the permissible period of DROP participation will still not be eligible for pre-retirement death or disability benefits and will not accrue additional credited service. 
(d)  Distribution of DROP accounts on termination of employment. 
(1)  Eligibility for benefits. A member shall receive the balance in his DROP account in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (d) upon his termination of employment as a police officer. Except as provided in subsection (d)(5), no amounts shall be paid to a member from the DROP prior to his termination of employment as a police officer. 
(2)  Form of distribution. 
a.  Unless the member elects otherwise, distribution of his DROP account shall be made in a lump sum, subject to the direct rollover provisions set forth in subsection (d)(6). Elections under this paragraph shall be in writing and shall be made within 60 days. 
b.  Notwithstanding the preceding, if a member dies before his benefit is paid, his DROP account shall be paid to his beneficiary in such optional form as his beneficiary may select. If no beneficiary designation is made, the DROP account shall be distributed to the member's estate. 
(3)  Date of payment of distribution. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (d), distribution of a member's DROP account shall be made as soon as administratively practicable following the member's termination of employment. Distribution of the amount in a member's DROP account will not be made unless the member completes a written request for distribution and a written election, on forms designated by the board, to either receive a cash lump sum or a rollover of the lump sum amount. 
(4)  Proof of death and right of beneficiary or other person. The board may require and rely upon such proof of death and such evidence of the right of any beneficiary or other person to receive the value of a deceased member's DROP account as the board may deem proper and its determination of the right of that beneficiary or other person to receive payment shall be conclusive. 
(5)  Distribution limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of subsection (d), all distributions from the DROP shall conform to the "Minimum Distribution of Benefits" provisions as provided for herein. 
(6)  Direct rollover of certain distributions. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any provision of the DROP to the contrary, a distributee may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid in a direct rollover as otherwise provided under the system in section 58-69. 
(e)  Administration of DROP. 
(1)  Board administers the DROP. The general administration of the DROP, the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the DROP and the responsibility of overseeing the investment of the DROP's assets shall be placed in the board. The members of the board may appoint from their number such subcommittees with such powers as they shall determine; may adopt such administrative procedures and regulations as they deem desirable for the conduct of their affairs; may authorize one or more of their number or any agent to execute or deliver any instrument or make any payment on their behalf; may retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such clerical, accounting, actuarial and consulting services as they may require in carrying out the provisions of the DROP; and may allocate among themselves or delegate to other persons all or such portion of their duties under the DROP, other than those granted to them as trustee under any trust agreement adopted for use in implementing the DROP, as they, in their sole discretion, shall decide. A trustee shall not vote on any question relating exclusively to himself. 
(2)  Individual accounts, records and reports. The board shall maintain records showing the operation and condition of the DROP, including records showing the individual balances in each member's DROP account, and the board shall keep in convenient form such data as may be necessary for the valuation of the assets and liabilities of the DROP. The board shall prepare and distribute to members participating in the DROP and other individuals or file with the appropriate governmental agencies, as the case may be, all necessary descriptions, reports, information returns, and data required to be distributed or filed for the DROP pursuant to the Code and any other applicable laws. 
(3)  Establishment of rules. Subject to the limitations of the DROP, the board from time to time shall establish rules for the administration of the DROP and the transaction of its business. The board shall have discretionary authority to construe and interpret the DROP (including but not limited to determination of an individual's eligibility for DROP participation, the right and amount of any benefit payable under the DROP and the date on which any individual ceases to be a participant in the DROP). The determination of the board as to the interpretation of the DROP or its determination of any disputed questions shall be conclusive and final to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(4)  Limitation of liability. 
a.  The trustees shall not incur any liability individually or on behalf of any other individuals for any act or failure to act, made in good faith in relation to the DROP or the funds of the DROP. 
b.  Neither the board nor any trustee of the board shall be responsible for any reports furnished by any expert retained or employed by the board, but they shall be entitled to rely thereon as well as on certificates furnished by an accountant or an actuary, and on all opinions of counsel. The board shall be fully protected with respect to any action taken or suffered by it in good faith in reliance upon such expert, accountant, actuary or counsel, and all actions taken or suffered in such reliance shall be conclusive upon any person with any interest in the DROP. 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  The DROP is not a separate retirement plan. Instead, it is a program under which a member who is eligible for normal retirement under the system may elect to accrue future retirement benefits in the manner provided in this section 58-70.3 for the remainder of his employment, rather than in the normal manner provided under the plan. Upon termination of employment, a member is entitled to a lump sum distribution of his or her DROP account balance or may elect a rollover. The DROP account distribution is in addition to the member's monthly benefit. 
(2)  Notional account. The DROP account established for such a member is a notional account, used only for the purpose of calculation of the DROP distribution amount. It is not a separate account in the system. There is no change in the system's assets, and there is no distribution available to the member until the member's termination from the DROP. The member has no control over the investment of the DROP account. 
(3)  No employer discretion. The DROP benefit is determined pursuant to a specific formula which does not involve employer discretion. 
(4)  IRC limit. The DROP account distribution, along with other benefits payable from the system, is subject to limitation under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b). 
(5)  Amendment of DROP. The DROP may be amended by an ordinance of the city at any time and from time to time, and retroactively if deemed necessary or appropriate, to amend in whole or in part any or all of the provisions of the DROP. However, except as otherwise provided by law, no amendment shall make it possible for any part of the DROP's funds to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of persons entitled to benefits under the DROP. No amendment shall be made which has the effect of decreasing the balance of the DROP account of any member. 
(6)  Facility of payment. If a member or other person entitled to a benefit under the DROP is unable to care for his affairs because of illness or accident or is a minor, the board shall direct that any benefit due him shall be made only to a duly appointed legal representative. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of the liabilities of the DROP for that benefit. 
(7)  Information. Each member, beneficiary or other person entitled to a benefit, before any benefit shall be payable to him or on his account under the DROP, shall file with the board the information that it shall require to establish his rights and benefits under the DROP. 
(8)  Prevention of escheat. If the board cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any person to whom a payment is due under the DROP, the board may, no earlier than three years from the date such payment is due, mail a notice of such due and owing payment to the last known address of such person, as shown on the records of the board or the city. If such person has not made written claim therefor within three months of the date of the mailing, the board may, if it so elects and upon receiving advice from counsel to the system, direct that such payment and all remaining payments otherwise due such person be canceled on the records of the system. Upon such cancellation, the system shall have no further liability therefor except that, in the event such person or his beneficiary later notifies the board of his whereabouts and requests the payment or payments due to him under the DROP, the amount so applied shall be paid to him in accordance with the provisions of the DROP. 
(9)  Written elections, notification. 
a.  Any elections, notifications or designations made by a member pursuant to the provisions of the DROP shall be made in writing and filed with the board in a time and manner determined by the board under rules uniformly applicable to all employees similarly situated. The board reserves the right to change from time to time the manner for making notifications, elections or designations by members under the DROP if it determines after due deliberation that such action is justified in that it improves the administration of the DROP. In the event of a conflict between the provisions for making an election, notification or designation set forth in the DROP and such new administrative procedures, those new administrative procedures shall prevail. 
b.  Each member or Retiree who has a DROP account shall be responsible for furnishing the board with his current address and any subsequent changes in his address. Any notice required to be given to a member or retiree hereunder shall be deemed given if directed to him at the last such address given to the board and mailed by registered or certified United States mail. If any check mailed by registered or certified United States mail to such address is returned, mailing of checks will be suspended until such time as the member or retiree notifies the board of his address. 
(10)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable to a member from the DROP shall be paid only from the assets of the member's DROP account and neither the city nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish the DROP with any funds, securities or other assets except to the extent required by any applicable law. 
(11)  Construction. 
a.  The DROP shall be construed, regulated and administered under the laws of Florida, except where other applicable law controls. 
b.  The titles and headings of the subsections in this section 58-70.3 are for convenience only. In the case of ambiguity or inconsistency, the text rather than the titles or headings shall control. 
(12)  Forfeiture of retirement benefits. Nothing in this section shall be construed to remove DROP participants from the application of any forfeiture provisions applicable to the system. DROP participants shall be subject to forfeiture of all retirement benefits, including DROP benefits. 
(13)  Effect of DROP participation on employment. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of employment and DROP participants shall be subject to the same employment standards and policies that are applicable to employees who are not DROP participants. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 8, 8-23-17)  
Sec. 58-70.4. - Reemployment after retirement. 
(a)  Any retiree under this system, except for disability retirement as previously provided for, may be reemployed by any public or private employer, except the city, and may receive compensation from that employment without limiting or restricting in any way the retirement benefits payable under this system. Reemployment by the city shall be subject to the limitations set forth in this section. 
(b)  After normal retirement. Any retiree who is retired under normal (or early) retirement pursuant to this system and who is reemployed as a police officer and, by virtue of that reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, shall upon being reemployed, discontinue receipt of benefits. Upon reemployment, the member shall be deemed to be fully vested and the additional credited service accrued during the subsequent employment period shall be used in computing a second benefit amount attributable to the subsequent employment period, which benefit amount shall be added to the benefit determined upon the initial retirement to determine the total benefit payable upon final retirement. Calculations of benefits upon retirement shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation, and credited service (and early retirement reduction factor, if applicable) as of that date and the retirement benefit amount for any subsequent employment period shall be based upon the benefit accrual rate, average final compensation (based only on the subsequent employment period and not including any period of DROP participation), and credited service (and early retirement reduction factor, if applicable) as of the date of subsequent retirement. The amount of any death or disability benefit received during a subsequent period of employment shall be reduced by the amount of accrued benefit eligible to be paid for a prior period of employment. The optional form of benefit and any joint pensioner selected upon initial retirement shall not be subject to change upon subsequent retirement except as otherwise provided herein, but the retiree may select a different optional form and joint pensioner applicable only to the subsequent retirement benefit. 
(c)  Any retiree who is retired under normal retirement pursuant to this system who is reemployed by the city in a position other than as a police officer, shall upon being reemployed, continue receipt of benefits for the period of any subsequent employment period. Former DROP participants shall begin receipt of benefits under these circumstances. 
(d)  After early retirement. Any retiree who is retired under early retirement pursuant to this system and who subsequently becomes an employee of the city in any capacity, shall discontinue receipt of benefits from the system. If the reemployed person, by virtue of his reemployment, is eligible to participate in this system, that person shall accrue a second benefit as provided for in subsection (b) above and benefit payments shall remain suspended during any such subsequent employment period. If the reemployed person is not eligible to participate in this system, that person's pension benefit payments shall be suspended until the earlier of termination of employment or such time as the reemployed retiree reaches the date that he would have been eligible for normal retirement under this system had he continued employment and not elected early retirement. "Normal retirement" as used in this subsection shall be the current normal retirement date provided for under this system. 
(e)  Reemployment of terminated vested persons. Reemployed terminated vested persons shall not be subject to the provisions of this section until such time as they begin to actually receive benefits. Upon receipt of benefits, terminated vested persons shall be treated as normal or early retirees for purposes of applying the provisions of this section and their status as an early or normal retiree shall be determined by the date they elect to begin to receive their benefit. 
(f)  DROP participants. Members or retirees who are or were in the deferred retirement option plan shall have the options provided for in this section for reemployment upon termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. O-17-03, § 9, 8-23-17)  
ARTICLE IV. - LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Junk, § 86-46 et seq.; nuisances, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Lost or abandoned property, F.S. § 705.101 et seq.; procedure for unclaimed evidence, F.S. § 705.105. 
 
Sec. 58-71. - Retrieval from public property. 
Whenever a police officer ascertains that an article of lost or abandoned property is present on public property and is of such nature that it can be easily removed, the officer shall take such article into custody and shall make a reasonable attempt to ascertain the rightful owner or lienholder pursuant to the provisions of section 58-72. 
(Code 1980, § 15-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 705.103(1).  
Sec. 58-72. - Notice of lost or abandoned property; disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer ascertains that an article of lost or abandoned property is present on public property and is of such nature that it cannot be easily removed, the officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such article in substantially the following form: 
"NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon public property known as (setting forth brief description of location) and must be removed within five days; otherwise, it will be removed and disposed of pursuant to chapter 705, Florida Statutes. The owner will be liable for the costs of removal, storage, and publication of notice. Dated this: (setting forth the date of posting of notice), signed: (setting forth name, title, address, and telephone number of law enforcement officer)." 
(b)  Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements. In addition to posting, the law enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner. If such is reasonably available to the officer, he shall mail a copy of such notice to the owner on or before the date of posting. 
(c)  If the property is a motor vehicle as defined in F.S. § 320.01(1) or a vessel as defined in F.S. § 327.02(27), the police department shall contact the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles or the state department of natural resources, respectively, in order to determine the name and address of the owner and any person who has filed a lien on the vehicle or vessel as provided in F.S. §§ 319.27(2) or (3) or 328.15(1). On receipt of this information, the police department shall mail a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and to the lienholder, if any. 
(d)  If, at the end of five days after posting the notice and mailing such notice, if required, the owner or any person interested in the lost or abandoned article described has not removed the article from public property or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, the following shall apply: 
(1)  For abandoned property, the police department may retain any or all of the property for its own use or for use by the state or unit of local government; trade such property to another unit of local government or state agency; donate the property to a charitable organization; sell the property; or notify the appropriate refuse removal service. 
(2)  For lost property, the officer shall take custody and the police department shall retain custody of the property for 90 days. The police department shall publish notice of the intended disposition of the property, as provided in section 58-73, during the first 45 days of this time period. 
(Code 1980, § 15-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 705.103(2).  
Sec. 58-73. - Notice of disposition. 
(a)  If the police department elects to retain the property for use by the unit of government, donate the property to a charitable organization, surrender such property to the finder, sell the property, or trade the property to another unit of local government or state agency, notice of such election shall be given by an advertisement published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the property was found. 
(b)  If the police department elects to sell the property, it must do so at public sale by competitive bidding. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be given by an advertisement of the sale published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the sale is to be held. The notice shall include a statement that the sale shall be subject to any and all liens. The sale must be held at the nearest suitable place to that where the lost or abandoned property is held or stored. The advertisement must include a description of the goods and the time and place of the sale. The sale may take place no earlier than ten days after the final publication. If there is no newspaper of general circulation in the county where the sale is to be held, the advertisement shall be posted at the door of the courthouse and at three other public places in the county at least ten days prior to sale. Notice of the police department's intended disposition shall describe the property in a manner reasonably adequate to permit the rightful owner of the property to identify it. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-1, 21-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 705.103(2).  
Sec. 58-74. - Disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  If the property is sold at public sale pursuant to section 58-73(b), the city shall deduct from the proceeds the costs of transportation, storage, and publication of notice, and any balance of proceeds shall be deposited into an interest-bearing account not later than 30 days after the date of the sale and held there for one year. The agency shall provide a bill of sale clearly stating that the sale is subject to any and all liens. The rightful owner of the property may claim the balance of the proceeds within one year from the date of the above-stated deposit by making application to the city. 
(b)  If no rightful owner comes forward with a claim to the property within the designated year, the balance of the proceeds shall be deposited into a special fund. The chief of police shall make report of such sale to and deliver the proceeds thereof to the director of finance. All of the proceeds thereof, less the city's costs, charges and expenses, as determined by subsection (a) of this section, shall be retained by the city in such special fund to be utilized for safety programs or to further aid law enforcement. 
(c)  If the sale is of property defined in F.S. § 705.101(2) or (3), the proceeds shall be deposited as required in F.S. § 705.103(3). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-1, 21-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 705.103(3).  
Sec. 58-75. - Liability of owner. 
(a)  The owner of any abandoned or lost property who, after notice as provided in section 58-72, does not remove such property within the specified period shall be liable to the police department for all costs of removal, storage, and destruction of such property, less any salvage value obtained by disposal of the property. 
(b)  Upon final disposition of the property, the police department shall notify the owner, if known, of the amount owed. In the case of an abandoned boat or motor vehicle, any person who neglects or refuses to pay such amount is not entitled to be issued a certificate of registration for such boat or motor vehicle, or any other boat or motor vehicle, until such costs have been paid. The police department shall supply the state department of natural resources with a list of persons whose boat registration privileges have been revoked under this section and the state department of motor vehicles with a list of persons whose motor vehicle privileges have been revoked. Pursuant to F.S. § 705.103(4), neither those state departments nor any other person acting as agent thereof shall issue a certificate of registration to a person whose boat or motor vehicle registration privileges have been revoked, as provided by this section, until such costs have been paid. 
(Code 1980, § 15-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 705.103(4).  
Sec. 58-76. - Obstructing enforcement. 
It is unlawful for any person to oppose, obstruct, or resist any police officer or any person authorized by the police officer in the discharge of his duties as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 705.103(5).  
Sec. 58-77. - Nonliability of officer, etc., in discharge of duties. 
Any police officer or any person authorized by the police officer is immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 705.103(6).  
Chapter 62 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26; standards for flood hazard reduction, § 46-56; land development code, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 62-1. - General specifications. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property or operator of a trailer park on which a unit is parked to provide the required ground anchors installed. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the unit to provide and install required tie-downs. 
(c)  Travel trailers that are not to be within the city limits for more than 15 days shall be excluded from such anchorage requirements. 
(d)  Other types of piers and methods of blocking, ground anchors or tie-downs, cables or couplings may be approved by the building official if deemed the equivalent of the foregoing specifications. 
(e)  Only closed-eye dropped forged turnbuckles and metal components of hot dipped galvanized finish shall be permitted. 
(Code 1980, § 7-138)  
Sec. 62-2. - Local pier requirements. 
(a)  Doublewide mobile homes are mobile homes with a width of 16 feet or wider. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of appendix H of the Standard Building Code, the following pier requirements shall apply to mobile homes and house trailers: 
(1)  Pier foundations shall be installed directly under the main frame, or chassis, of the mobile home or house trailer. The piers shall not be farther apart than ten feet on centers and the main frame, front or back, shall not extend farther than one foot beyond the centerline of the end piers. 
(2)  Mobile homes and house trailers shall have had the towing hitch or running gear, which includes tongues, axles, brakes, wheels, lights and other parts of the chassis that operate only during transportation, removed. 
(3)  All grass and organic material shall be removed and the pier footings placed on stable soil. 
(4)  A two-inch by eight-inch pressure treated wood plate shall be placed on top of the pier with hardwood one-inch maximum shims fitted and driven tight between the wood plate and the main frame and other frames. 
(Code 1980, § 7-135) 
State Law reference— Minimum standards, F.S. § 320.8325.  
Sec. 62-3. - Minimum ground anchor standards. 
In addition to the requirements specified in appendix H of the Standard Building Code, the following local requirements shall apply to all mobile homes and house trailers: 
(1)  Anchors shall be the screw auger type or the deadman type. 
(2)  Screw augers shall be no less than five-eighths-inch hot dipped galvanized steel with penetration to a depth of not less than three feet with a welded eye on one end and not less than a four-inch auger cap on the other end. 
(3)  The deadman type anchors shall be of poured-in-place concrete, no less than eight inches in diameter and a depth of no less than two feet in rock or four feet in soil. The deadman type shall be cast to a minimum depth of 24 inches a five-eighths-inch hot galvanized steel rod with welded eye. 
(4)  Any of the patented or expansion type bolts with a minimum of five-eighths-inch diameter and inserted in solid rock foundation to a minimum of 12 inches may be used for ground anchors. 
(5)  All anchors shall be capable of withstanding a vertical stress component of 4,800 pounds. 
(Code 1980, § 7-136) 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; buildings and building regulations, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Minimum standards, F.S. § 320.8325.  
Sec. 62-4. - Minimum tie-down standards. 
(a)  Each mobile home or house trailer shall have the minimum tie-downs as specified in appendix H of the Standard Building Code. Multiple-wide (doublewide) mobile homes are those with a width of 16 feet or wider. 
(b)  Ties shall be made of no less than one-half-inch galvanized steel turnbuckles connected to ground anchors, with no less than three-eighths-inch galvanized wire rope, or others that are at least equal thereto, and listed in section H-5.2.1 of appendix H of the Standard Building Code. One tie-down shall be placed as near adjacent to the front and as near adjacent to the rear piles as possible. 
(c)  Over-the-roof ties, required on single wides only, shall be reinforced at points of contact with the mobile home or trailer unit so the cable cannot cause cutting damage thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 7-137) 
State Law reference— Minimum standards, F.S. § 320.8325.  
Sec. 62-5. - Enforcement and applicability. 
(a)  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the building official as specified in chapter 1 of the Standard Building Code. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply immediately to all mobile homes or house trailers installed within the city limits after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(c)  In the event that land on which mobile homes are installed is annexed into the city limits, such mobile homes shall be required to meet the standards contained in this article, as well as the other standards contained in appendix H of the Standard Building Code, within 60 days after any such annexation. 
(Code 1980, § 7-139)  
Chapter 66 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Distribution of handbills, § 6-26 et seq.; lost and abandoned property, § 58-71 et seq.; solid wastes, ch. 86; junk, § 86-46 et seq.; refuse disposal and waterways of the city prohibited, § 110-3; excessive noise of watercraft prohibited, § 110-37; required equipment for excrement, waste, and refuse disposal for watercraft, § 110-40. 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances by injunction, F.S. § 60.05; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. ch. 386; public nuisances in general, F.S. ch. 823. 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Enforcement official means either the city building official, special magistrate or city engineer as appropriate to the alleged violation. 
Improved real property means any lot, tract or parcel of land upon which a structure of any kind or type has been either placed or constructed. Improved real property shall not include property which is otherwise unimproved except to the extent that a dock or similar structure has been constructed pursuant to section 20A-5.7(D) of the city's Land Development Code. 
Nuisance means any person doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(1)  Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)  Offends decency; 
(3)  Is offensive to the senses; 
(4)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; 
(5)  In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or 
(6)  Essentially interferes with comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. 
Unimproved real property means any lot, tract or parcel of land that does not have any structure of any kind or type either placed or constructed upon it. 
(Code 1980, § 16-1; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-1), 7-10-91; Ord. No. O-99-06, § 1, 8-25-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-2. - Findings and intent. 
The city council finds and determines that the continuous growth and urban development of this city requires the reasonable and effective control and regulation of excessive growth and accumulation of weeds, undergrowth and other plant life to the extent and in such manner of accumulation as to cause infestation by rodents and other health endangering wild animals, the breeding of mosquitos and vermin or to threaten or endanger the public health, or adversely affect and impair the economic welfare of adjacent property. These findings are not to be construed to be in conflict with the intent of the council to encourage the protection of trees in this community. Further, the council finds and determines that the accumulation of garbage and trash and the accumulation, storage and maintenance of junk or trash requires reasonable and effective control to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Code 1980, § 16-1.1; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-1.1), 7-10-91)  
Sec. 66-3. - Illustrative enumeration. 
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions is hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  Accumulations of trash, litter, debris, garbage, bottles, paper, cans, rags, dead or decayed fish, fowl, meat or other animal matter, fruit, vegetables, offal, bricks, concrete, scrap lumber or other building debris or other refuse of any nature. 
(2)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
(3)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(6)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(7)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial waters or other substances. 
(8)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(9)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground, excluding drainage facilities contained in public rights-of-way or easements as authorized by the city. 
(10)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities. 
(11)  Growth of weeds, grass, vines, undergrowth or other vegetation (but not protected species): 
a.  Upon improved real property, when above a height of ten inches, or 
b.  Upon unimproved real property when such growth encroaches upon adjoining improved real property such that it: 
i.  Causes, or is imminent danger of causing, damage to the adjoining property, or 
ii.  Creates an unreasonable maintenance burden upon said adjoining property. 
Nothing herein shall relieve the landowner of any requirement to obtain appropriate permits for removal of such vegetation {See Resolution R-08-14}. 
(12)  Inoperative, junk or abandoned vehicles and vessels on the exterior portions of residential property. Trailers shall be deemed vehicles for purposes of this regulation. 
It shall constitute a violation of this provision to have either of the following conditions on a residential property: 
a.  A vehicle or vessel that is unregistered or unlicensed and located to the street side of the building line of the [principal] structure; or 
b.  A total of more than one vehicle, vessel or vessel/trailer tandem on the property that is unregistered or unlicensed. 
(Code 1980, § 16-2; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-2), 7-10-91; Ord. No. O-02-02, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. O-08-08, § 1, 8-27-08; Ord. No. O-09-12, § 1, 9-23-09) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26.  
Sec. 66-4. - Notice of violation. 
Upon the failure of the owner of any lot, parcel or tract of land within the city to keep such premises free of weeds, grass and undergrowth of a height of ten inches or more from the ground, or of rubbish, trash, debris, dead trees, or other unsightly or unsanitary matter, or to keep such premises free of excavations or depressions, or other nuisances as provided in section 66-3, then it shall be the duty of the enforcement official to give notice to such owner of his violation of this article and to demand elimination of the violation within 15 days after the receipt, or posting, of such notice, unless the violation poses an imminent threat to public health and safety, in which case the notice shall require elimination of the violation within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Code 1980, § 16-2.1; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-2.1), 7-10-91; Ord. No. O-99-06, § 2, 8-25-99)  
Sec. 66-5. - Service of notice; form. 
(a)  The notice required by section 66-4 shall be given by certified mail, addressed to the owner of the property described, as his name and address is then shown upon the tax roll of the county property appraiser, as of the date received or posted. If such notice is returned by postal authorities without evidencing receipt thereof, the enforcement official shall cause a copy of the notice to be served by a police officer of the city upon the occupant of the property, or upon any agent of the owner thereof, if located in the county. If personal service upon the occupant of the property or upon any agent of the owner thereof cannot be performed after two attempts by such officer, the notice shall be accomplished by physically posting the notice on the property. 
(b)  The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
Name of owner _____ 
Address of owner _____ 
Public records indicate that you are the owner of the following property in the City of Sebastian, Florida: _____ 
;fillrule; 
;fillrule; 
(describe property) 
An inspection of this property discloses, and the City has found and determined, that a condition exists thereon which is a violation of section 66-3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian in that: _____ 
;fillrule; 
;fillrule; 
;fillrule; 
(describe here the condition which places the property in violation) 
You are hereby notified that unless the condition described above is remedied so as to make it nonviolative of section 66-4 of the Code of Ordinances of the city within 15 days/48 hours from the time of receipt hereof, the City of Sebastian will proceed to remedy this condition, and the expenses will be imposed as a lien on the property if not paid within 14 days after receipt of billing. If you have any questions, please phone the special magistrate of the city. 
If you dispute that such alleged conditions exist on such property, you may request a hearing before the city special magistrate to show good reason why such condition should not be corrected. Such request for hearing must be in writing and must be postmarked by a date not later than ten days if fifteen (15) days is given to correct the violation, or by hand-delivery or fax of such request by noon of the next business day if only forty-eight (48) hours is given in the notice, after your receipt of this notice by you or the occupant of the premises, and addressed to city clerk, city hall. 
City of Sebastian, Florida 
By:___________ 
Title: 
(Code 1980, § 16-3; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-3), 7-10-91; Ord. No. O-99-06, § 3, 8-25-99)  
Sec. 66-5.1. - Solicitation, selling or distributing to motor vehicles. 
(a)  Legislative findings. The City Council of the City of Sebastian, in the exercise of its legislative discretion, finds and determines as a matter of fact that the busiest and most dangerous intersections within the city are those intersections controlled by traffic lights. It is at these intersections that drivers need to be most alert and more aware of their surroundings, including other motor vehicles, bicyclists, pedestrians and the signals of traffic control devices. People walking outside of the pedestrian crosswalks and between lines of temporarily stopped vehicles in an effort to solicit money or sell or distribute items create an unnecessary distraction and pose an unacceptable heightened risk and danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Violation. It is unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to solicit money for any cause, to sell any goods or services, or to distribute or attempt to distribute any item to the operator or any occupant of a motor vehicle at any of the following intersections in the City of Sebastian: 
Jackson Street & US #1; 
Main Street & US #1; 
Sebastian Blvd/CR 512(W) & US #1; 
Sebastian Blvd/CR 512(E) & US #1; 
Sebastian Blvd/CR 512 & Delaware Avenue; 
Sebastian Blvd/CR 512 & Easy Street; 
Sebastian Blvd/CR 512 & Fleming Street; 
Sebastian Blvd/CR 512 & Barber Street; 
Sebastian Blvd/CR 512 & Roseland Road; 
Barber Street & US #1; 
Schumann Drive & US #1, and that portion of the intersection of Sebastian Blvd./CR 512 and C/R 510 within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-16-02, § 1, 7-13-16)  
Sec. 66-6. - Hearing before special magistrate. 
Within ten days after the receipt of notice or after the service or posting of such notice on the property, or by noon of the following business day if corrective action is required within forty-eight (48) hours, the owner of the property may make written request to the city clerk for a hearing before the special magistrate to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist, or to show other reasons why the alleged violation should not be corrected. At the hearing, the city and the property owner may introduce such evidence as is appropriate. 
(Code 1980, § 16-4; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-4), 7-10-91; Ord. No. O-99-06, § 4, 8-25-99)  
Sec. 66-7. - Condition may be remedied by city and lien imposed. 
(a)  If, within the times allotted under this chapter, no hearing has been requested in writing and the condition described in the notice has not been corrected within the time period provided in the notice of public nuisance, the enforcement shall cause the condition to be remedied at the expense of the property owner. 
(b)  If a hearing has been held and is concluded adversely to the property owner, and the condition is not remedied by the owner within the time ordered by the special magistrate after such hearing, the enforcement official may cause the condition to be remedied at the expense of the property owner. 
(c)  After causing the condition to be remedied, the enforcement official shall certify to the director of finance the expense incurred in remedying the condition, including advertising costs and all other expenses incurred by the city in correcting the condition, whereupon such expense shall become due and payable in full within 14 days after receipt of the bill therefor, after which a special assessment lien and charge will be made upon the property, which lien shall be payable with simple interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month on the unpaid balance from the due date until paid. Such lien shall be of equal dignity with the lien for taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided by law, and may be satisfied at any time by payment thereof, including accrued interest. Upon such payment, the director of finance shall, by appropriate means, evidence the satisfaction and cancellation of such lien upon the record thereof. Notice of such lien may be filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and recorded among the public records of Indian River County. 
(Code 1980, § 16-5; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-5), 7-10-91; Ord. No. O-99-06, § 5, 8-25-99)  
Sec. 66-8. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. Any action taken pursuant to this chapter in regard to the disposal, abatement or removal of the conditions declared in this chapter to be public nuisances shall be considered cumulative and in addition to other penalties and remedies provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 16-8; Ord. No. O-91-18, § 1(16-8), 7-10-91)  
Chapter 67 - NOISE 
 
Sec. 67-1. - Noises; unnecessary and excessive prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any unreasonably loud, excessive, unnecessary, or unusual noise. 
B.  A violation of this chapter shall occur if circumstances are such that a violation would be obvious to an ordinary, reasonable, prudent person. 
C.  The following acts, among others, are declared to be unreasonably loud, excessive, unnecessary or unusual noises in violation of this chapter but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Power tools and landscape equipment. The operation of noise-producing lawn mowers, lawn edgers, weed trimmers, blowers, chippers, chain saws, power tools and other noise producing tools which are used at a residence out-of-doors between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  Animals, birds, etc. The owning, harboring, possessing or keeping of any dog, animal or bird which causes frequent, habitual or continued noise and which disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents. 
(3)  Radios, televisions, CD players, musical instruments, speakers, loudspeakers, amplifiers, and similar devices. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio, television, CD player, musical instrument, speakers, loudspeakers, amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing, reproducing or amplifying sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighbors. 
(Ord. No. O-09-12, § 2, 9-23-09; Ord. No. O-12-01, § 1, 2-8-12)  
Sec. 67-2. - Responsibility for compliance. 
A.  For the purposes of this article, any person owning or having responsibility for management of a premises, however temporarily, or any performer or disc jockey producing sound upon any premises, any person playing music, any person having control of volume knobs or levels or amplification devices, and the business as named on the occupational license, if applicable, shall be jointly and severally liable for compliance with this article and shall be responsible for any violations of this article. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation may provide the city with the name and phone number(s) of one or more persons who may be called to achieve compliance with this chapter. City enforcement officers, when furnished with such contact information, shall attempt to reach those persons by phone in an attempt to achieve compliance and such persons shall also be responsible for compliance as defined in section 67-2 A. above. 
(Ord. No. O-09-12, § 2, 9-23-09; Ord. No. O-12-01, § 1, 2-8-12)  
Sec. 67-3. - Enforcement procedure, warnings, and citations. 
A.  Warnings. A first violation of this chapter shall result in a warning, either oral or written, that details the violation with specificity and requires prompt corrective action be taken by any person(s) responsible for compliance as defined in section 67-2. 
B.  Citations. If corrective action is not taken within 15 minutes of the warning, or if a warning for the same offense has been issued within the past 60 days, an enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation for each subsequent violation in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  The first citation issued within 60 days of a warning for the same offense shall carry a fine of $50.00. 
(2)  The second citation issued within 60 days of a warning for the same offense shall carry a fine of $250.00. 
(3)  The third and each subsequent citation issued within 60 days of a warning for the same offense shall carry a fine of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. O-09-12, § 2, 9-23-09; Ord. No. O-12-01, § 1, 2-8-12)  
Sec. 67-4. - Exemption. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this chapter: 
(1)  Noises of authorized safety signals and warning devises. 
(2)  Noises emanating from any government vehicle or property. 
(3)  Noises from emergency work, which is to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger, including without limitation noises from generators or other equipment used by communications companies or other utility companies due to a commercial power outage or in connection with restoration of service operations or routine testing of such generators or other equipment. 
(4)  Any activity authorized by the city council or city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-09-12, § 2, 9-23-09; Ord. No. O-12-01, § 1, 2-8-12)  
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Adoption of state laws constituting a misdemeanor. 
It shall be unlawful to commit, within the limits of the city, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor; and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
(Code 1980, § 17-1) 
Annotation— Adoption of state law relating to misdemeanors by city upheld, McFarland v. Roberts, 74 So.2d 88; adoption of state law misdemeanors by reference includes laws both in existence at the time and those later adopted by the state legislature, State v. Smith, 189 So.2d 846. 
State Law reference— Penalty for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083. See also Fla. Stats. general index under heading "Fines and Civil Penalties" for listing of state law misdemeanors.  
Sec. 70-2. - Surcharge on court costs. 
Pursuant to F.S. ch. 943, the city hereby authorizes the assessment of a $3.00 surcharge on court costs, to be used as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 17-1.1) 
State Law reference— Surcharge authorized, F.S. § 943.25.  
Sec. 70-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-11-17, § 2, adopted Sept. 14, 2011, repealed § 70-3, which pertained to discharge of firearms and derived from Code 1980, § 17-2.  
Sec. 70-4. - Fireworks. 
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks within the city limits without prior written permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 17-2) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42.  
Sec. 70-5. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate areas of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, or parks. 
Riot means a public disturbance involving: 
(1)  An act of violence by one or more persons who are part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual; or 
(2)  A threat of the commission of an act of violence by one or more persons who are part of an assemblage of three or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat, where the performance of the threatened act of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person or any other individual. 
Incite a riot means, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written advocacy of ideas or the expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any act of violence or assertion of the rightness of, or the right to commit, any such act. 
(b)  Certain acts unlawful. A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if the conduct of such person is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person wilfully does any of the following acts in a public place within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the other person is placed in danger of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(4)  Interferes by acts of violence with the pursuit of a lawful occupation by another. 
(5)  Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known to be such. 
(6)  Is in a public place under the influence of a controlled substance as defined in F.S. ch. 893, as constituted at the time of adoption of this chapter or as subsequently revised or amended, and in such condition as to be unable to exercise care for his own safety or for the safety of others. 
(7)  Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot. 
(8)  Addresses abusive or obscene language or threats or makes an obscene gesture to any member of the city police department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performance of his duties, or any other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not included in this provision. 
(9)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive conditions. 
(10)  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other person nearby or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed. 
(11)  Fails to obey a lawful order of a police officer to disperse when such police officer is known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is imminently threatened. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking, or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 17-5)  
Sec. 70-6. - Obstructing officers. 
(a)  Prohibited. A person shall be guilty of obstructing an officer if he willfully obstructs, interferes or resists the performance of duties by city police or any other authorized official of the city, when known to be such an official, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 17-6) 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 58.  
Sec. 70-7. - Trespass. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter into a room, building, parcel of land, or other area owned by the city that has a sign posted thereon such as Employees Only, Authorized Persons Only, Keep Out, No Trespassing, or other sign specifying that any such room, building, parcel of land or other area is not open to the general public or is limited to access by a limited class of persons. It is also unlawful for any person to fail to immediately vacate any room, building, parcel of land or other area owned by the city when instructed to leave the premises by any police officer of the city for good cause. Failure to immediately vacate the area in accordance with the instructions of the police officer shall be a trespass ab initio. 
(Code 1980, § 17-7)  
Sec. 70-8. - Forfeiture of vehicle under state law; distribution of funds; duty of city attorney. 
(a)  Any vehicle, vessel or conveyance operated within the city limits, which vehicle, vessel or conveyance shall be forfeited under the provisions of state law for the violation of such provisions of the state law that shall require forfeiture of such vehicle, vessel or conveyance, shall be forfeited to the city. 
(b)  The funds received from property forfeited pursuant to F.S. §§ 932.701 through 932.704 shall be distributed pursuant to the procedure in F.S. § 932.704. All other funds received from the sale or other disposition of seized property shall go into the general fund of the city. 
(c)  The city attorney shall act on behalf of the city relative to the proceedings for forfeiture, notice of seizure, order to show cause and other procedures as required by law. 
(Code 1980, § 21-3) 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Chapter 74 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; waterways, ch. 110. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-20, §§ 1—10, adopted Sept. 13, 2000, amended Art. I, §§ 74-1—74-10, to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. I, §§ 74-1—74-5, pertained to hours of operation, prohibited animals and alcoholic beverages, and restricted use of vehicles in parks and prohibited swimming in Swim Lake. Such sections were derived from the 1980 Code, §§ 18-1—18-4, 26-7; and Ord. No. O-92-11, § 1, adopted July 8, 1992. 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Enclosed public-use facilities means those city properties such as the yacht club and community center, which by their very nature, are generally best utilized by designated groups for meetings, events and private parties. 
Open-air public use facilities means those city properties such as the ball fields of the Barber Street Sports Complex, the skatepark facility, that by their very nature, are generally best utilized by either the general public or designated groups for sporting events, and may be leased on a long-term basis to specific organizations. 
Park areas means any and all outdoor and covered grounds and facilities owned, operated or designed by the city for the purposes of recreational or leisure activities, except those facilities designated as waterway facilities or public-use facilities. 
Park Event means utilization of a recreation facility, other than an enclosed public-use facility, or any portion thereof for any planned or organized event, other than a city-sponsored event, at which the city manager reasonably believes between 50 and 300 persons will attend. 
Recreation facilities means any and all real property owned or maintained by the city for the purposes of active or passive recreation, community and civic gatherings, open space and such other traditionally related activities. However, these provisions shall specifically not apply to the Sebastian Municipal Golf Course. 
Special event means utilization of a recreation facility, other than an enclosed public-use facility, or any portion thereof for any planned or organized event, other than a city-sponsored event, at which the city manager reasonably believes more than 300 persons will attend. 
Waterway facilities means any structure constructed on or over the waterways of the city such as a public dock, boat ramp, seawall or boardwalk, as well any pedestrian walkway constructed or maintained by the city running over or along its waterways. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 1, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-2. - Designation by resolution. 
The city council shall, by resolution, designate the classification, and the fees, where applicable, for use of each recreation facility in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 2, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 2, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-3. - Regulations; promulgation and approval by resolution. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby empowered and authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations which shall apply to city recreational facilities. 
(b)  All rules and regulations promulgated and adopted pursuant to this article shall, in order to be effective, be posted in a conspicuous place in the area where they are intended to be effective. The existence of such signs at any place within the city shall be prima facie evidence such signs were erected or placed with the authority of the city manager. 
(c)  Any person violating any such rule or regulation promulgated and posted pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00. 
(d)  The city council may by resolution, remove or modify any regulation promulgated pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 3, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 3, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-4. - General regulations for recreational facilities. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct; unlawful acts. No person shall: 
(1)  Use profane, obscene or threatening language or conduct within the area which unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of the recreational facility by others. 
(2)  Smoke in buildings or other areas except where designated by signs posted by the city manager or his designee. 
(3)  Knowingly interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous any part of a facility. 
(4)  Enter or leave any park facility by motor vehicle except at established entrance ways or exits, or at established times. 
(5)  Use an electronic public address system or other mechanical sound amplification devices, including radios and electronic sound reproduction equipment of any kind at such a high volume level as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment by others of the facility. 
(6)  Build or set fires except on cooking grills or self-contained cooking units in specified areas or upon written approval of the city manager. 
(7)  Possess, consume or serve any alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in any area therein unless in accordance with regulations allowing the same in conjunction with a city sponsored event, or as authorized by a city permit for a function held at a public use facility. 
(8)  Cause or permit a dog or other domestic animal, other than a service animal within the scope of F.S. § 413.08, to enter the area unless such pet is maintained on a leash of six feet or less. No dogs or other domestic animals shall be brought into any enclosed public use facility except in accordance with the aforementioned statute. 
This subsection does not apply to city-designated dog parks where activities are conducted in accordance with posted rules and regulations. 
(9)  Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash anywhere on the grounds of the parks other than in proper receptacles provided therefor, and no such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to, the parks or beach areas. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(10)  Drive or park any unauthorized motor vehicle on any area within any park or recreational area except designated park roads or parking areas; park any motor vehicle that is not authorized by the city manager in any area other than an established or designated parking area; or park any motor vehicle that is not authorized by the city manager within any recreational facility during the established hours that said area is closed to the public. 
(11)  Ride a bicycle on other than a designated vehicular road or path designated for that purpose; leave a bicycle in any place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided, or leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or any place or position so as to present any obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(12)  Post public notices except in designated areas and in accordance with time and place restrictions established by the city manager. 
(13)  Operate a concession; sell, peddle, or solicit sell in any park without written prior approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(14)  Bed down or sleep in parks or recreational areas including any parking area except upon written approval of the city manager; nor shall camper trucks, buses or trailers be permitted to remain in such parking area between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. except boat trailers may remain in areas designated for the parking thereof during the time between launch and return of the watercraft it has transported. 
(b)  Signage. The city manager is hereby empowered and authorized to regulate the use of recreational facilities within the context of this article by erecting or placing of signs regulating such use and hours of use. 
(c)  Violations and penalties. Violations of this section are punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both. 
(d)  Parental liability. Parents shall be held liable for conduct of their minor children. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 4, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 4, 11-13-02; Ord. No. O-04-06, § 1, 5-12-04; Ord. No. O-09-04, § 1, 5-13-09; Ord. No. O-17-02, § 1, 5-24-17)  
Sec. 74-5. - Additional regulations affecting waterway facilities. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct; unlawful acts. In addition to the restrictions set-forth elsewhere in this chapter, no person shall within or upon waterway facilities: 
(1)  Dive or jump into the water from such facility. 
(2)  Use railings or benches on piers or riverwalks for cleaning or cutting bait or fish. 
(3)  Push, propel or ride bicycles, scooters, skates or skateboards on piers or docks. 
(4)  Fish with more than two lines or poles at one time on piers or riverwalks. 
(5)  Park or dock watercraft utilized for a commercial purposes, including rental to the public, longer than reasonably necessary to launch or retrieve the same. 
(b)  Signage. The city manager is empowered and authorized to further regulate waterway facilities within the context of this article by erecting or placing of signs governing their use. The existence of such signs at any place within the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs were erected or placed with the authority of the city manager. 
(c)  Violations and penalties. Violations of this section are punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both. 
(d)  Parental liability. Parents shall be held liable for conduct of their minor children. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 5, 9-13-00l; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 5, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-6. - Park event permits. 
No person shall conduct a park event without the prior approval of the city manager. Any person desiring to conduct a park event shall submit a written application to the recreation department on forms promulgated by the city manager and shall pay fees as established by resolution of the city council. Further conditions for park event permit approval may be set out by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 6, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 6, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-7. - Special event permits. 
(a)  No person shall conduct a special event without the prior approval of the city council. Any person desiring to conduct a special event shall submit a written permit application to the recreation department on forms promulgated by the city manager. The amount of the permit fee and conditions for special event permit approval shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall deny an application if the special event will unreasonably conflict with public policy or adequate measures cannot be taken by the applicant to protect the public health, safety and welfare. A decision of the city council to deny, or to grant with conditions, an application made pursuant to this section shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 7, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 7, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-8. - Enclosed public-use facility permit. 
(a)  No person shall utilize an enclosed public-use facility without the prior approval of the city manager, except that certain uses shall require city council approval as set out in paragraph (c) below. Anyone desiring to utilize an enclosed public-use facility shall submit a written application to the recreation department on forms promulgated by the city manager and shall pay fees as established by resolution of the city council. Further conditions may be set out by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  No permit shall be granted for the commercial use of an enclosed public-use facility, although fund-raising for non-profit organizations shall be allowed subject to council approval as set forth below. In the event that gambling activity is to be a part of the permitted use, the city council shall make a determination that such activity is not in conflict with the general law of the State of Florida. 
(c)  In the event that the proposed use may include activities involving gambling, alcoholic beverages, the use of a facility after 11:00 p.m., or if a charge for admission, food costs, required donation or other fee is to be assessed, then the permit can only be issued upon approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 8, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 8, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-9. - Claims against security deposit. 
All or part of the security deposit for any permit issued under this article shall be forfeited to the city if it is determined by the city manager that non-compliance with the terms of this article or conditions of the permit occurred, or if damages to the facilities have occurred which can be attributed to the applicant. The city manager is authorized to pro-rate the amount of estimated damages and shall return any amount of the deposit in excess of estimated damages. Damages are determined to be either physical destruction to the facilities or costs associated with specific clean-up attributable to the applicant. 
Any decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council. The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the city manager after considering the facts as presented by both the applicant and the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 9, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 9, 11-13-02)  
Sec. 74-10. - Permit rescission. 
The city manager is authorized to rescind any permit found in violation of provisions of this article when it is deemed in the best interest of the public. Violations of any provisions of this article may result in the forfeiture of the security deposit as provided above. 
The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council. The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the city manager after considering the facts as presented by both the applicant and the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-00-20, § 10, 9-13-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 10, 11-13-02)  
Secs. 74-11—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GOLF COURSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of city relative to golf course, § 1.02(8). 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Municipal golf course; objectives; management. 
The Sebastian Municipal Golf Course has been established to promote and encourage persons to learn and play golf, swimming, tennis and other recreational sports at the municipal golf course and its premises. The affairs of the golf course shall be managed by an administrative department head whose title shall be the golf course manager. Such office shall be occupied by a person appointed by the city manager and shall have such duties and powers as are from time to time prescribed by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1980, § 12.5-1)  
Sec. 74-32. - Manager; duties. 
The affairs of the golf course shall be managed by the course manager, who shall generally be supervised by the city manager. The course manager shall, however, have general supervisory responsibility over the operations of the golf course, including promotion, supervision, and discipline of the staff. 
(Code 1980, § 12.5-2) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-56 et seq.  
Sec. 74-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-04, § 1, adopted March 25, 2015, repealed § 74-33, which pertained to rates and derived from Code 1980, § 12.5-3.  
Sec. 74-34. - Operating fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created the municipal golf course operating fund which shall be composed of all funds received for the construction and from the operation of the municipal golf course and related facilities from whatever sources. 
(b)  All moneys received and expended shall be maintained by the finance director in a separate and distinct fund from all other city funds. However, such funds may be invested in the local government surplus trust fund, as established by Florida law, or such other prudent investments as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 12.5-6) 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-86 et seq.  
Sec. 74-35. - Vehicle restrictions. 
No person shall ride, drive or park any motor vehicle except golf carts on the municipal golf course or greens. Other vehicles are permitted on the roads and parking areas at the golf course except as may be prohibited by signs. 
(Code 1980, § 26-8) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Secs. 74-36—74-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECREATIONAL IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 74-50. - Fee required. 
The payment of a fee to the city in the amount of nine hundred seventy-five dollars ($975.00) to be used for the acquisition, expansion, construction and provision of city recreational facilities shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for any newly constructed dwelling unit of any kind. A dwelling unit shall be considered newly constructed whether it is constructed on a vacant lot or parcel, is the reconstruction or renovation of a building that was not previously occupied as a dwelling unit of any kind, or whether it is an additional dwelling unit added to a lot, parcel, tract of property, thereby increasing the total number of dwelling units to two (2) or more. 
(Ord. No. O-01-15, § 1, 7-11-01)  
Sec. 74-51. - Credit for parcels vested under 1992 Bankruptcy Court Order. 
Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement and Order in Case No. 90-12231-BKC-AJC of the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Florida, the fee for lots developed pursuant to the plats of the Sebastian Highlands Units 1-17 shall be six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00), which represents a credit of three hundred twenty-five dollars ($325.00) for the pro-rata amount of the impact fee attributable to costs of land acquisition under the level of service standards of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. O-01-15, § 2, 7-11-01)  
Sec. 74-52. - Credit for the dedication of land for active recreation uses. 
Upon the dedication of two (2) or more contiguous acres of land to the city as hereinafter set forth, a developer shall receive a credit against the fee otherwise required to be paid pursuant to this article. The credit shall be applied as follows: 
(1)  The credit shall become effective upon city council acceptance of the dedication of the land. Said land shall not be accepted by the city council unless it finds the land to be suitable for public park or active recreation purposes. In determining the suitability of the land for such purposes, the city council may consider all factors and variables affecting such suitability, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Access from paved public streets. 
b.  Size. 
c.  Fair market value. 
d.  Physical characteristics and qualities. 
e.  Proximity of the land to other recreation facilities. 
f.  Availability of city funds to construct facilities on the land. 
g.  Conformance with the city's comprehensive plan. 
Conservation lands required as a condition of development approval by regulatory agencies shall not be eligible for impact fee credits. 
(2)  The fair market value of the land to be dedicated shall be established by a formal MAI appraisal which is acceptable to the city. The appraisal shall be provided by the developer at his expense. The developer shall provide the city manager or his designee with detailed plans and specifications of any improvements and facilities to be constructed thereupon, including estimates and information as to costs, and the city shall make a determination as to the credit available for such construction. 
(3)  The land shall be dedicated to the city in fee simple, and shall be free of any liens or encumbrances. 
(4)  The credit shall be calculated as a ratio of the fair market value of land dedicated, plus the value of any facilities constructed thereupon by the developer, divided by the total recreational impact fee required to be paid. The fee required to be paid pursuant to this article shall be reduced by the percentage of credit determined by the above formula. 
(5)  Recreation impact fees credited to a developer, for dedications and improvements eligible for impact fee credits, shall be provided on a lot by lot basis. The impact fee amount shall be reduced equally for each lot or in the case of multi-family residential projects each dwelling unit, within the development by assessing the total impact fee per lot or unit minus the proportionate share of the credit applied to each lot. 
(6)  If the percentage of credit is one hundred (100) percent or more, no fee shall be required to be paid. Any dedications valued in excess of the total projected impact fee due for the project shall result in an impact fee credit in favor of the developer, which shall be assignable and shall remain in effect for a maximum of ten (10) years. Such excess credits may be used anywhere within the city if arising from the dedication of a community park facility. However, credit arising from dedication of neighborhood park facilities may only be utilized within the recreational zone in which the development containing the dedicated facility is located. 
(7)  A recreation impact fee agreement shall be provided governing credits and payment of fees. Such agreement shall be acceptable to the city attorney and city manager, and shall be recorded. 
(Ord. No. O-01-15, § 3, 7-11-01)  
Sec. 74-53. - Time of payment. 
The fee required by this article shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. O-01-15, §, 7-11-01)  
Sec. 74-54. - Establishment of recreation zones. 
The city shall be divided into four (4) recreational zones which shall function as service areas for neighborhood park facilities as follows: 
(1)  Zone A. Begin at the intersection of centerlines of Fleming Street and CR 512; thence follow centerline of Fleming Street north to Main Street; thence follow centerline of Main Street northeast until it intersects with the perpendicular extension of the lot line between Lots 3 & 4, Block 12, Sebastian Highlands Unit 1; thence follow said extended lot line through to the boundary of Roseland Satellite Airfield Tract 1 (Sebastian Municipal Airport); thence follow along said boundary to the west and north, and continue along the same as it becomes the boundary to Roseland Satellite Airfield Tract 3, continuing as the same line becomes the city limits; thence follow said city limits to the west and around until the same intersects with CR 512; thence follow northeast along the centerline of CR 512 to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Zone B. Begin at the intersection of centerlines of Fleming Street and CR 512; thence follow centerline of Fleming Street north to Main Street; thence follow centerline of Main Street northeast until it intersects with the perpendicular extension of the lot line between Lots 3 & 4, Block 12, Sebastian Highlands Unit 1; thence follow said extended lot line through to the boundary of Roseland Satellite Airfield Tract 1 (Sebastian Municipal Airport); thence follow along said boundary to the west and north, and continue along the same as it becomes the boundary to Roseland Satellite Airfield Tract 3, continuing until said line intersects with the city limits along the northwest corner of the former St. Sebastian PUD; thence follow said city limits to the northeast and around until the same intersects with the boundary between Sections 7 & 18; thence follow west along said section line continuing as it becomes the boundary between Sections 12 & 13 until the same intersects with the centerline of CR 512; thence along said right-of-way to the point of beginning. 
(3)  Zone C. Begin at the point the city limits intersect the boundary of Sections 7 & 18 from the north; thence follow said city limits east and around south until the same intersects with Powerline Road; thence follow the centerline of Powerline Road north to Barber Street; thence follow Barber Street to the west and north to the centerline of the Elkam Waterway; thence follow the centerline of the Elkam Waterway east to mouth of the Collier Waterway; thence follow the Collier Waterway to the point it intersects with the boundary of Sections 12 & 13; thence follow east along said section line, continuing as it becomes the boundary of Sections 7 & 18 to the point of beginning. 
(4)  Zone D. Begin at the point the boundary of Sections 12 & 13 intersects the centerline CR 512; thence follow said section line east to the point the Collier Waterway intersects the same from the south; thence follow the centerline of the Collier Waterway until it intersects with the Elkam Waterway; thence follow the centerline of the Elkam Waterway to the west to the centerline of Barber Street; thence follow the centerline of Barber Street to the south and east to the intersection with Powerline Road; thence follow the centerline of Powerline Road south to the city limits; thence follow the city limits to the west and around to the north to CR 512; thence follow along the centerline of CR 512 to the northeast to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. O-01-15, § 5, 7-11-01)  
Sec. 74-55. - Use of fees paid. 
The fees paid pursuant to this article shall be segregated and held in trust by the city in its recreation trust fund. The city shall maintain records of monies collected adequate to determine the amount contributed to the fund from each particular development. The funds collected from any development shall be used only to acquire, construct or provide recreational improvements or facilities, but may not be used on a neighborhood park facility located in a different recreation zone than the one containing the originating development. The city shall maintain records of all funds expended and the purposes for which they were expended. Funds must be encumbered for a qualifying project within seven (7) years of being collected. 
(Ord. No. O-01-15, § 6, 7-11-01)  
Chapter 78 - PLANNING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 78-1—78-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Land development code, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Local government comprehensive planning act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-26. - Adopted, available for public inspection. 
The City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan is adopted and made a part of this article by reference and is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1980, § 20-51; Ord. No. 91-17, § 1, 6-12-91)  
Secs. 78-27—78-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REDEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 78-30. - Community redevelopment trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established and created, in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 163.387, a community redevelopment trust fund, hereafter referred to as the "fund". 
(b)  The monies allocated to and deposited into the fund are hereby appropriated to the community redevelopment agency, hereafter referred to as the "agency", to finance projects within the community redevelopment district, hereafter referred to as the "district". The agency shall utilize the monies and the revenue paid into and earned by the fund for all and every community development purpose delegated to it by the established community redevelopment plan as modified, and as further provided by law. The fund is to exist for 30 years from the date the redevelopment district is last expanded, or until legally terminated by ordinance. Said monies shall be held by the city for and on behalf of the agency and distributed to the agency in accordance with a subsequent agreement to be established between the city and the agency. 
(c)  There shall be paid into the fund each year by all taxing authorities within the district, excluding the following entities: 
Florida Inland Navigation District 
Indian River County Mosquito Control District 
Indian River County Hospital Maintenance District 
School district, and associated general obligation debt funded by ad valorem taxes 
Indian River County Land Acquisition Bond General Obligation Debt 
Emergency Services Dependent Taxing District 
St. Johns River Water Management District 
Sebastian Inlet Taxing District 
the incremental increase in ad valorem taxes levied each year by the non-exempt taxing authorities over the amount of ad valorem taxes levied by the non-exempt taxing authorities in the base year, as established in subsection (e) below. 
(d)  For the area covered by the original redevelopment district, the tax roll used in connection with the taxation of such property for the base year shall be the tax roll of 1994 in Indian River County. All deposits into the fund shall begin with the incremental increases in ad valorem tax revenues received subsequent to November 1, 1995. 
For the expansion area of the Sebastian Boulevard Triangle, the tax roll used in connection with the taxation of such property for the base year shall be the tax roll of 2003 in Indian River County. All deposits into the fund shall begin with the incremental increases in ad valorem tax revenues received subsequent to November 1, 2004. 
(e)  The tax increment shall be determined and appropriated annually in an amount equal to the difference between: 
(1)  That amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by all non-exempt taxing authorities on taxable real property contained within the geographic boundaries of the district; and 
(2)  That amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for all non-exempt taxing authorities upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable property in the district as shown upon the base year assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of such property by all non-exempt taxing authorities. If any conflict occurs between the provisions of this section and the provisions of F.S. Chapter 163, Part III, concerning tax increment financing, the statutory provisions shall control and apply to this section. 
(f)  The tax increment shall be computed by using the assessed value of taxable property in the district for the applicable base year, and in subsequent years using the assessment value of property in the district for that current year as the second factor in determining the amount of tax increment in that year. 
(g)  All non-exempt taxing authorities will annually appropriate to the fund the aforestated sum at the beginning of their fiscal year. The fund shall receive the tax increment above described no later than December 31 of each year as provided by Florida Statute. The taxing authorities' obligation to annually appropriate to the fund shall commence immediately upon the effective date of Ordinance No. O-95-08 and continue for 30 years from the effective date of Ordinance No. O-03-28, or such other time as extended or shortened by law. 
(h)  The agency with the approval of the city council is directed to establish and set up the fund and to develop and promulgate rules, regulations and criteria whereby the fund may be promptly and effectively administered, including the establishment and the maintenance of books and records and adoption of procedures whereby the agency may, expeditiously and without undue delay, utilize said monies for their allocated statutory purpose. 
(i)  The agency accepts full responsibility for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability; management and proper application of all monies paid into the fund subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-95-08, §§ 1—9, 3-22-95; Ord. No. O-00-16, § 1, 6-28-00; Ord. No. O-03-28, § 2, 12-10-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-95-08, §§ 1—9, adopted Mar. 22, 1995, which pertained to a community redevelopment trust fund, did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 78-30 was at the direction of the city.  
Secs. 78-31—78-35. - Reserved.  
Sec. 78-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-23, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 2005, repealed § 78-36, which pertained to establishment of a community redevelopment advisory committee and derived from Ord. No. O-04-05, § 1, adopted May 12, 2004.  
Sec. 78-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-23, § 2, adopted Dec. 14, 2005, repealed § 78-37, which pertained to committee panel composition and derived from Ord. No. O-04-05, § 2, adopted May 12, 2004.  
Sec. 78-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-23, § 3, adopted Dec. 14, 2005, repealed § 78-38, which pertained to committee member terms and derived from Ord. No. O-04-05, § 3, adopted May 12, 2004.  
Sec. 78-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-23, § 4, adopted Dec. 14, 2005, repealed § 78-39, which pertained to committee duties and derived from Ord. No. O-04-05, § 4, adopted May 12, 2004.  
Sec. 78-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-23, § 5, adopted Dec. 14, 2005, repealed § 78-40, which pertained to committee procedures and derived from Ord. No. O-04-05, § 5, adopted May 12, 2004.  
Sec. 78-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-23, § 6, adopted Dec. 14, 2005, repealed § 78-41, which pertained to ex-officio members and staffing and derived from Ord. No. O-04-05, § 6, adopted May 12, 2004.  
Chapter 82 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sale means all general sales open to the public, from or on residential premises located in any zoning district of the city zoned residential, multifamily residential, mobile home, commercial office residential, marine commercial and residential, and commercial resort residential, for the purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "fleamarket," or "rummage" sales. This definition shall not include a situation where no more than five specific items of personal property are held out for sale, none of such items, except for motor vehicles and vessels, are displayed outside of the residence, and all advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold. 
Person means an individual, child, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, and all other groups or combinations. 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. Personal property shall not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment or food or beverages. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-1), 12-18-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-27. - Persons exempted from article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or a process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
(3)  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted under the city's Land Development Code or under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer, or vendor, which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in other provisions contained in this Code or in the Land Development Code; or 
(4)  Any bona fide charitable, educational, cultural, or governmental institution or organization, recognized as such under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the charitable purposes of the institution or organization, and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-2), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-28. - Property permitted to be sold. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this article, property other than personal property. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-7), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-29. - Hours of operation. 
Garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of three consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-8), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-30. - Display of sale property. 
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within a residence, in a garage, carport and/or front yard and only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in the side or rear yard areas of any such premises or in any public right-of-way. Provided, however, that a vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such front or side yards. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-9), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-31. - Provision for, control of parking. 
The person to whom a garage sale permit is issued shall provide for the parking of vehicles in such a way as to avoid creation of a hazardous or unsafe traffic condition, and shall not permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of the property upon which the garage sale is conducted. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-10), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-32. - Responsibility for conduct of persons on the premises. 
The person to whom a garage sale permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the property on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on such premises. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-11), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-33. - Advertising, signs. 
(a)  Number, location and size of signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale: one sign of not more than four square feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is being conducted. 
(b)  Time limitation on exhibition of signs. No sign as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be exhibited except during the hours of operation. 
(c)  Removal of signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of the garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-12), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-34. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city council may enact by resolution reasonable rules and regulations to implement and carry out the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In addition to all other available legal and equitable remedies, the city council may bring suit to restrain, enjoin, or otherwise to prevent the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-13), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-35. - Fines and penalties for violation of article. 
Violations of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. In addition, if any person is found to have willfully violated any provision of this article, the community development department is instructed to cancel any existing garage sale permit held by such person and not to issue such person another garage sale permit for a period of two years from the date of the finding of willful violation, nor to issue any member of such person's household a garage sale permit to conduct a garage sale from the same location where the violation occurred for a period of two years from the finding of a willful violation. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-14), 12-18-91)  
Secs. 82-36—82-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 82-51. - Required. 
No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the person designated to conduct such sale shall obtain a garage sale permit from the community development department. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-3(a)), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-52. - Application. 
Prior to issuance of any garage sale permit, the person conducting such sale shall file a written application with the community development department in advance of the proposed sale, setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Full name and address of applicant. 
(2)  The location at which the proposed garage sale is to be held. 
(3)  The date upon which the sale shall be held. 
(4)  The date of any other garage sales held at the same location within the current calendar year. 
(5)  An affirmative statement by the applicant that the property to be sold was owned by the applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired nor consigned for the purpose of resale. 
(6)  An affirmative statement by the applicant that he understands that the garage sale permit will expire in three days from the time and date of its issuance or effective date and that the applicant understands that he is entitled to conduct only one garage sale pursuant to any such permit, which sale shall only be conducted at the location stated in the application. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-3(b)), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-53. - Fee. 
There shall be an administrative processing fee of $2.00 for the issuance of a garage sale permit. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-3(c)), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-54. - Consent. 
By applying for a garage sale permit under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the community development department of its responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-3(d)), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-55. - Investigation of applicant. 
Before issuing a permit, the community development department may conduct an investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-4), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-56. - Permit conditions; restrictions. 
The garage sale permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of the garage sale. No more than four garage sale permits may be issued to any one residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in requesting a garage sale permit, then such permit shall be considered as having been issued for each and all such residences. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-5), 12-18-91)  
Sec. 82-57. - Display of permit. 
The garage sale permit must be clearly displayed and visible for a distance of six feet from the curbline or nearest edge of the paved portion of the street or right-of-way abutting the property upon which the garage sale is to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. O-91-28, § 1(32-6), 12-18-91)  
Chapter 86 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; health and sanitation, ch. 50; nuisances, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 102; refuse disposal in waterways or sea prohibited, § 110-3; trash disposal for watercraft, § 110-39. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Littering. 
(a)  As used in this section, "litter" means any garbage, rubbish, lawn clippings, cans, bottles, containers, trash, refuse, and papers, including but not limited to discarded machinery, building materials, furniture, appliances, automobiles and other vehicles, and similar objects. An item shall be considered to be discarded when: 
(1)  It can no longer be used for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured; 
(2)  It is incapable of locomotion under its own power; 
(3)  It has been substantially wrecked or demolished as a result of a collision or upset; or 
(4)  It has only salvage value whereby parts thereof are kept and used for the replacement and repair of other items. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place, or deposit litter in any manner or amount whatsoever in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, thoroughfare, public right-of-way, sidewalk, vacant or adjoining lot, park or other public place, except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit any litter in or on any lakes, rivers, streams, canals, basins, coastal waters or other body of water or any part thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 12-1) 
State Law reference— Florida Litter Law, F.S. § 403.413.  
Secs. 86-2—86-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-26. - Service by the city. 
The city shall maintain and operate a service for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish or other refuse within its corporate limits. 
(Code 1980, § 12-16)  
Sec. 86-27. - Unlawful dumping. 
It shall be unlawful to dump any garbage, trash, rubbish or other refuse within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 12-17)  
Sec. 86-28. - Burning. 
It shall be unlawful to burn garbage, trash, rubbish or other refuse within the corporate limits of the city, except as set forth in section 42-48. 
(Code 1980, § 12-18)  
Secs. 86-29—86-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; businesses, ch. 30; nuisances, ch. 66; loss and advantage of property, § 58-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Seized, abandoned, wrecked or derelict property, F.S. ch. 705. 
 
Sec. 86-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates different meaning: 
(a)  "Junk" shall include, without limitation: Old and dilapidated motor vehicles, trailers, boats or other vessels and parts thereof, household appliances, scrap, building material, scrap contractor's equipment, tanks, casks, cans barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper, excelsior, mattresses, beds, bedding, or any other kind of waste material. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be a motor vehicle which is incapable of locomotion under its own power, or which can no longer be used for the purpose for which it was originally manufactured or shall have only salvage value whereby parts thereof are kept and used for the replacement and repair of other motor vehicles. A motor vehicle which has been substantially wrecked or demolished as a result of a collision or upset shall be deemed to become a junk if it becomes impracticable to repair because of financial reasons or otherwise and if it shall remain without repair for a period of 30 days after the collision or upset which substantially wrecked or demolished the motor vehicle. 
(b)  "Open-air storage" shall mean an area other than in a structure enclosed by four walls and a roof, such as a garage or utility shed, that conceals it from public view shall be deemed to be open-air storage. Placement of an article under a carport or on a porch that is not so enclosed shall be considered open-air storage. 
(Code 1980, § 12-30; Ord. No. O-11-20, § 1, 12-14-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-47. - Unlawful deposits, exception. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit, store, or maintain, or to permit to be deposited, stored, or maintained junk as defined in section 86-46 of this Code, in open-air storage. The temporary deposit of junk in a location authorized for waste collection is exempted from this section. 
(Code 1980, § 12-31; Ord. No. O-11-20, § 1, 12-14-11)  
Sec. 86-48. - Deposit without knowledge or consent of owner; remedy of city. 
If the junk situated upon any lot or open space within the city shall have been deposited upon such lot or open space without the consent or knowledge of the owner or occupant of such lot or open space, then the costs and charges of removing such junk or refuse shall be paid by the person depositing such junk or refuse on such lot or open space and shall be collected by an action at law. 
(Code 1980, § 12-32)  
Sec. 86-49. - Abatement of nuisances. 
Any junk which is determined to be a nuisance under this article may be removed pursuant to the abatement procedures of chapter 66. 
(Code 1980, § 12-33)  
Chapter 90 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance establishing and prescribing street grades on any streets in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); distribution of handbills in public places, § 6-30; obstruction of streets, sidewalks and public places by business prohibited, § 30-45; cemeteries, ch. 34; outdoor fires, § 42-48; lost and abandoned property, § 58-71 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 74; municipal golf course, § 74-31 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98; designation on one-way streets, § 98-8; stopping, standing and parking regulations, § 98-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 102; permit required to construct benches for taxicab loading zones, § 106-78; waterways, ch. 110; mooring restrictions for watercraft at municipal docks and piers, § 110-44; franchises, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Street names; designation and changes—Generally. 
The following street name designations shall be changed as provided in this section: 
(1)  The street heretofore designated as Fleming Street and Grant Avenue, as the same extends southwest from Main Street and Yucca Court to Wimbrow Drive shall hereafter be called and designated as Main Street. 
(2)  The street heretofore designated as Rose Arbor Drive, as the same extends northerly from Laconia Street to Granduer Street shall hereafter be called and designated as Bevan Drive. 
(3)  The street heretofore designated as Rose Arbor Drive, as the same extends easterly from Laconia Street to Barber Street shall hereafter be called and designated as Periwinkle Drive. 
(4)  The street heretofore designated as Rose Arbor Drive, as the same extends in a semicircle east, then south and west from Melrose Lane to Melrose Lane shall hereafter be called and designated as Carnation Drive. 
(5)  The street heretofore designated as Rose Arbor Drive as the same extends southeasterly from Melrose Lane to Bevan Drive (formerly Rose Arbor Drive) shall hereafter be called and designated as Tulip Drive. 
(6)  The street heretofore designated as Lansdowne Drive, as the same extends southerly from Strait Avenue to Barber Street shall hereafter be called and designated as George Street. 
(7)  The street heretofore designated as Lansdowne Drive, as the same extends westerly from Barber Street (south) to Laconia Street shall hereafter be called and designated as Rolling Hill Drive. 
(8)  The street heretofore designated as South Easy Street, as the same extends southeasterly from Englar Avenue to Schumann Drive, shall hereafter be called and designated as Dahl Avenue. 
(9)  The street heretofore designated as First Street, lying north of CR 512, as the same extends west from the Florida East Coast Railway right-of-way to Louisiana Avenue shall hereafter be called and designated as Taft Street. 
(10)  The street heretofore designated as First Street, lying north of Main Street, as the same extends from the Indian River to North Central Avenue shall hereafter be called and designated as Jefferson Street. 
(11)  The street heretofore designated as Second Street, lying south of CR 512, as the same extends west from High Street to Louisiana Avenue shall hereafter be called and designated Harrison Street. 
(12)  The street heretofore designated as Second Street, lying north of Main Street, as the same extends west from North Central Avenue (U.S. 1) to Louisiana Avenue shall hereafter be called and designated Truman Street. 
(13)  The street heretofore designated as Ninth Street, as the same extends west from the Indian River to the Florida East Coast Railway right-of-way, shall hereafter be called and designated Davis Street. 
(14)  The street heretofore designated as Tenth Street, as the same extends west from North Central Avenue to the Florida East Coast Railway right-of-way shall hereafter be called and designated Madison Street. 
(15)  The street heretofore designated as Eleventh Street, as the same extends west from North Central Avenue to the Florida East Coast Railway right-of-way shall hereafter be called and designated Jackson Street. 
(16)  The street heretofore unnamed as the same extends northwest from Main Street (formerly Fleming Street) toward runway number 22 at the Sebastian Municipal Airport shall hereafter be called and designated Airport Drive East. 
(17)  The street heretofore unnamed as the same extends east from Roseland Road toward runway number 31 at the Sebastian Municipal Airport shall hereafter be called and designated Airport Drive West. 
(Code 1980, § 23-1) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26.  
Sec. 90-2. - Same—Sebastian Highlands section. 
The following street name designations shall be changed as provided in this section: 
(1)  The street heretofore designated as Highland Drive, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 11; and Lots 13 through 23, Block 443; Lots 12, 13, 14, Block 444; and Lots 1 through 25, Block 447, shall be hereafter called and designated as Nebraska Circle. 
(2)  The street located between Lots 1 through 48, Block 457; and Lots 1 through 16, Block 458, shall hereafter be called and designated as Larchmont Terrace. 
(3)  The street heretofore designated as Chello Avenue, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 24, Block 513; Lots 1 and 31, Block 514; and Lots 1 and 31, Block 515, shall be hereafter called and designated as Barbara Street. 
(4)  The street heretofore designated as Chello Avenue, as the same is located between Lots 1 and 31, Block 516; and Lots 1 through 20, Block 517, and street heretofore designated as Holden Avenue, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 26, Block 523; and Lots 21 through 42, Block 524, shall be hereafter called and designated as Marilyn Street. 
(5)  The street heretofore designated as Kasper Avenue, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 18, Block 525; and Lots 1 through 12, Block 526, shall be hereafter called Hunt Circle. 
(6)  The street heretofore known as Tyson Circle, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 18, Block 529; and Lots 1 through 12, Block 530, shall be hereafter called and designated as Holden Circle. 
(7)  The street heretofore designated as Balsa Avenue, as the same is located between Lots 11 and 12, Block 533; and street heretofore designated as Pratt Court, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 19, Block 536; Lots 1 through 14, Block 537; and Lots 1 and 26, Block 538, shall be hereafter called and designated as Balsa Court. 
(8)  The street heretofore designated as Norman Drive, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 36, Block 541; Lots 12 through 22, Block 542; and Lot 1, Block 543, shall be hereafter called and designated as Orlando Circle. 
(9)  The streets heretofore designated as Girard Avenue, Sunburst Street, and Thunderbird Drive, as the same are located between Lots 1 through 30, Block 581; Lots 1 and 28, Block 582; Lots 14 and 15, Block 582; Lots 1 and 28, Block 583; and Lots 14 and 15, Block 583, shall be hereafter called and designated as Sunburst Circle. 
(10)  The streets heretofore designated as Lomas Street and Helms Street, as the same are located between Lots 1 through 36, Block 594; Lots 1 through 9, Block 595; Lots 1 and 32, Block 596; Lots 16 and 17, Block 596; Lots 16 and 17, Block 597; and Lots 19 through 30, Block 598, shall be hereafter known and designated as Spring Valley Avenue. 
(11)  The street heretofore designated as Helms Street, as the same is located between Lots 1 and 32, Block 597; Lots 1 through 19, and Tract U, Block 598, shall be hereafter called and designated as Ithaca Avenue. 
(12)  The street heretofore designated as Harland Street, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 16, Block 599; and Lots 10 through 18, Block 600, shall be hereafter called and designated as Dahl Avenue. 
(13)  The streets heretofore designated as Osceola Avenue, Nash Street and Admiral Avenue, as the same are located between Lots 1 through 24, Block 607; Lots 1 and 16, Block 608; Lots 8 and 9, Block 608; Lots 1 and 16, Block 609; and Lots 8 and 9, Block 609, shall be hereafter called and designated as Admiral Circle. 
(14)  The street heretofore designated as Admiral Avenue, as the same is located between Lots 1 through 9, Block 610; and Lots 23 through 34, Block 611, shall be hereafter called and designated as Aetna Street. 
(15)  The streets heretofore designated as Deacon Drive and Julian Avenue, as the same are located between Lots 1 through 28, Block 617; Lots 1 through 30, Block 618; Lots 1 and 25 through 30, Block 618; Lot 1, Block 619; Lot 1, Block 620; Lots 1 and 25 through 30, Block 620; and Lots 1 through 13, Block 621, shall be hereafter called and designated as Mabry Street. 
(16)  The street heretofore designated as Carlson Street, as the same is located between Lots 24 and 25, Block 618; Lots 1 through 21, Block 619; and Lots 1 through 24, Block 620, shall be hereafter called and designated as Crawford Drive. 
(17)  The street heretofore designated as Lomas Street, as the same is located between Lots 24 and 25, Block 620; and Lot 13, Block 621, shall be hereafter called and designated as Spring Valley Avenue. 
(18)  The street heretofore designated as Crown Street, as the same is located between Lots 11 through 18, Block 232; Lots 10 and 11, Block 233; and Lots 13 and 14, Block 235, shall be hereafter called and designated as Seagrass Avenue. 
(Code 1980, § 23-2) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26.  
Secs. 90-3—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Land development code, ch. 54; street construction, repair, land development code, § 20A-17.2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person who makes application for a permit. 
Emergency means any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or properties. 
Engineer means the person duly appointed as city engineer, his authorized deputy, representative or inspector. 
Permittee means any person who has been issued a permit and is obligated to fulfill all the terms of this article. 
Person means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association, utility, corporation, or authority created pursuant to statute. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
Street means and includes a public street, public easement, public right-of-way, public highway, public alley, public way, or public road accepted or maintained by the city, and any state or county road over which the city may have acquired jurisdiction by agreement or otherwise. 
(Code 1980, § 23-45) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-32. - Commencement of work. 
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 90 days after the issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit shall be automatically terminated. Permits thus terminated may be renewed upon the payment of an additional permit fee as originally required. 
(Code 1980, § 23-48)  
Sec. 90-33. - Street openings limited. 
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any work in any amount or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except that upon approval of the engineer additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit in any amount not greater than ten percent of the amount specified in the permit. Any deposit deposited in connection with the original permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be approved pursuant to this section within the limited mention stated in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 23-47)  
Sec. 90-34. - Street opening regulations; construction requirements. 
The engineer is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate such written instructions as may be necessary for the construction of each street opening. Such instructions shall include but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Limitation on the size of opening; 
(2)  Restriction for the protection of existing subsurface installations, monuments and drainage systems; 
(3)  Requirements for the storage and removal of excavated materials; 
(4)  Provisions for safety precautions to be taken by the permittee; 
(5)  Restrictions as to the periods of day when the work may be performed; 
(6)  Requirements for backfilling, inspections and final paving cross section for openings; and 
(7)  Refusal to permit a road opening and instructions to use a bore and jack method in lieu of cutting pavement. 
(Code 1980, § 23-54) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 102.  
Sec. 90-35. - Temporary paving. 
Upon notice to the city engineer or his designee, and under his inspection, the permittee shall immediately after completing the work, refill, properly tamp and restore the excavation or opening with a temporary paving cover as follows: Ten inches of compacted limerock in all areas and two inches of approved bituminous temporary patch material (cold patch) in paved cartways. The temporary paving cover shall be left in place and maintained by the applicant for a minimum of 30 days and a maximum of 90 days after which the temporary paving cover and required portion of compacted limerock shall be removed and replaced with the final paving required by the engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 23-55)  
Sec. 90-36. - Additional regulations governing all work. 
(a)  Unless written permission is obtained from the city engineer or his designee, no permittee shall be allowed permission to cut, break into, excavate or open a street for a greater distance than 300 feet at one time, or keep such excavation open for a period longer than one week. During the entire period the street is being cut, broken into, excavated or opened by the permittee there shall be provided by the permittee a space at street level of at least 12 feet in width for the purpose of allowing free and unimpeded use of such street. In no event shall a permit be valid for a period of time in excess of 135 days after its issuance without the written approval of the city engineer or his designee. 
(b)  All cuts, breaks, excavations and openings shall conform in size to the application on which the permit is based and shall be performed in neat, even and rectangular sections. All excavations to a depth of six feet or more shall be stored and braced or provided with an acceptable shield to support the walls of the trench for the protection of workmen and to prevent the unintentional widening of the trench, unless otherwise permitted by the city engineer. 
(c)  If, in the opinion of the city engineer, any cut, excavation or opening would be dangerous if left exposed, the permittee shall erect a suitable barrier or railing around such cut, excavation or opening in such manner as to prevent danger to pedestrians or vehicles and place upon such barrier or railing and upon any building materials and appliances, suitable and sufficient warning lights during the period of darkness. In any event, suitable and sufficient warning lights shall be maintained by the permittee during periods of darkness in the vicinity of the cut, excavation or opening. 
(d)  All permittees shall keep the area of their work clear of dirt and debris at all times and shall carry away and dispose of all excess dirt, debris and other material resulting from their work. 
(Code 1980, § 23-56)  
Sec. 90-37. - Deposit requirements and schedule. 
If the application and plan conform to the requirements of this article, provide for the work to be performed in accordance with current state department of transportation specifications, and are approved by the city engineer, the city clerk shall issue the permit upon receipt of a deposit covering engineering review and city administration determined as follows: 
(1)  City administration fee: $20.00 per application submitted. 
(2)  Engineer review fee: $50.00 per application submitted. 
(3)  City security deposit schedule: 
Type of Road 	Deposit for 
10 square feet 
or less 	Additional deposit per square foot in excess 
of 10 square feet 
Marl or limerock 	$100.00 	$ 1.00 
Blacktop or oil and chip 	 180.00 	  5.00 
Reinforced concrete 	 300.00 	 15.00 
 
(4)  In lieu of a security deposit in accordance with the above schedule, the applicant may deposit the sum of $1,500.00 in cash with the city clerk or provide other assurances to the city satisfactory to the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 23-58)  
Sec. 90-38. - Inspection fees and refund after final repairs. 
(a)  After final and permanent repairs are completed a fee covering inspection charges shall be charged against the deposit. If at the end of a six-month period from the issuance of the permit and completion of the permanent cover, no defects in the contractor's work appear, the work will be considered accepted by the city and the balance of the city deposit not used to defray engineering inspection costs will be returned to the applicant. 
(b)  If during such six-month period any settlement occurs in the excavation or opening, the city engineer or his designee shall notify the permittee by ordinary mail, addressed to the location given on the application permit, to correct the condition within ten working days of the notice and complete a new temporary cover, after which final and permanent repairs shall again be made as set out in this division. The city clerk shall charge and deduct an additional fee covering additional inspection charges. If the permittee shall fail to correct the conditions as required in this division the city may do so and all funds on deposit shall, without further notice, be credited to the general revenues of the city to defray the cost of the work required to be performed by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 23-59)  
Sec. 90-39. - Openings in new streets; notice of improvements. 
When the city shall improve or pave any street, the city clerk shall first give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about to be paved or improved, and to all public utilities and authorities operating in the city, and all such persons, utilities, and authorities shall make all connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the street, within 30 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 23-61)  
Sec. 90-40. - Restrictions upon opening new streets. 
Unless there is determined that an emergency exists involving underground gas, water, sewer, telephone or electric facility, no street opening permit will be issued for a period of 24 months after acceptance of the street by the city where a new pavement has been constructed, or for a period of 12 months after acceptance of the street by the city where an existing pavement has been resurfaced. An exception will be made to this restriction in cases where it can be clearly demonstrated that this restriction is in conflict with any legal contractual obligations and/or agreements. 
(Code 1980, § 23-62)  
Sec. 90-41. - Emergency openings. 
In case of an emergency involving any underground gas, water, sewer, telephone or electric facility where immediate repair is imperative to prevent loss or damage to streets or property or discontinuance of service, it shall not be necessary to obtain permits before commencing such repair, but such a permit shall be obtained within five days thereafter and this section shall not be held or taken in any case to exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 23-63)  
Sec. 90-42. - Utility as-built map requirements. 
(a)  Every person owning, using, controlling or having interest in pipes, conduits, ducts, or other structures under the surface of any street used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication impulses, water or sewer to or from the city, or to or from its inhabitants, or for any other purpose, shall file with the engineer, within one year after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derived, accurate information, showing the as-built location, size and description of all such installations. 
(b)  Within 30 days after January 1 of each and every year, such person shall file with the engineer additional information showing installations, including all those made or abandoned during the previous year; provided, however, if no additions have been made to its installations during the previous year, a utility or authority may file with the engineer a written statement to that effect, within the period of time specified in this section. A utility or authority may at its own option elect to provide additional information throughout the year as it is available rather than proceed as noted in this section. The engineer may, however, request additional information periodically as may be necessitated by proposed construction or reconstruction of roadways within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 23-64)  
Sec. 90-43. - Notice to property owners and tenants. 
If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, or subsurface installations including utilities in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the permittee shall be required to submit evidence in affidavit form that notices were served on the owners and tenants of such properties and subsurface installations personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1980, § 23-65)  
Sec. 90-44. - State and county roads. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances where the highway or road is maintained by the state or county, except in such cases where the city may have special arrangements with the state or county. 
(Code 1980, § 23-51)  
Sec. 90-45. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notice in writing shall have been served by the clerk shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 23-66)  
Secs. 90-46—90-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 90-61. - Street openings and pavement cuts, permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, bore, break into, excavate or open any street of the city, except specifically setting utility poles in unpaved areas, without first securing a permit from the city clerk as required in this division. 
(Code 1980, § 23-46)  
Sec. 90-62. - Permits nontransferable. 
Permits are not transferable from one person to another and work shall not be performed in any place other than the location specifically designated in the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 23-49)  
Sec. 90-63. - Expiration. 
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present in writing to the clerk a request for an extension of time, setting forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If such an extension is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted additional time by the city clerk for completion of the work upon recommendation of such extension by the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 23-50)  
Sec. 90-64. - Revocation; notice of violation; remedy by city. 
(a)  Any permit may be revoked by the city council after notice to the permittee for: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this article. 
(2)  Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law relating to the work. 
(3)  Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or properties of others. 
(b)  Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the permittee or by certified or registered United States mail addressed to the permittee. 
(c)  A permittee may be granted a period of 48 hours from the date of the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before such permit is revoked. 
(d)  When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the permit has not been completed, the city shall cause such work to be done as may be necessary to restore the street or part thereof to as good a condition as before the opening was made. All expenses incurred therein by the city shall be recovered from the deposit the permittee has deposited with the city or billed against other assurances satisfactory to the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 23-52)  
Sec. 90-65. - Duties and responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of each applicant for a permit under this article to: 
(1)  Make a written application for permit with the city clerk on such forms as the city shall prescribe. No work shall commence until the engineer has approved the application and plan and the applicant has paid and provided all fees, deposits and certificates required by this article. The engineer shall review the application and issue a decision within ten working days of his receipt of the application provided the application as submitted is complete. The clerk will issue a permit within seven days after receipt of the city engineer's approval of the permit application and all required fees, deposits and certificates from the applicant. 
(2)  Include in the application information stating the kind, character and purpose of the proposed excavation or opening and such other information which may be reasonably required to fulfill the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Furnish in triplicate a detail plan with dimensions showing the location of the work to be performed under such permit. If approved by the engineer, one copy of such plan shall be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted. 
(4)  Obtain a permit for each and every project. 
(5)  Agree to save the city, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under such permit. The acceptance of any permit under this article shall constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether such acceptance is expressed or not. 
(6)  Pay a permit and engineering review fee and security deposit in accordance with the requirements of section 90-37. Any utility which pays a franchise tax or fee to the city and has a valid franchise agreement with the city shall not be required to pay a permit and engineering review fee and security deposit. The permit and engineering review fee and security deposit shall be credited to the franchise tax or fee paid to the city by the utility as long as the total annual tax or fees paid exceeds the permit, review and deposit fees due. Unfranchised utilities and developers of major subdivisions may request to pledge assurances to the city in lieu of cash or check and the city may accept or reject such assurances. 
(7)  Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by section 90-66 of this article. 
(8)  Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan in the possession of the party actually doing the work, and when required, exhibit such copy to the engineer, duly authorized inspectors, or, in the instances of county and state roads, to the respective inspectors of these authorities. 
(9)  Agree to perform the work under such permit in accordance with the regulations established under this article and such further conditions as may be imposed by the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 23-53)  
Sec. 90-66. - Insurance requirements. 
Each applicant prior to receipt of a permit shall provide the city with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as against claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability arising from completed operations for a period of time as outlined in section 90-38. The amount of insurance shall be prescribed by the city in accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided, however, that the liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be in an amount less than $250,000.00 for each person and $500,000.00 for each accident, and for property damages in an amount not less than $50,000.00, with an aggregate of $100,000.00 for all accidents. Public utilities and authorities may be relieved of the obligation of submitting such certificates if they are insured in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 23-60)  
Secs. 90-67—90-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26; jurisdiction of the code enforcement board, § 2-178; construction of driveways, swales and improvements affecting drainage, land development code, § 20A-5.18. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-86. - Minimum standards for construction of driveways. 
Minimum standards for the construction, alteration or repair of driveways shall be as follows: 
(1)  No driveways shall be placed within 30 feet of an intersection, such 30 feet being measured from the right-of-way of the intersection, unless plans for the construction, alteration, or repair of such driveways are submitted to the city engineer 40 days prior to issuance of permit for the approval of the city council. 
(2)  Driveways on state roads: 
a.  No driveways shall be constructed on a state road unless the applicant shall have first obtained a permit from the state department of transportation and submitted such permit to the city engineer. 
b.  The minimum standards shall be the minimum standards set out by the state department of transportation. 
(3)  Driveways on nonstate roads where curb and gutter are in existence: 
a.  Applicant shall maintain existing drainage and gutter. 
b.  Applicant shall meet sidewalk grade if existing. 
c.  Minimum width shall be ten feet with a ten-foot radius at the intersections. 
d.  Maximum width shall be 60 feet with a ten-foot radius at the intersection. 
e.  Construction shall be either six inches of marl or shell rock after compaction with one inch paving on top, four inches of limerock after compaction with one inch paving on top, or four inches of concrete after compaction. 
f.  Applicant shall rebuild curbing on the ten-foot radius, of like construction of existing curb, to a point five feet behind existing curbline. 
(4)  Driveways on nonstate roads where curb and gutter are not in existence. 
a.  Applicant shall maintain drainage in swale ditch. 
b.  Applicant shall furnish minimum 12-inch pipe for drainage at least eight feet longer than driveway width, size of pipe to be specified in application for city engineer approval. Applicant shall provide a headwall on both sides of the pipe as per city standard design. 
c.  The minimum and maximum width of construction and the material to be used shall be the same as in subsection (3) of this section with the exception of rebuilding existing curb. 
(5)  All residential driveways shall be surfaced with concrete, pea gravel, shell or any other comparable material approved by the city engineer and shall be properly graded. All provisions of sections 26-2 and 90-87 of the Code shall be complied with. 
(6)  The property owner, or his successor in title, shall be responsible to mark the proper elevations on plans submitted to the city engineer and the property owner shall bear the cost of any changes required in such plans and construction of proposed driveways. 
(Code 1980, § 23-16)  
Sec. 90-87. - Drains under driveways for swale ditches. 
(a)  All driveways over a swale ditch shall be provided with a swale drainage pipe with a minimum size of 12 inches diameter or greater if deemed necessary by the city engineer. The pipe shall be constructed of corrugated aluminum, high-density polyethylene or reinforced concrete pipe. The pipe shall be installed under the driveway at the proper elevation and set back as established by the approved GDC drainage plans, this Code, and/or established by the city engineer. The minimum length of the drainage pipe shall be the width of the driveway plus a minimum of four feet on each side of the driveway or additional length on each side of the driveway to provide for a three horizontal to one vertical slope from the top of the driveway surface to the bottom of the drainage pipe or greater length as deemed necessary by the city engineer. A standard mitered end headwall shall be required in all cases at both sides of the pipe to avoid interference from grass or sediments. 
(b)  A permit must be obtained from the city engineer after paying the established fee in order to change, modify, construct, reconstruct, or repair any drainpipe under a driveway, or any other structure or landfill accessory to any driveway, if any such structure or landfill might adversely effect drainage of any drainage swale. This fee shall not be required for any driveway in existence on the effective date of this section. No drainage in conjunction with a driveway other than the properly sized pipe will be permitted. Refer to section 90-86 of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 7-78; Ord. No. O-98-20, § 1, 12-16-98)  
Sec. 90-88. - Maintenance not an obligation of city. 
The issuance of a permit under this article does not constitute any obligation on the city to maintain driveways. 
(Code 1980, § 23-17)  
Secs. 90-89—90-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 90-106. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade a driveway which enters on, over or across a public right-of-way of this city without first obtaining a permit as provided by this division. 
(b)  All permits shall be issued by the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 23-29)  
Sec. 90-107. - Application. 
An applicant for a permit under this article shall file with the city engineer an application showing: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area. 
(2)  Name and address of the party doing the work. 
(3)  Location of the work area. 
(4)  Sufficient description of the property to ascertain its location. 
(5)  Attached plans showing details of the proposed project, including pertinent dimensions. 
(6)  Estimated cost of the project and time schedule to complete the project. 
(7)  Such other information as the city engineer shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should be issued under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 23-30)  
Sec. 90-108. - Fees. 
The following fee which shall accompany an application for a permit under this article is $30.00. 
(Code 1980, § 23-31)  
Sec. 90-109. - Bond of applicant. 
The following bonds may be required to accompany an application for a permit under this article: 
(1)  Construction and maintenance. The building official may require a maintenance and construction bond to be filed with the application for a permit under this article in an amount equal to one-half of the estimated cost of the project and conditioned that such work shall be done in accordance with the city's minimum standard specifications and guaranteeing such work for a period of 90 days. 
(2)  Failure of compliance of permittee. In any case where a permittee under this article shall be in default or shall fail to comply with the requirements of this article, the building official shall order the completion of the work by the city and shall recover the cost from the permittee as required by law. 
(3)  Indemnity. The building official shall have the authority to require an applicant under this article to file a bond conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to other persons by reason of such alteration work. 
(Code 1980, § 23-32)  
Sec. 90-110. - Standards for issuance. 
The building official shall issue a permit under this article when he finds that: 
(1)  The plans for the proposed operation are in conformance with the minimum standards as set out in this article and when, as the case may require, such plans have been approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means of ingress to and egress from the property affected and adjacent properties. 
(3)  The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(Code 1980, § 23-33)  
Secs. 90-111—90-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EASEMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 102. 
 
Sec. 90-126. - Request to vacate. 
Requests for vacating of easements shall be submitted to the community development department on a form prescribed by that department, together with the fee as determined by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of processing and recording, and any other documentation required by the community development department, by the owner or his designated agent of such property wherein the easement exists or is contiguous thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 23-75; Ord. No. O-97-68, § 1, 12-17-97)  
Sec. 90-127. - Notification of public utilities; objections. 
Upon receipt of the complete application package, under section 90-126, the community development director shall advise the existing public utility companies by regular mail or facsimile, and appropriate city staff, and the utility companies and staff, after notification is received, shall respond in writing within 15 days of any objections thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 23-76; Ord. No. O-97-68, § 2, 12-17-97)  
Sec. 90-128. - Onsite inspection report. 
The city manager shall direct the building inspector or city engineer to make an onsite inspection of the property and make his report and recommendation in writing to the city manager, stating whether the easement is necessary to exist to serve the city either at present or in the future, or whether the easement serves no public purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 23-77)  
Sec. 90-129. - Action by city council. 
(a)  The city manager shall present the request for vacating an easement, together with the reports from the utility companies, and the report and recommendation of the building inspector or city engineer, to the city council. 
(b)  If the city council deems that such easement is without the public interest and affords no public necessity at the present time or as regards the future growth of the city, the city council may, by resolution duly passed, vacate the easement. 
(Code 1980, § 23-78)  
Sec. 90-130. - Recording of city council resolution. 
The city clerk shall send a copy of the resolution vacating the easement together with the necessary recording fee to the Clerk of the Circuit Court, Indian River County Courthouse for recording. 
(Code 1980, § 23-79)  
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-86 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; taxation and finance generally, F.S. ch. 192 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 94-1—94-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 102. 
State Law reference— Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231. 
 
Sec. 94-26. - Levy. 
There is hereby levied by the city within the corporate limits of the city, on each and every sale within the city of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service and local telephone and telegraph services, a tax of ten percent of the charge made by the seller thereof, which tax, in every case, shall be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city to the seller of such electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service or local telephone and telegraph services at the time of paying the charge therefor. 
(Code 1980, § 25-16)  
Sec. 94-27. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The United States of America, the State of Florida, and the political subdivisions and agencies, boards, commissions and authorities thereof, are hereby exempted from payment of the tax levied by this article. 
(b)  Any recognized church is exempt from the tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 25-17)  
Sec. 94-28. - Collection by seller; monthly reports; delinquency. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service or local telephone and telegraph services to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax levied by this article, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over on or before the 20th day of each calendar month unto the city clerk, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service or local telephone and telegraph services, without at the same time collecting the tax levied by this article in respect to such sale, unless the seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the tax from the purchaser. 
(b)  Any consumer failing to pay the tax as such tax may lawfully be imposed by the city shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax and the city manager shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to make all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax. The city may in the nonpayment of the tax by the consumer lawfully impose and is hereby invested with the power to make such special assessments against the property of the consumer (such property real, personal or mixed) as may be necessary for the payment of the tax. 
(Code 1980, § 25-18)  
Sec. 94-29. - Record of sales by seller; examination by city. 
Each and every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service, or local telephone and telegraph services shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or services, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof and the date of payment thereof. These records shall be kept for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, and such duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make transcripts thereof during such time as they may desire. 
(Code 1980, § 25-19)  
Sec. 94-30. - Tax applicable only for local telephone service; metered sales of gas, etc. 
The tax levied under this article on sales of telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service as defined in F.S. § 201.012, except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in public coin-operated telephones, access charges, and any customer access line charges. Each metered or measured service of electricity, water service or gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) shall constitute a separate sale. 
(Code 1980, § 25-20)  
Sec. 94-31. - Computation of tax. 
In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), water service, or local telephone and telegraph services collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of sales during such period, provided that the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1980, § 25-21; Ord. No. O-99-05, § 1, 8-11-99)  
Sec. 94-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any purchaser willfully violating or refusing to pay the tax imposed under this article where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller willfully violating the provisions of this article, shall upon conviction be subject to the penalties set out in section 1-10. 
(Code 1980, § 25-22)  
Secs. 94-33—94-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CASUALTY INSURANCE PREMIUMS TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Police officers retirement fund, § 58-46 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy, F.S. § 185.08. 
 
Sec. 94-51. - Levy. 
(a)  Imposed. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or who shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of casualty insurance, as shown by records of the state department of insurance, an excise tax in addition to any lawful license or excise tax now levied by the city, amounting to 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Payment date. The license or excise tax imposed in this section shall be due and payable annually on March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 25-1)  
ARTICLE IV. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AD VALOREM TAX EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 94-52. - Definitions. 
Applicant means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation that files an application with the city seeking an economic development ad valorem tax exemption. 
Business means any activity engaged in by any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other business organization or entity, with the object of private or public gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect. 
Department means the Florida Department of Revenue. 
Expansion of an existing business: 
(1)  As defined in F.S. § 196.012(16), (as the same may be amended or renumbered from time to time) an expansion of an existing business means: 
a.  A business establishing ten or more jobs to employ ten or more full-time employees in this state, which manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale, items of tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an industrial or manufacturing plant; or 
b.  A business establishing 25 or more jobs to employ 25 or more full-time employees in this state, the sales factor of which, as defined by F.S. § 220.15(5), for the facility with respect to which it requests an economic development ad valorem tax exemption is less than 0.50 for each year the exemption is claimed; provided that such business increases operations on a site co-located with a commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business resulting in a net increase in employment of not less than ten percent or an increase in productive output of not less than ten percent. 
Improvements means physical changes made to raw land, and structures placed on or under the land surface. 
New business: 
(1)  As defined in F.S. § 196.012(15), (as the same may be amended or renumbered from time to time) a new business means: 
a.  A business establishing ten or more jobs to employ ten or more full-time employees in this state which manufactures, processes, compounds, fabricates, or produces for sale items of tangible personal property at a fixed location and which comprises an industrial or manufacturing plant; 
b.  A business establishing twenty-five or more jobs to employ twenty-five or more full-time employees in this state, the sales factor of which, as defined by F.S. § 220.15(5), for the facility with respect to which it requests an economic development ad valorem tax exemption is less than 0.50 for each year the exemption is claimed; or 
c.  An office space in this state owned and used by a corporation newly domiciled in this state, provided such office space houses fifty or more full-time employees of such corporation; provided that such business or office first begins operation on a site clearly separate from any other commercial or industrial operation owned by the same business. 
d.  A business that is situated on property annexed into a municipality and that, at the time of the annexation, is receiving an economic development ad valorem tax exemption from the county under F.S. § 196.1995. 
Sales factor means as defined in F.S. § 220.15(5), (as the same may be amended or renumbered from time to time) the sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total sales of the taxpayer in this state during the taxable year or period and the denominator of which is the total sales of the taxpayer everywhere during the taxable year or period. 
(Ord. No. O-10-01, § 1, 1-13-10)  
Sec. 94-53. - Economic development ad valorem tax exemption established. 
(a)  There is herein established an economic development ad valorem tax exemption (herein-after the "exemption"). The exemption is a local option tax incentive for new or expanding businesses which may be granted or refused at the discretion of the city. 
(b)  The exemptions shall not accrue to improvements to real property made by or for the use of new or expanding businesses when such improvements have been included on the tax rolls prior to the effective date of the ordinance specifically granting a business an exemption as provided in this article. 
(c)  Any exemption granted may apply up to 100 percent of the assessed value of all improvements to real property made by or for the use of a new business and of all tangible personal property of such new business, or up to 100% of the assessed value of all added improvements to real property made to facilitate the expansion of an existing business and of the net increase in all tangible personal property acquired to facilitate such expansion of an existing business, provided that the improvements to real property are made or the tangible personal property is added or increased on or after the effective date of the ordinance specifically granting a business an exemption as provided in this article. Property acquired to replace existing property shall not be considered to facilitate a business expansion. 
(d)  The exemption shall be granted by ordinance for every eligible project, as determined by the city council at its discretion. The exemption may be granted for a period up to ten years from the date of adoption of the ordinance granting the exemption. 
(e)  No exemption shall be granted for the land upon which new or expanded businesses are to be located. 
(f)  The exemption shall apply only to taxes levied by the city. The exemption shall not apply to taxes levied by the county, school district or water management district, or to taxes levied for the payment of bonds or taxes authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to Section 9 and Section 12, Article VII of the Florida Constitution. 
(g)  The ability to receive an exemption for the period granted shall be conditioned upon the applicant's ability to maintain the new business or the expansion of an existing business as defined by the conditions of this application throughout the entire exemption period. The applicant shall be required to submit a report on an annual basis to the city evidencing satisfaction of this condition. In addition, any business granted an exemption shall furnish to the city, such information/report as the city may reasonably deem necessary for the purpose of determining continuing performance by the business of the conditions stated in this division, the ordinance granting the exemption and the representations made in the application process. 
(Ord. No. O-10-01, § 1, 1-13-10)  
Sec. 94-54. - Application for exemption. 
(a)  Any eligible person, firm, partnership or corporation, which desires an exemption, shall file with the city manager written application prescribed by the department. 
(b)  The application shall request that the city council adopt an ordinance granting the applicant the exemption and shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The name and location of the new business or the expansion of an existing business; 
(2)  A legal description of the real property, a description of the improvements to the real property for which an exemption is required, and the date of intended or actual commencement of construction of such improvements; 
(3)  A description of the tangible personal property for which an exemption is requested and the dates when such property was or is to be purchased; 
(4)  Proof, to the satisfaction of the city council, that the applicant meets the criteria for a new business or for an expansion of an existing business as defined in this article; 
(5)  Other information deemed necessary by the city council or the city manager. 
(c)  If the city manager determines that the applicant is eligible and has an interest in allowing the application to proceed, the city manager shall refer the application to the property appraiser for a report which shall include the following: 
(1)  The total revenue available to the city for the current fiscal year from ad valorem tax sources, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual total available revenue cannot be determined; 
(2)  The amount of revenue lost to the city for the current fiscal year by virtue of exemptions previously granted, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual revenue lost cannot be determined; 
(3)  An estimate of the amount of revenue which would be lost to the city for the current fiscal year if the exemption applied for was granted had the property for which the exemption is requested otherwise been subject to taxation; and 
(4)  A determination as to whether the property for which an exemption is requested is to be incorporated into a new business or the expansion of an existing business, or into neither, which determination the property appraiser shall also affix to the face of the application. Upon request, the department will provide the property appraiser such information as it may have available to assist in making this determination. 
(d)  If a new business is locating to, or an expansion of an existing business is occurring in a community redevelopment area, the community redevelopment agency advisory committee overseeing such area shall be provided a copy of the application for review and comment. 
(Ord. No. O-10-01, § 1, 1-13-10)  
Sec. 94-55. - City council consideration of application. 
(a)  An ordinance granting an exemption shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the new business or expansion of an existing business. 
(2)  The total amount of revenue available to the city from ad valorem tax sources for the current fiscal year, the total amount of the revenue lost to the city for the current fiscal year by virtue of exemptions currently in effect, and the estimated amount of revenue attributable to the exemption to the new or expanding business; 
(3)  The expiration date of the exemption, which shall be ten years or less (depending upon the duration of the exemption granted) from the date the city council enacts the ordinance granting the exemption; and 
(4)  A finding that the business meets the definition of a new business or an expansion of an existing business as set forth in this article. 
(b)  No precedent shall be implied or inferred by the granting of any exemption. Applications for exemptions shall be considered by the city council on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. O-10-01, § 1, 1-13-10)  
Sec. 94-56. - Revocation of exemption/recovery of funds. 
Should any new business or expansion of an existing business fail to file the annual report or any other report required in this article, or fail to continue to meet the definition of a new business or an expansion of an existing business, and/or fail to fulfill any other representation made to the city council during the application process, the city council may adopt an ordinance revoking the ad valorem tax exemption. An ordinance revoking the ad valorem tax exemption may provide that the city recover any taxes waived during the exemption period. Nothing herein shall prohibit a business from reapplying for an ad valorem tax exemption pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. O-10-01, § 1, 1-13-10)  
Sec. 94-57. - Sunset repealer. 
This article shall stand repealed effective November 3, 2019, unless renewed by a referendum at a general or special election held upon, prior to, or in the same month as that date, as is authorized under the provisions of F.S. § 196.1995(1), (2) and (6) or any successor or amended version of that statute. 
(Ord. No. O-10-01, § 1, 1-13-10)  
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); placing advertising on motor vehicles, § 6-29; speed limit within airport area, § 22-31; speed limits in cemeteries, § 34-6; vehicles prohibited on cemetery lots, § 34-56; law enforcement, ch. 58; disposition of stolen automobiles and bicycles, § 58-27; lost and abandoned property, § 58-71 et seq.; forfeiture procedure for vehicles, § 70-8; vehicles restricted to paved areas in public parks, § 74-4; vehicle regulations on the golf course, § 74-35; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; vehicles for hire, ch. 106; taxicab loading zone permit application procedure, § 106-77; watercraft, § 110-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, F.S. § 316.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 98-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park means a playground, beach, ballfield or other land area owned by the city or dedicated or otherwise held in trust by the city for the public. 
Vehicle means any vehicle defined by section 316.003, Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1980, § 26-6; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 1, 12-3-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-2. - Adoption of Florida Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act and the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
There is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Uniform Disposition of Traffic Infractions Act, F.S. ch. 318, as amended from time to time and the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, F.S. ch. 316, as amended from time to time, both of which shall be in full force and effect in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-2; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 2, 12-3-97)  
Sec. 98-3. - Obeying traffic control signs. 
No person shall fail to observe and follow all traffic signs including speed, direction, caution, stopping, parking or standing, and all other posted signs for the proper control of vehicles. 
(Code 1980, § 26-10)  
Sec. 98-4. - Driving onto medians, shoulders, etc. 
No person shall ride or drive any vehicle on the land areas that separate paved streets, roads or highways such as medians, islands or similar land areas. No person shall ride or drive any motorized vehicle on the soft shoulder of any paved street, except as is necessary to get the motorized vehicle on or off the road to lawfully park the same, or during emergencies, such as accidents and breakdowns. 
(Code 1980, § 26-9; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 3, 12-3-97; Ord. No. O-00-22, § 1, 10-11-2000)  
Sec. 98-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-97-61, § 4, adopted Dec. 3, 1997, deleted § 98-5, operation on public school grounds, derived from the 1980 Code, § 26-22.  
Sec. 98-6. - Limit on gross weight of vehicles; enforcement. 
(a)  The gross weight imposed on the streets of the city by the wheels of any one axle of a vehicle shall not exceed 20,000 pounds. 
(b)  Any police officer of the city having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, is authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle either by means of portable or stationary scales and may require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scales for weighing. 
(Code 1980, § 26-4; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 5, 12-3-97)  
Sec. 98-7. - Penalty for violation of chapter; enforcement. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and shall be punished by a fine as set forth in F.S. chs. 316 and 318, as presently constituted or as hereafter amended. 
(b)  Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 26-5; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 6, 12-3-97)  
Sec. 98-8. - Designation of one-way streets. 
The city council may provide for one-way traffic on city streets by enacting a resolution in each instance to provide for such one-way designation. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of any such one-way changes. Upon enactment of any such resolution, the public works department shall erect proper signals to indicate such one-way designation pursuant to the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices. 
(Code 1980, § 26-12; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 7, 12-3-97) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 98-9. - Bicycle regulations. 
(a)  A person operating a bicycle may not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  (1)  A bicycle may not be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed or equipped, except that an adult rider may carry a child securely attached to his or her person in a backpack or sling. 
(2)  Except [as] provided in paragraph (1), a bicycle rider must carry any passenger who is a child under four years of age, or who weighs 40 pounds or less, in a seat or carrler that is designed to carry a child of that age or size and that secures and protects the child from the moving parts of the bicycle. 
(3)  A bicycle rider may not allow a passenger to remain in a child seat or carrier on a bicycle when the rider is not in immediate control of the bicycle. 
(4)  A bicycle rider or passenger who is under 16 years of age must wear a bicycle helmet that is properly fitted and is fastened securely upon the passengers' head by strap, and that meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute. As used in this subsection, the term "passenger" includes a child who is riding in a trailer or semi-trailer attached to a bicycle. 
(5)  A bicycle rider or passenger who violates this subsection may be issued a city citation by a law enforcement officer and assessed a fine. 
(c)  Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(d)  The city may waive, reduce, or suspend payment of any fine imposed under subsection (a) or subsection (c) and impose conditions on the waiver, reduction, or suspension. 
(e)  All bicycle violations will be annotated on the existing city parking violation citations, entered in the other block. 
(f)  Moving and helmet violations will be assessed a $25.00 fine. 
(g)  Violators may attend a bicycle safety class that will allow the fine to be waived, reduced, or suspended. 
(Ord. No. O-02-05, § 1, 2-27-02)  
Secs. 98-10—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, F.S. § 316.1945; additional parking regulations, F.S. § 316.195. 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have these meanings unless the context shall reasonably require another common useage: 
Shoulder shall mean that portion of the right-of-way located between the edge of pavement of a street and the swale adjacent thereto. 
Swale shall mean that portion of the city drainage system which is identified as the area extending two feet to each side of the centerline running along the lowest elevated point located in the right-of-way between the edge of pavement of a street and the front lot line adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 26-20; Ord. No. O-00-22, § 2, 10-11-2000)  
Sec. 98-32. - Verbal notice of unsafe parking; refusal to obey. 
When the parking of a vehicle interferes with the safety of the general inhabitants of the city and a police officer has determined that the vehicle is so parked, he shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner or operator of the vehicle, giving to the owner or operator the opportunity to remove the vehicle from the parking location. If the owner or driver refuses to remove the vehicle from such location after notification by the police officer or if the owner or operator cannot be located, the vehicle shall be sited, towed and stored at the owner's expense, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 26-21; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 8, 12-3-97)  
Sec. 98-33. - Damaging or parking in swales and shoulder prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of City Code for a vehicle to be parked or driven in such way that it damages the swale. Further, except as provided in sections 98-34 and 98-35 below, it shall be a violation for any motor vehicle to park in the swale or shoulder of the right-of-way. However, a vehicle may park on the shoulder if one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The motor vehicle has been removed from the paved street due tomechanical failure or is temporarily parked due to emergency situations such as an accident, with a time limit of 24 hours. 
(2)  The motor vehicle is titled to the owner or resident of the residential lot adjacent to the right-of-way, or an invited guest thereof, and all available parking space within the driveway of said lot is occupied by other motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. O-00-22, § 3, 10-11-2000)  
Sec. 98-34. - Exception; commercial vehicles rendering services to residences. 
Commercial vehicles rendering services to residences of the city, such as lawn care trailers or mobile vendors, shall be allowed to park on the shoulder adjoining the lot being serviced, so long as the operator of such vehicle parked in the right-of-way places at least three traffic cones along the side of the vehicle facing the travel lane. Said cones shall have a minimum height of two feet, shall be orange or such other color as approved by the city engineer, and one shall be placed a minimum ten feet from the end of the vehicle that traffic approaches. 
(Ord. No. O-00-22, § 4, 10-11-2000; Ord. No. O-00-24, § 1, 12-6-2000)  
Sec. 98-35. - Exception; construction-related vehicles. 
Vehicles related to the construction of a structure on a lot in the city shall be allowed to park within all portions of the unpaved right-of-way adjacent to the lot being improved or adjoining vacant lots, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A sufficient grade shall be maintained along the right-of-way to allow a reasonable flow of stormwater; or the building official shall issue a "stop work" order for the construction; 
(2)  Any damage to the swales utilized for parking during said construction shall be presumed to have been caused by the construction process; 
(3)  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the contractor shall restore the swale for the improved lot, and any adjacent damaged swale, to the grades and standards established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. O-00-22, § 5, 10-11-2000)  
Sec. 98-36. - Additional violations; parking on street rights-of-way. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered to be parked if it is stopped other than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
(b)  No vehicle displaying a "for sale" sign may be parked on any street right-of-way. 
(c)  No truck, van, or road tractor over 23 feet in length and/or 9 feet in height shall be parked on any street right-of-way. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the exceptions of sections 98-33—98-35, it shall be a violation for any vehicle to park across, or otherwise impede, the crossing of a public sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. O-95-03, § 1, 7-26-95; Ord. No. O-95-23, § 1, 9-13-95; Ord. No. O-97-03, § 1, 2-12-97; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 12, 12-3-97; Ord. No. O-00-22, § 6, 10-11-2000; Ord. No. O-00-24, § 2, 12-6-2000)  
Sec. 98-37. - Penalties for violation of section 316.1955 Florida Statutes; handicapped accessibility fund. 
In accordance with Section 316.008(4) Florida Statutes, any violation of Section 316.1955, Florida Statutes shall be a civil infraction, subject to a maximum civil penalty of $250.00 per day. There is hereby established a Handicapped Accessibility Fund, a separate account in which the fines collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited and which shall be used in the following manner: one third to be used to provide funds to defray expenses for the administration of this section and two thirds to be used to provide funds to improve accessibility and equal opportunity to qualified physically disabled persons in the city and to conduct public awareness programs in the city concerning persons who have disabilities. 
(Ord. No. O-97-61, § 13, 12-3-97) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-97-61, § 13, adopted Dec. 13, 1997, amended § 98-37 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such section pertained to parking at Sebastian Municipal Airport, derived from Ord. No. O-97-44, § 1, adopted Mar. 26, 1997.  
Sec. 98-38. - Designation of no parking zones. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution, designate site specific "no parking" zones within the boundaries of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any motor vehicle in a designated "no parking" zone. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked in a "no parking" zone will be subject to removal by the city, at the owner's expense. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall be a civil infraction, subject to a maximum civil penalty of $50.00 if the person committing the offense does not contest the citation. 
(Ord. No. O-97-55, § 1, 8-13-97)  
Sec. 98-39. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any violation of this article shall be a civil infraction, subject to a maximum civil penalty of $100.00 per day. 
(b)  In addition to the fine set forth above, the costs of restoring the swale or shoulder to its proper condition shall be assessed against the violator. Said assessment may be imposed by the court if the violation is contested, or by resolution of the city council after written notice to the violator if a citation is uncontested. If the violator is the owner of the lot adjacent to the damaged swale, any such assessment unpaid for more than 30 days shall be filed as a lien against said lot and such lien shall be equal in dignity to the lien for taxes. 
(c)  Vehicles in violation of this article may additionally be given a notice that the vehicle must be removed. Any vehicle parked on any city right-of-way which is not removed within 24 hours after a notice requiring removal has been posted on the vehicle by the city will be towed and stored at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. O-00-22, § 7, 10-11-2000)  
Secs. 98-40—98-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NONMOVING TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS 
 
Sec. 98-51. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the city council in the adoption of this article to decriminalize the violations of the stopping, standing and parking provisions in articles I and II of this chapter, thereby facilitating the implementation for the disposition of municipal nonmoving traffic infractions. 
(Code 1980, § 26-50)  
Sec. 98-52. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases where used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cited means to notify a person that he has been charged with a municipal noncriminal infraction and must comply with the provisions of this article. 
Infraction means a municipal noncriminal violation which is not punishable by incarceration and for which there is no right to a trial by jury or a court appointed counsel. 
Officer means any law enforcement officer charged with and acting under his authority to arrest persons suspected of, or known to be, violating statutes or ordinances regulating traffic or parking or the operation of equipment or vehicles. The term includes any individual employed or utilized by the police department who is acting as a parking enforcement officer without arrest powers. 
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of property or passengers as may be permitted under this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 26-51; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 14, 12-3-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-53. - Municipal noncriminal traffic infractions; purpose. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of article I or II of this chapter regarding a vehicle found parked, stopped or standing shall be deemed to have committed a municipal nonmoving and noncriminal infraction and shall be cited for such an infraction. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle with a driver therein or thereby is found parked, stopped or standing in violation of any of the provisions of article I or II of this chapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall deliver to the driver therein or thereby a traffic citation or notice in writing on a form provided therefor. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle without a driver therein or thereby is found parked, stopped or standing in violation of any of the provisions of article I or II of this chapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall make a reasonable effort to identify the owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation or notice in writing on a form provided therefor. 
(d)  Whenever a citation has been issued, the owner or driver of the vehicle must answer the citation or notice within 72 hours of the issuance of the citation or notice, during the hours and at the place specified in the citation or notice, or mail a check or money order as payment for the penalty by U.S. mail. If such procedure is followed within 72 hours, the penalty for a violation of the parking, stopping or standing provisions of article I or II of this chapter is $10.00. 
(e)  If the operator or owner of the vehicle cited for violation of any of the stopping, standing or parking provisions of this chapter does not deliver or mail a check or money order in timely response to the citation or notice delivered or affixed to the vehicle pursuant to this article, within a period of 72 hours, the police department shall mail to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the citation or notice was affixed, a letter to inform the owner of the violation and that the owner must deliver or mail a check or money order in response to such notice or citation within seven days of the date of such letter, and that the penalty for the violation is then $25.00. 
(f)  If the registered owner fails to pay the proper penalty in full within the seven days from the date of such letter, or fails to request a hearing within such seven days in the manner provided in subsection (i) of this section, written notice of the violation shall be sent by mail to the registered owner of the vehicle in the name of the traffic violations bureau of the clerk of the county court, Indian River County, Florida. 
Such notice mailed by certified or registered mail to the registered owner or the address shown on the vehicle registration shall be sufficient and equivalent to notice having been received by the registered owner. 
(g)  If the person notified fails to pay the proper penalty in full within the time stated, or fails to request a hearing in the manner provided for in subsection (i) of this section, the clerk of the court, based on a sworn affidavit, shall issue a summons to appear directed to the registered owner of the vehicle. Failure to appear at the specified time and place shall be deemed a contempt of court, which contempt may be punished as provided by the laws of Florida. 
(h)  If the registered owner or operator of the vehicle pays the penalty prior to a finding by the court of an infraction, such payment shall admit the infraction and shall waive any right to a hearing or any appeal. 
(i)  Any person cited for an infraction may elect to appear before a county judge by requesting a hearing in writing. Such request shall be made at the place specified in the citation or notice. Such request must be made before a summons to appear is issued. 
(j)  Any person electing to appear before a county judge, or who is required to appear, shall be entitled to a hearing to determine whether or not the cited infraction has been committed. If the commission of the infraction is found to have occurred by the court, the county judge may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $250.00. 
(k)  The commission of a charged infraction at a hearing under this article must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(l)  If the cited infraction is found to have been committed, the violator may appeal the judge's finding to the circuit court. 
(Code 1980, § 26-52; Ord. No. O-97-61, § 15, 12-3-97)  
Sec. 98-54. - Evidence of identity of violator. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this chapter governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation or notice was stopped, standing or parked in violation of any provision of this chapter, together with proof that the operator of the vehicle was not present at the time that the citation or notice was affixed to the vehicle, or was present but did not identify himself as the operator, the individual, corporation or other entity in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the cited violation. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall apply only when the notice or citation provisions for delivery or affixing the notice or citation to the vehicle have been followed. 
(Code 1980, § 26-53)  
Chapter 102 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26; sanitary facilities required for buildings, § 26-37; septic tank as mineral requirements for sewage disposal, § 50-1; solid wastes, ch. 86; street excavation regulations, § 90-34; easements, § 90-126 et seq.; public service tax levied on certain utilities, § 94-26 et seq.; required equipment for excrement, waste, and refuse disposal for watercraft, § 110-40; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; franchises, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 102-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
Franchise means a contract with the city by which the utility is licensed to conduct a particular business within a particular area for a given period of time. 
Service availability policy means a policy which sets forth a uniform method of determining the system capacity charge or other charges to be paid and conditions to be met by applicants for service in order to obtain water and sewer service. 
Utility means water or sewer utilities serving subdivision, apartment and housing complexes, condominium, mobile home or trailer parks, industrial complexes, shopping centers and similar systems. "Utility" includes wells, pumps, tanks, treatment facilities, distribution systems, water meters, disposal facilities, force mains, pump stations, collection systems, service lines and pipes, real estate and easements necessary to such systems, and includes every person, corporation, lessee, trustee, or receiver owning, operating, managing or controlling a utility system or proposing construction of a system or who is providing or proposes to provide water or sewer service to the public. 
(Code 1980, § 27-1; Ord. No. 0-92-16, § 2, 9-23-92)  
Sec. 102-2. - Regulation in public interest. 
The regulation of utilities in the city is declared to be in the public interest and this is an exercise of the police power of the city for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1980, § 27-2)  
Sec. 102-3. - Jurisdiction of city. 
The city, by and through the city council, shall have jurisdiction over each utility within the city limits with respect to its authority, service and rates to be determined by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 27-3)  
Sec. 102-4. - Rates; procedure for fixing and changing. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, rates and charges being charged and collected by a utility shall be changed only by approval of the city council. The city council shall, either upon request or upon its own motion, fix rates which are just, reasonable, compensatory, and not unfairly discriminatory. 
(b)  The company and its successors and assigns shall at all times be limited in its charges for services furnished in accordance with its franchise to a schedule of charges which shall be presented to and approved by the city council. The initial water rates and other charges described in the franchise shall be the rates in effect pursuant to this grant until modified or changed by the parties. The company may, if it deems it necessary to amend or change such schedule or charges, give the council notice in writing of such rate changes. Within 60 days after notice as aforesaid, the council shall authorize and hold a public hearing and, within 30 days after such public hearing, if the council shall decline to act, then the company may forthwith put into effect such amendment or change of schedule. It is understood and agreed that if the company should raise charges as stated in this subsection, the moneys so collected shall be escrowed by the company or the company shall post with the council a good and sufficient surety bond, for a period of 90 days. If the council should deny the raise at any time during this 90-day period, the company shall refund to its customers the moneys collected by virtue of the raise. However, upon the expiration of the 90-day period, if no action is taken by the council theretofore, the moneys shall become the funds of the company and there shall be no further obligation on the part of the company to escrow any moneys or in the case of a surety bond, such surety bond will no longer be in force, and the increase in charges shall continue the same as if the request of the company had been granted. 
(c)  The council, in fixing rates, may determine the prudent cost of providing service during the period of time the rates will be in effect following the entry of a final order relating to the utility's rate request and may use such costs to determine the revenue requirements that will allow the utility to earn a fair rate of return on its rate base. 
(d)  Automatic rate adjustments. 
(1)  The approved rates of any utility which receives all or any portion of its utility service from a governmental agency or from a water or sewer utility regulated by the council and which redistributes that service to its utility customers shall be automatically increased or decreased, without hearing, upon verified notice to the council 90 days prior to its implementation of the increase or decrease that the rates charged by the governmental agency or other utility have changed. Provisions of this subsection shall not prevent a utility from seeking changes in rates pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Before implementing a change in rates under this subsection (d), the utility shall file an affirmation under oath as to the accuracy of the figures and calculations upon which the change in rates is based and that the change will not cause the utility to exceed the range of its last authorized rate of return. Whoever makes a false statement in the affirmation required under this subsection which he does not believe to be true in regard to any material matter shall be guilty of a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 and 775.083. 
(3)  If, within 24 months of an adjustment in the rates as authorized by this subsection, the council shall find that a utility did thereby exceed the range of its last authorized rate of return as set forth in subsection (d)(5) of this section, it may order the utility to refund the difference to the rate payers. These provisions shall not be construed to require a corporate performance bond not otherwise required. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no utility may adjust its rates under this subsection more than two times in any 12-month period. 
(5)  The council shall by order each year establish a minimal authorized rate of return on common equity which shall reasonably reflect the minimum return on equity for an average water or sewer utility and which, for purposes of this section, shall be the last authorized rate of return for any utility which otherwise would have no established rate of return. Such minimal return on common equity shall not apply to any utility once an overall rate of return has been established for such utility in a proceeding which will result in the establishment of an authorized rate of return. 
(Code 1980, § 27-4) 
Editor's note— Utility fees, rates and charges are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 102-5. - Operating and testing in accordance with agency rules and regulations. 
Upon completion of the initial portion of the utility plant, the applicant shall be responsible for the operation and regular testing of the utility in accordance with the rules and regulations of all agencies having jurisdiction, including without limitation the city. 
(Code 1980, § 27-5; Ord. No. 0-92-16, § 3, 9-23-92)  
Sec. 102-6. - Annexation of existing systems. 
Annexation of existing water and sewerage systems must comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 27-6)  
Sec. 102-7. - Applicability. 
(a)  All utilities within the jurisdiction of the city must develop a service availability policy. 
(b)  The provisions of sections 102-7 through 102-9, shall apply to any utility that on or after September 2, 1992, (i) files or applies for a change to any of its rates or charges, or (ii) when the city council initiates a show cause proceeding to require the utility to adopt or change a service availability policy or charges. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-16, § 4, 9-23-92)  
Sec. 102-8. - Guidelines for designing service availability policy. 
(a)  A utility's service availability policy shall be designed in accordance with the following guidelines: 
(1)  The maximum amount of contributions-in-aid-of-construction, net of amortization, should not exceed 75 percent of the total original cost, net of accumulate depreciation, of the utility's facilities and plant are at their designed capacity; and 
(2)  The minimum amount of contributions-in-aid-of-construction should not be less than the percentage of such facilities and plant that is represented by the water transmission and distribution and sewage collection systems. 
(b)  In any case where compliance with the guidelines of subsection (a) introduces unusual hardship or unreasonable difficulty, and the city council, utility or interested party shows that it is not in the best interest of the customers of the utility to require compliance, the council may exempt the utility from the guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-16, § 5, 9-23-92)  
Sec. 102-9. - Imputation of contributions-in-aid-of-construction. 
(a)  If the amount of contributions-in-aid-of-construction (CIAC) has not been recorded on the utility's books and the utility does not submit competent substantial evidence as to the amount of CIAC, the amount of CIAC shall be imputed to be the amount of plant cost charged to the cost of land sales for tax purposes if available, or the proportion of the cost of the facilities and plant attributable to water transmission and distribution system and the sewage collection system. 
(b)  In any case where provisions of subsection (a) introduce unusual hardship or unreasonable difficulty, and the council, utility or interested party shows it is not in the best interest of the customers of the utility, the council may waive the applicability of this section to the utility. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-16, § 6, 9-23-92)  
Sec. 102-10. - Application for rate increase. 
(a)  Each applicant for a rate increase shall file with the city clerk a written application containing information substantially the same as that information required by Florida Administrative Code Rules 25-30.436, 25-30.437, 25-30.438 and 25-30.440, in effect on the effective date of this ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any previous ordinance to the contrary, the applicant's application for rate relief will not be deemed filed and the applicant shall not have the right to collect any increased rates until the appropriate filing fee has been paid and all minimum filing requirements have been met, including prepared testimony where appropriate. 
(c)  Each applicant shall pay an application fee as determined by the city based upon the city's estimate of the city's fees and costs to review and render a decision on the requested rates; provided, however, that the application fee shall not exceed $50,000.00. This fee may be recovered in the rates as an expense of the utility over a ten year period. The city shall notify the applicant of the application fee due to the city within seven business days after the city receives the applicant's initial application. 
(d)  The city may grant a waiver with respect to specific data required by this rule upon a showing that the production of the data would be impractical or impose an excessive economic burden upon the applicant. All requests for waiver shall be made with the submittal of the initial application. 
(e)  This section shall apply to all applications filed on or after September 2, 1992. 
(Ord. No. 0-92-16, § 7, 9-23-92)  
Secs. 102-11—102-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 102-31. - Individual sewage disposal systems prohibited. 
The use of individual sewage disposal systems and/or septic tanks, grease traps and dry wells by any person in the area where central sewage collection service is available is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 27-40) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26; sanitary facilities required, § 26-37; septic tanks as minimum requirements for sewage disposal, permits, location, § 50-1.  
Sec. 102-32. - Individual water systems prohibited. 
The use of individual water systems, other than for irrigation purposes, by any person in the area where water distribution service is available is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 27-41) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 26.  
Sec. 102-33. - Connection required. 
The owner of improved real property wherein either sewer collection service or water distribution service, or both services, becomes available, shall cause the connections of such available services to the improvements on the premises within 30 days of receipt of notification that the utility has installed the necessary meters. The city council may extend this 30-day period for good cause upon written request by the owner. 
(Code 1980, § 27-42)  
Sec. 102-34. - Notice; time for compliance; meter installation. 
(a)  Each entity providing either sewer collection services or water distribution service, or both services, to real property within the city, shall notify both the city and the owner of real property when such service has become available, in writing, that the utility service is available for use by the respective parcel of real property. The written notice shall notify the owners of the real property that the utility service is available and shall list the applicable connection fees and charges. Application for service and payment of the connection charges must be made to the utility by the owner not later than 60 days from the date of receipt of the notice of availability of service. 
(b)  The utility shall install the necessary meters within 30 days of receipt of the owner's application and connection charges and shall notify the owner of the date of the meter installation. Notice to any owner of jointly owned real property shall be notice to all owners of such property. 
(Code 1980, § 27-43)  
Sec. 102-35. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of failure to connect to the water or sewer system after having received proper notification as provided in section 102-34, shall be punished by a fine of up to $500.00. Each day such a condition exists shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Code 1980, § 27-44)  
Secs. 102-36—102-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISES GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Franchises, app. A. 
 
Sec. 102-51. - Scope of article. 
The following sections of this article are standards and procedures for the grant of utility franchises in accordance with this chapter, the guidelines laid down in F.S. ch. 367, rules and regulations of the state departments of health and rehabilitative services, environmental regulation, and pollution control. 
(Code 1980, § 27-18)  
Sec. 102-52. - Application. 
(a)  The application for a utilities franchise shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; if applicant is a corporation, the names of officers and resident agent and their addresses. 
(2)  Legal description of franchise area. 
(3)  Specify whether it is for a public water system, a public sewerage system, or both; if in connection with another or existing system, or an extension of an existing system, the planned utility may not exceed the capacity of the other system. 
(4)  State the area served by the utility; any water supply and/or distribution system having a total average daily demand in excess of 50,000 gallons shall be designed to provide firefighting facilities, including distribution, supply storage, and hydrants, as necessary to meet the requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, class 8. Any water supply and/or distribution system having a total average daily demand of 50,000 gallons or less shall be designed to provide distribution system capacity, valves and hydrant connections sized and located to provide capacity and pressure necessary to meet the requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, class 8. For daily demands of 50,000 gallons or less it is not necessary to provide fire flow water supply and storage capacities and hydrants. Valves and connection points for hydrants shall be installed at locations as required by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, class 8 code and as required and/or approved by the city engineer. It is not necessary to install hydrants but it is required that the developer and/or applicant submit a check to the city in the total amount calculated by multiplying the number of hydrants required by $1,000.00 each. The city shall deposit the funds in an interest bearing trust fund to be used for the future purchase of hydrants when fire flow and storage capacities are available in the area. The hydrant check shall be submitted to the city prior to the issuance of any building permits within the project. 
(5)  Attach location map showing the layout of lots, location of all proposed treatment plants, and all rights-of-way and easements required for utility purposes, and submit approval from the owners of all necessary rights-of-way or easements other than the city; the location map must show all adjacent land owners within 300 feet of the franchise area, and their mailing addresses. 
(6)  Attach approval of planned utility by the department of environmental regulation, St. Johns River Water Management District and all other agencies having jurisdiction. 
(7)  Submit financial statement or proof of available financing or resources, as may be required by the city council. 
(b)  The application for a utilities franchise shall be filed with the city clerk, and submitted by the clerk to the city council for review. 
(Code 1980, § 27-19)  
Sec. 102-53. - Qualifications and conditions. 
(a)  The city council shall be satisfied that the applicant under this article is acting in good faith and has the means to build, install and operate the proposed system. The city council may require the applicant to file certified copies of its corporate charter, including names of persons having a financial interest in the proposed franchise, current financial statement, proof of liability insurance coverage, provide a credit check prepared by a certified credit bureau, inventory of capital assets and such other data as may be pertinent. If the city council is satisfied that the applicant has sufficient resources to serve the district for which he has made application, the council may also require the applicant to post a reasonable bond satisfactory in form and sureties to the city council to guarantee compliance with any conditions imposed by the city council. The city council shall satisfy itself that the proposed system is sufficiently large to serve the franchise area for which a utilities permit is sought. 
(b)  The issuance of any franchise shall further be subject to all conditions contained in Laws of Florida, ch. 59-1380, and all other applicable city, state, and federal rules and regulations, and approval by the department of environmental regulation, St. Johns River Water Management District, and all other agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1980, § 27-20)  
Sec. 102-54. - Certification of planned construction. 
When the requirements of this article are met, the city council shall refer the matter to its city engineer to certify that all planned construction complies with city specifications and all other state and federal regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 27-21)  
Sec. 102-55. - Hearing on applications. 
Upon certification by the city engineer, a public hearing shall be held. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the applicant and shall include the name of the applicant, the legal description of the area to be embraced by the franchise, the proposed rate and hookup charges, the period for which the franchise is required and the time and place of such hearing, and shall be published in a newspaper regularly published in the county at least one time not less than 15 days preceding such hearing. All property owners lying within 300 feet of the franchise area shall be notified by the applicant and certified proof of such notice of hearing and notice to property owners shall be filed with the city clerk by the applicant ten days prior to the date set for the public hearing. The applicant shall deposit the sum of $100.00 with the city clerk to cover expenses of advertising. 
(Code 1980, § 27-22)  
Sec. 102-56. - Grant of franchise. 
(a)  Upon public hearing and a determination by the council that the granting of a franchise would be in the public interest, the franchise shall be granted by a resolution or ordinance adopted by the city council, in a form prepared by the applicant and approved by the city attorney, to be effective as of the date of its adoption and shall continue in force and effect for a period of time not to exceed 30 years or until such earlier time as the city shall elect to install or acquire its own water treatment and distribution system and/or its own sewerage collection and treatment system, and supply the same to individual units. If the city elects to install or acquire a water and/or sewer system in an area where a franchise has been granted and the term of such franchise is about to or has not expired, then the city shall notify the utility of its intent to acquire its system and terminate or modify such franchise in accordance with section 102-58. 
(b)  Within 60 days of the date of adoption of the resolution or ordinance granting a franchise, the franchise holder shall file with the clerk of the city its written acceptance of the franchise, together with all of its terms and conditions including the provisions of this chapter. Failure to file such written acceptance within the time specified shall automatically repeal the resolution granting such franchise and the franchise shall be null and void and without further force and effect. 
(c)  The franchise holder shall supply the city engineer with one accurate set of as-built drawings (on sepia) for each utility extension or modification thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 27-23)  
Sec. 102-57. - Construction. 
Upon approval of the franchise by the city council, the city building official shall issue a utility permit for the actual construction of the utility. Construction shall be in compliance with all city building ordinances and all rules and regulations of all other agencies having jurisdiction. The applicant shall conduct all tests on each utility in accordance with city specifications and view all sanitary sewer lines by a television camera in the presence of the city engineer or his representative. 
(Code 1980, § 27-24)  
Sec. 102-58. - Purchase of utility by city. 
(a)  Within a reasonable time after the city has notified the utility of its intent to terminate the franchise and to acquire the system, the franchise holder shall convey all of its facilities together with all easements to the city. Such conveyance by the utility shall be without encumbrance. At this time the franchise holder shall convey unencumbered all of its facilities together with all easements to the city, without charge as to all property contributed to the utility; provided further, however, that the city shall have the right to purchase the remaining assets of the utility based on the average of the net original cost and a price as computed and agreed upon by three competent and qualified appraisers. The city shall select an appraiser, the utility shall select an appraiser, and these two appraisers shall mutually agree upon and select a third independent appraiser and these three appraisers shall arrive at the value of the utility and the sales price involved. However, the city shall not be required to purchase and no value will be placed on additions or extensions to the system which were paid for as contributions-in-aid-of-construction by any person other than the utility. 
(b)  At the end of the franchise period, the city shall not be required to pay to the utility any amount for goodwill and the appraised value shall be based entirely upon physical assets only. 
(c)  If the board of appraisers cannot agree as to the price to be paid by the city, then the city may file appropriate condemnation proceedings under Florida law. Any franchise granted by the city shall include this requirement. 
(Code 1980, § 27-25)  
Sec. 102-59. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Violation of this article and/or operating a utility without first obtaining a franchise from the city in compliance with this article, shall constitute a violation of this Code, and upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. Each day that violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Code 1980, § 27-26)  
Secs. 102-60—102-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER RESTRICTION PLAN 
 
Sec. 102-76. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Sebastian Water Restriction Plan." 
(Code 1980, § 30-1)  
Sec. 102-77. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. 
Address means the house number of a physical location of a specific property. This includes "rural route" numbers but excludes post office box numbers. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar community is used by the U.S. Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall be the property's address. An "even numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or the letters "A" through "M". An "odd numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 or the letters "N" through "Z". 
District means the St. Johns River Water Management District. 
Landscape irrigation means the outside watering of plants in a landscape such as shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens and other such flora that are situated in such diverse locations as residential areas, cemeteries, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, and public medians and rights of way. "Landscape irrigation" does not include golf course greens, tees, fairways, primary roughs, and vegetation associated with intensive recreational areas such as, but not limited to, playgrounds, and football, baseball and soccer fields. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
(Code 1980, § 30-2; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 1, 6-23-99; Ord. No. O-06-02, § 1, 4-12-06)  
Sec. 102-78. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all individuals, legal entities and their agents who use water, as defined in this article, within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 30-3; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 2, 6-23-99)  
Sec. 102-79. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Every city police officer shall be authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this article through a noncriminal citation, with jurisdiction vesting in the county court upon failure of the violator to pay the same. However, where the offense is designated a misdemeanor, the officer shall issue a Notice to Appear before the county court. 
(b)  Additionally, the city code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article under the citation method of Code section 2-194. 
(c)  The following enforcement notification guidelines shall be in effect for this article and shall supersede any conflicting provision of Code section 2-194: 
(1)  If personal contact is made with the violator, the officer shall require immediate compliance; 
(2)  If personal contact cannot be made with anyone having ownership or control of a residence found to be in violation of this article, the enforcement personnel shall leave a notice of violation posted on the front door thereof requiring compliance within 24 hours; 
(3)  If the notice remains posted undisturbed at said location 24 hours later, a second notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt to said address; and 
(4)  If said violation continues more than 24 hours after delivery of the second notice, the violator shall be cited. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this subsection to the contrary, if enforcement personnel has proof the premises is actively occupied, the requirement of a mailed second notice is waived. 
(Code 1980, § 30-4; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 3, 6-23-99)  
Sec. 102-80. - Landscape irrigation schedule. 
(a)  Landscape irrigation at odd numbered addresses must only occur on Wednesday and Saturday and must not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. daily. 
(b)  Landscape irrigation at even numbered addresses or no address must only occur on Thursday and Sunday and must not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. daily. 
(Code 1980, § 30-5; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 4, 6-23-99; Ord. No. O-06-02, § 2, 4-12-06)  
Sec. 102-81. - Exceptions to landscape irrigation schedule. 
Landscape irrigation shall be subject to the following irrigation schedule exceptions: 
(1)  Irrigation using a micro-irrigation system is allowed anytime. 
(2)  Irrigation of new landscape is allowed at any time of day on any day for the initial 30 days and every other day for the next 30 days for a total of one 60-day period, provided that the irrigation is limited to the minimum amount necessary for such landscape establishment. 
(3)  Watering in of chemicals, including insecticides, pesticides, fertilizers, fungicides, and herbicides when required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices is allowed anytime within 24 hours of application. 
(4)  Irrigation systems may be operated anytime for maintenance and repair purposes not to exceed ten minutes per hour per zone. 
(5)  Irrigation using a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle is allowed anytime. 
(6)  Discharge of water from a water-to-air air-conditioning unit or other water- dependent cooling system is not limited. 
(7)  The use of water from a reclaimed water system is allowed anytime. For the purpose of this paragraph, a reclaimed water system includes systems in which the primary source is reclaimed water, which may or may not be supplemented from another source during peak demand periods. 
(8)  The use of recycled water from wet detention treatment ponds for irrigation is allowed anytime provided the ponds are not augmented from any ground or off-site surface water, or public supply sources. 
(Code 1980, § 30-6; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 5, 6-23-99; Ord. No. O-99-12, § 1, 9-8-99; Ord. No. O-01-01, § 1, 1-24-01; Ord. No. O-06-02, § 3, 4-12-06)  
Sec. 102-82. - Variance from specific day of the week limitations. 
A variance from the section 102-80 landscape irrigation schedule above may be granted if strict application of that schedule would lead to unreasonable or unfair results in particular instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates with particularity that compliance with the schedule will result in a substantial economic, health or other hardship on the applicant requesting the variance or those served by the applicant. Where a contiguous property is divided into different zones, a variance may be granted hereunder so that each zone may be irrigated on different days than other zones of the property. However, no single zone may be irrigated more than two days a week. 
(Code 1980, § 30-19; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 6, 6-23-99; Ord. No. O-99-12, § 2, 9-8-99; Ord. No. O-01-01, § 2, 1-24-01; Ord. No. O-06-02, § 4, 4-12-06)  
Sec. 102-83. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First offense; citation amount of $25.00, maximum fine upon conviction in county court of $75.00; 
(2)  Second offense; citation amount of $50.00, maximum fine upon conviction in county court of $150.00; and 
(3)  Third and subsequent offenses; citation amount of $100.00, maximum fine upon conviction of $250.00. 
(b)  Citations shall be paid to the office of the finance director at city hall. 
(Code 1980, § 30-7; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 7, 6-23-99; Ord. No. O-99-12, § 3, 9-8-99; Ord. No. O-06-02, § 5, 4-12-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-02, § 5, adopted Apr. 12, 2006, deleted § 102-83 and renumbered former § 102-95 as § 102-83. Former § 102-83 pertained to residential and commercial landscape irrigation restrictions for existing installations and derived Code 1980, § 30-7; Ord. No. O-99-03, § 7, adopted June 23, 1999; Ord. No. O-99-12, § 3, adopted Sept. 8, 1999 and Ord. No. O-01-01, § 3, adopted Jan. 24, 2001.  
Secs. 102-84—102-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-02, § 6, adopted Apr. 12, 2006, repealed §§ 102-84, 102-85, and 102-91—102-93 and renumbered former § 102-95 as § 102-83. The repealed sections pertained to residential and commercial landscape irrigation restrictions for new installations (102-84), essential use restrictions (102-85), use restrictions for public facilities (102-91), dewatering use restrictions (102-92) and water-based recreation restriction use (102-93) and derived from Code 1980, §§ 30-8, 30-9, 30-15—30-17; Ord. No. O-99-03, §§ 8, 11, adopted June 23, 1999; and Ord. No. O-99-12, §§ 4, 6, adopted Sept. 8, 1999.  
Secs. 102-96—102-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SEBASTIAN STORMWATER UTILITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-0-16, adopted Sept. 26, 2001, §§ 1—9, enacted Article V, entitled Sebastian Stormwater Utility, designated as §§ 102-100—102-108. Such sections have been redesignated by the editor as §§ 102-121—102-129, in order to reserve sections for future additions. 
 
Sec. 102-121. - Utility established. 
There is hereby created and established in the city, in accordance with section 403.0893 of the Florida Statutes, a stormwater management utility entitled the Sebastian Stormwater Utility. This utility shall be responsible for the city's stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. O-16-01, § 1, 9-26-01)  
Sec. 102-122. - Powers and authority. 
The Sebastian Stormwater Utility shall have all powers necessary for the exercise of its responsibility for the drainage from all properties within the city, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Preparation of plans for improvements and betterments to the stormwater management system. 
(2)  Construction of improvements and betterments to the stormwater management system. 
(3)  Promulgation of regulations for the use of the stormwater management system, including provisions for enforcement of such regulations. 
(4)  Review and approval of all new development permits within the city for compliance with stormwater management regulations included in present city ordinances or ordinances later adopted. 
(5)  Performance of routine maintenance and minor improvement to the stormwater management system. 
(6)  Establishment of charges for connection and use of the stormwater management system. 
(7)  Evaluation of water quality concerns for discharges to the stormwater management system. 
(8)  Performance of all normal utility functions to include construction, operation, and maintenance of the city's stormwater management system, including, but not limited to, the hiring of staff, the selection of special consultants, the entering into contracts for services and construction of facilities, and the handling of purchase, lease, sale or other rights to property for the stormwater management system. 
(9)  Issuance of revenue bonds or other debt instruments for the purpose of performing those duties as described herein. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 2, 9-26-01)  
Sec. 102-123. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Calculated impervious surface of an ERU means for purposes of determining a stormwater fee, the calculated impervious surface of an ERU shall be deemed to be 3,285 square feet which is the statistical average of impervious area for one developed residential lot. 
Developed nonresidential property means property zoned for uses other than for residential purposes upon which improvements have been constructed. 
Developed residential property means property zoned for residential use upon which is constructed one or more dwelling units. This would include single-family or multi-family dwellings, condominiums and duplexes. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the statistical average horizontal impervious area of all residential units in the city. 
Exempt property means property which shall not be subject to a stormwater fee, which is limited to: 
(1)  Common areas within multi-family areas. 
(2)  Property, or portions of property, which is perpetually designated for conservation land uses or which, because of its environmentally sensitive character, cannot be developed under present environmental protection regulations. 
(3)  Publicly owned road and drainage right-of-way and all city-owned property. 
Undeveloped parcels means unimproved property zoned for uses other than for single-family residential purposes or property zoned for residential uses upon which no subdivision improvements have been constructed. 
Undeveloped single-family residential property means property improved and subdivided into single-family residential lots upon which no dwellings have been constructed. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 3, 9-26-01; Ord. No. O-19-02, § 2, 2-27-19)  
Sec. 102-124. - Stormwater fee; imposition and calculation of. 
(a)  Imposition. A stormwater fee is hereby imposed upon all property within the city unless otherwise exempted, for services and facilities provided by the stormwater management system. For purposes of imposing the stormwater fee, the city has obtained the services of a consulting engineer to develop the statistical rationale for providing just and equitable rates, fees, and charges for the facilities and services provided by the system. 
(b)  Application and classification. 
(1)  Developed residential property. Each dwelling unit shall be billed at a flat fee of one ERU per month. 
(2)  Undeveloped single-family residential property. Each undeveloped single-family lot shall be billed for one ERU multiplied by a correction factor of 0.67 to calculate the flat monthly rate. 
(3)  Undeveloped parcels. Each undeveloped parcel shall be billed at a rate determined by dividing the total land area of the properties, in square feet, by 11,154 which represents the square footage of a statistically average residential building site in the city, multiplied by a correction factor of 0.67 to arrive at the number of ERUs for that parcel. 
(4)  Developed nonresidential property. Each parcel of developed nonresidential property shall be billed at a rate determined by dividing the total impervious area of the parcel by the calculated impervious surface of an ERU to arrive at the number of ERUs for that parcel. 
(5)  Exempt property. Exempt property shall not be subject to a stormwater fee. 
(c)  Within the guidelines and procedures established by administrative regulations duly promulgated by the utility, a landowner may apply for a Stormwater Utility Fee Credit for constructed stormwater management systems pursuant to St. John's River Water Management District requirements in accordance by resolution adopted by city council. When there is existence of atypical physical features to the site, or alternative stormwater treatment, the city shall reasonably determine said credit based upon the equitable pro-rata decrease in the total services required of the utility in providing the systemic benefits of stormwater management to the property. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 4, 9-26-01; Ord. No. O-04-15, § 1, 7-28-04; Ord. No. O-19-02, § 2, 2-27-19)  
Sec. 102-125. - Establishment of fee. 
There is hereby established as the fee for one equivalent residential unit (ERU) the sum of $10.00 for each month. Said fee shall continue in effect unless and until the city council, by resolution passed by supermajority, establishes a different rate for any fiscal period following the 2018-2019 fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 5, 9-26-01; Ord. No. O-19-02, § 2, 2-27-19)  
Sec. 102-126. - Collection. 
(a)  Fees for the Sebastian Stormwater Utility levied pursuant to the Code shall constitute a non-ad valorem assessment, as set forth in Chapter 197, Florida Statutes, and shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method of assessing, billing and collecting of the same. The stormwater fee is to be henceforth assessed annually to the owner of each parcel which is subject to the stormwater fee. The assessment roll prepared on electronic medium by Camp, Dresser & McKee, September 15, 2001, from records provided by the property appraiser of Indian River County, Florida, and as modified annually hereafter, is hereby adopted for this purpose. The period for which the fee is charged shall coincide with the city's fiscal year. 
(b)  The city may utilize any other method available under the law to collect the stormwater utility fee provided herein, including placement of a lien against the subject property and any real or personal property of landowner, effective as of October 1 of each fiscal period and charged until the same has been paid in full, and said lien thereby created shall be co-equal with the lien of all state, county, district and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims, until paid and shall be enforceable in accordance with all available provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 6, 9-26-01)  
Sec. 102-127. - Stormwater utility trust fund; use of funds. 
(a)  There shall be established a Sebastian Stormwater Utility Fund for the deposit of all fees collected pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The stormwater utility fund shall be used exclusively to provide funding for the stormwater management program. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 7, 9-26-01; Ord. No. O-04-15, § 2, 7-28-04; Ord. No. O-05-16, § 1, 8-24-05)  
Sec. 102-128. - Appeal of fee amount; procedure. 
(a)  After having paid in full all utility fees invoiced against his property, any property owner shall have the right to appeal either the utility fee charged, or a credits determination pursuant to section 102-124(c), with respect to his property as follows: 
(1)  Within 30 days of either the initial mailing of the utility fee bill, or the written determination as to credits, whichever date is relevant, the property owner shall have the right to appeal to the city council. The city council shall have 30 days from the receipt of the notice of appeal within which to hold a hearing on the appeal and thereafter shall render a determination. 
(2)  If the appellant prevails and it is decided a refund is due, the refund amount shall be in accordance with the determination on appeal but shall not include any interest on the refunded fee. 
(3)  Upon filing of a proper petition within 30 days of the determination of city council, said determination may be reviewed in the circuit court by writ of certiorari upon the record made before the city council. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions set forth above, any property owner shall have until December 1st, to request a review by the city manager of the utility fee bill for the current fiscal year for claims of errors in classification or calculation. As a condition of requesting such review, the property owner must pay the fees due. The city manager may deny the appeal or modify the amount of the fee. The owner may appeal the city manager's determination to city council within 30 days and thereafter follow the procedures set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (3) above. Any claims relating to a credits determination pursuant to section 102-124(c) must be appealed in accordance with the standard procedure set forth above. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 8, 9-26-01; Ord. No. O-19-02, § 2, 2-27-19)  
Sec. 102-129. - Additional regulations. 
The city manager may promulgate reasonable regulations concerning the operation of the Sebastian Stormwater Utility, with said regulations subject to modification or nullification by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-01-16, § 9, 9-26-01)  
ARTICLE VI. - URBAN STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 102-130. - Title and general provisions. 
This article shall be known as the "Urban Stormwater Quality Management and Discharge Control Ordinance" of the City of Sebastian and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-131. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-132. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Best Management Practices. Activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best Management Practices include but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwater; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-stormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. The City of Sebastian's Stormwater Master Plan or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), as discussed further under section 102-141 herein, provides for specific requirements. 
(b)  City. The City of Sebastian. 
(1)  The duly appointed City Manager of the City of Sebastian, or designee. 
(c)  Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(d)  Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
(e)  Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(f)  Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 102-138 of this chapter. 
(g)  Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
(h)  Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14). 
(i)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permits. A permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis. 
(j)  Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(k)  Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
(l)  Pollution. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
(m)  Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
(n)  Storm drain system. Publicly-owned facilities operated by the city by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the city and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2. 
(o)  Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rain storm events. 
(p)  Waters of the United States. Surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2., including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-133. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within the City of Sebastian including any amendments or revisions thereto. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-134. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager or the city manager's designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated in writing to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-135. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-136. - Regulatory consistency. 
This article shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-137. - Ultimate responsibility of discharger. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sebastian, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 102-138. - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(a)  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the U.S. when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or this ordinance: potable water line flushing; uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges from potable water sources; landscape irrigation and lawn watering; diverted stream flows; rising groundwater; groundwater infiltration to the storm drain system; uncontaminated foundation and footing drains; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; air conditioning condensation; uncontaminated nonindustrial roof drains; springs; individual residential and occasional non-commercial car washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; street wash waters; and flows from fire fighting. 
(b)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the FDEP under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the City of Sebastian for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(c)  With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the City of Sebastian may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system nor waters of the U.S. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-139. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-140. - Waste disposal prohibitions. 
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-141. - Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 102-142. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
(a)  Authorization to adopt and impose Best Management Practices. The city will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. Such requirement will be located in the Stormwater Master Plan/SWPPP. Where Best Management Practices requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal, State of Florida, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or water of the U.S., every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. 
The city manager will report to the city council annually on the status of implementation of BMP's, the pollutants of concern to be addressed the next year, and any new BMPs to be developed. BMP's developed under this program will be included in the City of Sebastian's Stormwater Master Plan/SWPPP. 
(b)  New development and redevelopment. The city may adopt requirements identifying appropriate Best Management Practices to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The city shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this article. 
(c)  Responsibility to implement Best Management Practices. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections (a) and (b), any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. shall implement Best Management Practices to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
Best Management Practices required by the city can be obtained from the public works department by requesting the Stormwater Master Plan or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan appropriate to a commercial or industrial activity. BMP's are broken into three categories: "high priority" which are required to be implemented, "medium priority" which are desirable to implement, and "low priority." 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-143. - Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of section 102-149 herein, the city manager may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-144. - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
(a)  The city manager may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this article to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this article. 
(b)  If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this article, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-145. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-146. - Requirement to remediate. 
Whenever the city manager finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., the city manager may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of sections 102-151 through 102-154 below. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-147. - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The city manager may require by written notice of requirement that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the U.S., to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the City of Sebastian as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-148. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city's public works department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city's public works department within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION AND MONITORING 
 
Sec. 102-149. - Authority to inspect. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the city manager has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the city manager may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-150. - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
During any inspection as provided herein, the city manager may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 102-151. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city manager finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the city manager may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(a)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(b)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(c)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(d)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and 
the  restoration of any affected property; and 
(e)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(f)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the city or a contractor designated by the city manager and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to section 102-153 below. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-152. - Appeal. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 102-155 below, any person receiving a notice of violation under section 102-151 above may appeal the determination of the city manager to the city council. The notice of appeal must be received by the city manager within five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city council shall take place within 30 days from the date of city's receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-153. - Abatement by city. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under section 102-152, then the city or a contractor designated by the city manager shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-154. - Charging cost of abatement/liens. 
Within 30 days after abatement of the nuisance by city, the city manager shall notify the property owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk within 15 days. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final. 
If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the city council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under this section, the charges shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-155. - Urgency abatement. 
The city manager is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this article that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the city manager, the City of Sebastian is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the City of Sebastian shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-156. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. A violation of or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-157. - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the city manager may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-158. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Sec. 102-159. - Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter, may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this article shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Ord. No. O-13-11, § 1, 10-23-13)  
Chapter 106 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; license taxes on buses and bus companies, trucks and trucking companies, § 30-52; traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 106-1—106-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-25, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2000, deleted former Art. II, §§ 106-26—106-31 and §§ 106-51—106-58, which pertained to taxicab operation and permits, and derived from the 1980 Code, §§ 29-16—29-21 and §§ 29-43—29-50, respectively. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 106-26—106-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Secs. 106-51—106-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLES OPERATING ON FIXED ROUTE 
 
Sec. 106-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fixed route operator means any person that holds all required and necessary permits to engage in the business of operating a vehicle over the public streets and alleys of the city on a fixed, established route, such as a bus or community coach van. 
(Code 1980, § 29-33; Ord. No. O-00-25, § 2, 12-6-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 106-77. - Loading zone application. 
Any fixed route operator may apply in writing to the city manager for the establishment of a loading zone on the public streets. Such written application shall designate the exact spot for such loading zone and, if and when approved by the city manager, the city shall mark, set apart and designate each of the spots as a loading zone for the use and benefit of a fixed route operator. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such loading zone except a fixed route operator. 
(Code 1980, § 29-34; Ord. No. O-00-25, § 3, 12-6-2000) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98.  
Sec. 106-78. - Permit to construct benches; restrictions. 
Any fixed route operator may apply in writing to the city manager for a permit to erect, construct and maintain benches or seating for the use of the general public at any loading zone established under this division. Such permit shall state the kind and type of seating and shall indicate the spot on the public street right-of-way where the bench or seating shall be placed and shall state any advertising, signs or painting to be placed thereon or affixed thereto. If and when such application is approved by the city council, the city manager shall issue a permit for the specific public seating, painting and advertising and the permit shall not be changed or altered except by written amendment of the permit by the city manager. Such seating shall be placed at such a location as will, in the discretion of the city council, constitute a minimum of interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the public streets. 
(Code 1980, § 29-35; Ord. No. O-00-25, § 4, 12-6-2000) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
Sec. 106-79. - Revocation of permit; removal of facility. 
The city council may, after 30 days' notice in writing delivered by mail to any fixed route operator, evoke, cancel and terminate any permit issued pursuant to this division and immediately upon such revocation, any fixed route operator shall remove any facility placed on the public streets pursuant to such permit. Should any fixed route operator fail to remove such facility, then the city manager shall remove and destroy the facility. Any permit for construction of benches granted pursuant to this division shall become and be deemed a part of the loading zone permit of the fixed route operator, and upon revocation or suspension of the loading zone permit, then any permits for construction of benches shall likewise be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1980, § 29-36; Ord. No. O-00-25, § 5, 12-6-2000)  
Chapter 109 - WATER AND WASTEWATER UTILITY  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 109-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Water and Wastewater Utility Rate Ordinance" or the "Rate Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 1, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-2. - Council findings. 
In adopting this chapter and the rates, fees and charges incorporated herein, the city council hereby makes and expresses the following findings, purposes and intent: 
(1)  Pursuant to section 102-4, the city council shall have the duty, right, power and authority to establish, adopt and amend, from time to time, by resolution a water system rate schedule which shall apply to each customer of the city's water system. 
(2)  Pursuant to section 102-4, the city council shall have the duty, right, power and authority to establish, adopt and amend, from time to time, by resolution a wastewater system rate schedule which shall apply to each customer of the city's water system. 
(3)  Pursuant to F.S. 108.301, the city council may establish just and equitable rates or charges to be paid to the city for the use of the utility by each person, firm or corporation whose premises is served. 
(4)  The rates established herein provide funding for water and sewer utility services which promote the health, safety and general welfare of its customers and is, therefore, beneficial to the ratepayers of the water and wastewater system. 
(5)  The city is in the process of issuing certain revenue bonds to, among other things, purchase the Sebastian Highlands Water and Wastewater System from General Development Utilities (GDU). 
(6)  In order to provide payment for the revenue bonds, the city must enact certain rates, fees and charges, and meet certain covenants as required by the bond resolution which authorized the issuance of such bonds. 
(7)  The city's engineers have performed certain studies in order to calculate just, fair and equitable rates, fees and charges. 
(8)  The city is authorized to adopt water and wastewater rates, fees and charges pursuant to F.S. chs. 166 and 180. 
(9)  The city has provided the required public notices and held the necessary public hearing(s) in order to adopt said water and wastewater rates, fees and charges. 
(10)  The findings, conclusions, testimony and results of the public briefing document, studies and comments of the city's consultants and engineers are hereby incorporated into these findings and this chapter. 
(11)  It is the policy and objective of the city council to ensure that rates, fees, and charges levied to pay for the cost of the acquisition, additions and expansions are just and reasonable and cover the true cost of said acquisitions, additions and expansions. 
(12)  It is just and reasonable that the cost of the system should be borne by those existing and new users on a fair share basis in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 2, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-3. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined to mean: 
Applicant means the owner of real property or the person or legal entity which has the legal right to utilize real property by means of any form of ownership which real property the applicant desires to be served by water service or wastewater service. The terms "applicant", "developer" and "property owner" are synonymous and may be used interchangeably herein. 
Application means a written request from an applicant requesting that, pursuant to a utility agreement, specific water service and/or wastewater service be provided to and for certain real property. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen in the biochemical oxidation of the organic matter in wastewater under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. The BOD shall be determined in accordance with procedures set forth in the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
City means the City of Sebastian, Indian River County, Florida, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida 
Collection facilities means the lines, pipes and appurtenance equipment and all other related equipment of the facility, of whatever type or nature, used to collect sewage from sewer facilities, buildings, structures or facilities and to transmit it to wastewater transmission facilities. 
Council means the city council of the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
Cross connection means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected directly or indirectly with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or any other device, facility or system which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage, waste material or other material or substance of unknown or potentially unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, changeable devices or other devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are deemed to constitute cross connections. 
Customer means any person, firm or corporation who has entered into an agreement to receive water or wastewater service from the city and who is liable for the payment of that water and wastewater service. 
Customer installations means all water and wastewater facilities which ordinarily and customarily exist on the consumers' side of the point of delivery, such as, by way of example and not limitation, curb stops and lateral connections. 
Distribution facilities means the lines, pipes, meters and appurtenant equipment and any other related equipment or facility, or whatever type or nature, used to distribute water from the utility to the customer for usage. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms in a residential or commercial building which are used or intended for use as a living facility for no more than one family and generally including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A hotel or motel room is not considered as a dwelling unit. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent disposal facilities means those wastewater facilities necessary to detain, transmit, store and dispose of wastewater previously treated at treatment facilities. 
Equivalent residential unit or ERU means a factor used to convert a given average daily flow (ADF) to the equivalent number of residential connections. For this purpose the ADF of one (1) ERU is deemed to be two hundred (200) gallons per day (GPD) for wastewater service and two hundred fifty (250) GPD for water service. The number of ERUs contained for a given ADF is initially determined hereunder by dividing that ADF by two hundred (200) GPD for wastewater or two hundred fifty (250) GPD for water. ERUs shall be calculated as a whole number. The rounding of ERUs to whole numbers shall be calculated as follows: 0.5 and greater shall be rounded up to the next whole number, and 0.49 and less shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 
FDEP means the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, or its successor agency. 
Gallons per day or GPD means gallons per day on an annual average basis. 
Hazardous waste means any substance, waste or product that is potentially damaging to environmental health, including toxicity, ignitability, corrosivity, chemical reactivity, radioactivity, infectious characteristics or any other reason. 
Mains refers to a pipe, conduit or other facilities installed to convey water service to individual service lines or to other mains, or in the case of sewer lines, to convey sewer service from individual service lines to other mains. 
Master meter means a single meter serving a multi-family residential or a multi-unit commercial facility. This term includes, but is not limited to, master meters serving condominiums, apartments, mobile home parks, hotels, motels, travel trailer parks, shopping centers and office buildings. 
Meter means a device used to measure water delivered to "point of delivery" by the city. 
Point of delivery means the designated point at which the applicant's property is connected to the water facilities or wastewater facilities. 
Private fire protection means the existence of separate fire connections, standpipes with hose attachments and automatic fire sprinkler systems which serve a customer. 
Property means the real property owned or controlled by an applicant for which water service capacity allocation, wastewater service capacity allocation, or both, is requested. 
Reclaimed water means water, treated wastewater or sewer effluent that has been appropriately treated and which, as a result of the treatment of wastes, is suitable and usable for direct beneficial uses or a controlled use by and for public agricultural, commercial, residential or industrial developments, projects or purposes including, but not limited to, irrigation projects or purposes including, but not limited to, irrigation purposes in green areas of developments or other appropriate uses. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily return wastewater or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed of solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Service lines means the pipes of the city which are connected from the mains to the "point of delivery". 
Service rates or rates means the city's applicable schedule of rates and charges for water and wastewater services, including, by way of illustration and not limitation, connection fees, meter set fees and any and all other fees or charges which may be in effect from time to time adopted by the city. The schedule of service rates shall be of general and uniform application within the city-wide water and wastewater utility system. 
Sewer or wastewater means a combination of any type of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments any and all other customers facilities, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present, but does not mean or include hazardous or toxic wastes. 
System means the City of Sebastian Water and Wastewater System. 
Transmission lines means those lines and appurtenance facilities used to either transmit wastewater from the collection system to the wastewater treatment plant or transmit treated wastewater to a final effluent disposal site or transmit water from the water treatment plant to the distribution system. Transmission lines are generally six (6) inches or greater in size and serve or are intended to serve more than one (1) parcel property. 
Utility agreement means a written agreement between the city and a property owner which establishes the terms and conditions pursuant to which the city will provide water and/or wastewater service. 
Utility agreement means a written agreement between the city and a property owner which establishes the terms and conditions pursuant to which the city will provide water and/or wastewater service. 
Utility facilities, facilities or installations means by way of illustration and not limitation, all equipment, fixtures, pumps, lines, mains, manholes, lift stations, pumping stations, laterals, service connections and any and all appurtenances thereto together with all real property, easements and rights-of-way necessary to provide water and wastewater service to property whether located on-site or off-site. 
Wastewater capital charge (sewer impact fee) means a fee or charge paid to the city by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining wastewater service capacity. Capital charges are utilized for the acquisition, improvements, expansion and construction of facilities deemed necessary by the city to furnish wastewater service capacity and related service to the property and to adequately fund capital improvements in the system. The term specifically does not include the costs of collection facilities, as defined previously; or customer installations, the cost for which shall be fully borne by the applicant. 
Wastewater service capacity means the rate of wastewater flow on an average daily basis measured in gallons per day, which can be treated and disposed of according to a wastewater facilities design. 
Water capital charge (water impact fee) means a fee or charge paid to the city by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining water service capacity. Capital charges are utilized for the acquisition, improvement, expansion and construction of facilities deemed necessary by the city to furnish water service capacity and related services to property and to adequately fund capital improvements in and for the system. The term specifically does not include distribution facilities or customer installations, the cost of which shall be fully borne by the applicant. 
Water service capacity means the amount of water which can be pumped, treated, transmitted and distributed, on an average daily basis, where such amount is measured in gallons per day and includes fire flows. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 3, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-4. - General terms and conditions regarding water and wastewater service. 
(a)  Signed application required. Water and wastewater service capacity may be furnished only after a signed application or agreement and payment of the applicable water and wastewater capital charges (impact fees) are accepted by the city. The conditions of such application or agreement are binding upon the customer as well as upon the city. A copy of the application or agreement for water and wastewater service accepted by the city will be furnished to the applicant on request. The applicant shall furnish to the city the correct name and street address or lot and block number at which water and wastewater service is to be rendered. 
(b)  Withholding service. The city may withhold or discontinue water and/or wastewater service rendered under application made by any member or agent of a household, organization or business unless all prior indebtedness to the city of such household, organization or business for water and wastewater service has been settled in full in accordance with city policy. Service may also be discontinued for any violation made by the customer of any rule or regulation set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Limitation of use. Water and wastewater service purchased from the city shall be used by the customer only for the purposes specified in the application for water and wastewater service. 
(d)  Continuity of service. The city will, at all times, use reasonable diligence to provide continuous water and wastewater service and, having used reasonable diligence, shall not be liable to the customer for failure or interruption of continuous water and wastewater service. The city shall not be liable for any act or omission caused directly or indirectly by strikes, labor trouble, accidents, litigation, breakdowns, shutdowns for emergency repairs or adjustments, acts of sabotage, enemies of the United States, Wars, United States, State, municipal or other governmental interferences, acts of God or other causes beyond its control. 
(e)  Type and maintenance. The customer's pipes, apparatus and equipment shall be selected, installed, used and maintained in accordance with standard practice and shall conform with the rules and regulations of the city. The city shall not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the customer's pipes and facilities. The customer expressly agrees not to utilize any appliance or device which is not properly constructed, controlled and protected, or which may adversely affect water or wastewater service provided by the city. The city reserves the right to discontinue or withhold water and wastewater service to such apparatus or device. 
(f)  Change of customer's installation. No changes or increases in the customer's installation, which will materially affect the proper operation of the pipes, mains or stations of the city, shall be made without written consent of the city. The customer shall be liable for any change resulting from a violation of this rule. 
(g)  Protection of city's property. The customer shall exercise reasonable diligence to protect the city's property on the customer's premises and shall knowingly permit no one, but the city's agent or persons authorized by law, to have access to the city's pipes and appurtenances. In the event of any loss or damage to property of the city caused by or arising out of carelessness, neglect or misuse by the customer, the cost of making good such loss or repairing such damage shall be paid by the customer. 
(h)  Access to premises. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing, maintaining, inspecting or removing the city's property or the performance under or termination of the city's agreement with the customer and under such performance shall not be liable for trespass. 
(i)  Billing period. Bills for water and wastewater service will be rendered monthly as stated in the rate schedule and shall become due when rendered and be considered as received by the customer when delivered or mailed to the water and/or wastewater service address or some other place mutually agreed upon. Non-receipt of bills by the customer shall not release or diminish the obligation of the customer with respect to payment thereof. 
(j)  Delinquent bills. Bills are due when rendered and become delinquent if not paid within twenty (20) days after the bill has been mailed or presented to the customer for payment. Water and wastewater service may then be discontinued only after a written notice has been mailed or presented within five (5) working days to the customer of the delinquency in payment. Water and wastewater service shall be restored only after the city has received payment for all past-due bills and reconnect charges from the customer. There shall be no liability of any kind against the city for the discontinuance of water and wastewater service to a customer for that customer's failure to pay the bills on time. Partial payment of a bill of the water and wastewater service rendered will not be accepted by the city, except by the city's agreement thereof. 
(k)  Payment of water and wastewater service bills concurrently. When both water and wastewater service are provided by the city, payment of any wastewater service bill rendered by the city to a customer shall not be accepted by the city without the simultaneous or concurrent payment of any water service bill rendered by the city. The city may discontinue both water service and wastewater service to the customer's premises for non-payment of the wastewater service bill or water service bill or if payment is not made concurrently. The city shall not re-establish or reconnect wastewater service and/or water service until such time as all wastewater and water service bills and all charges are paid. 
(l)  Tax clause. Any tax which may be levied upon the city's wastewater or water system shall not be incorporated into the rate for wastewater or water service but shall be shown as a separate item on the city's bills to its customers receiving such service. 
(m)  Change of occupancy. When a change of occupancy takes place on any premises supplied by the city with water and wastewater service, written notice thereof shall be given at the office of the city not less than three (3) days prior to the date of change by the outgoing customer. The outgoing customer shall be held responsible for all water and wastewater service rendered on such premises until such written notice is so received by the city and the city has had reasonable time to discontinue the water and wastewater service. However, if such written notice has been received, the application of such a succeeding occupant for water and wastewater service will automatically terminate the prior account. The customer's deposit may be transferred from one (1) service location to another, if both locations are supplied water and wastewater service by the city. The customer's deposit may not be transferred from one (1) name to another. Notwithstanding the above, the city will accept telephone orders, for the convenience of its customers, to discontinue or transfer water and wastewater service from one service address to another, and will use all reasonable diligence in the execution thereof. However, oral orders or advice shall not be deemed binding or be, considered formal notification to the city. 
(n)  Unauthorized connections. Connections to the city's water and wastewater system for any purpose whatsoever are made only by employees of the city. Any unauthorized connections to the customer's water or wastewater service shall be subject to immediate discontinuance without notice. Water and wastewater service shall not be restored until such unauthorized connections have been removed and until settlement is made in full to the city for all water and wastewater service estimated by the city to have been used by reason of such unauthorized connection. 
(o)  Adjustment of bills. When a customer has been overcharged or undercharged as a result of incorrect application of the rate schedule, incorrect reading of a water meter or other similar reason, the amount may be credited or billed to the customer in accordance with the policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 4, 12-1-93)  
Secs. 109-5—109-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CHARGES AND DEPOSITS 
 
Sec. 109-25. - Water meter installation charge. 
(a)  Each applicant shall be charged for the meter, meter service box and for installation of the water meter as follows: 
Meter Size 	Service Fee 
5/8 x ¾ inch 	$ 130.00 
1 inch 	200.00 
1½ inch 	500.00 
2 inch 	630.00 
3 inch to 8 inch 	Actual Cost plus overhead 
(minimum of $630.00) 
 
(b)  Service charges for connections requiring installation of a meter greater than two (2) inches will be based on the actual cost of materials, labor and overhead. A customer may elect to purchase his own meter if the required meter's size exceeds two (2) inches; provided, however, that such meter must be approved by the city prior to installation. 
(3)  The above charges assume only the installation of the meter and does not include the costs associated with the installation of a service and tapping into the water main. To the extent a service installation is required in order to provide the customer utility service, the cost of such installation, including the installation of the water meter will be based on the actual cost of installation, regardless of meter size. In no event will such cost be less than the meter installation charges shown above. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 5, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-26. - Meter testing. 
Meter testing shall be done at the customer's request, and in accordance with the following guidelines and schedules: 
(1)  Meter test request: If any customer requests a test of the water meter, the city will require a deposit to defray the cost of testing; such deposit shall not exceed the following schedule of fees: 
Meter Size 	Service Deposit 
5/8 x ¾ inch 	$ 20.00 
1 inch 	20.00 
1½ inch and over 	Actual Cost plus overhead 
 
(2)  The fee is retained by the city only if the test fee shows that the meter is registering with the acceptable accuracy limits as established by the city. If the meter is determined by the city to be registering outside of the acceptable accuracy limits, the meter test service fee will be refunded and an adjustment made to the bill for the proper amount of water consumption. 
(c)  For tests of meters equal to or greater than two (2) inches, the test will be based on actual costs incurred as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 6, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-27. - Customer deposits. 
(a)  Establishment of credit. Before rendering water or wastewater service, the city may require an applicant for service to satisfactorily establish credit, but such establishment of credit shall not relieve the customer from complying with the city's rules for prompt payment. Credit will be deemed so established if: 
(1)  The applicant for service furnishes a satisfactory guarantor to secure payment of bills for service requested; 
(2)  The applicant pays a cash deposit; 
(3)  The applicant for service furnishes an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or a surety bond. 
(b)  Amount of deposit. The amount of initial deposit shall be the following according to customer class and meter size: 
Customer Class 	Customer Deposits 
Meter Size 	Water 	Wastewater 
Residential: 		
  5/8 x ¾ inch 	$ 50.00 	$ 60.00 
 1 inch 	130.00 	150.00 
 1½ inch 	270.00 	300.00 
 2 inch 	485.00 	500.00 
Commercial and Multi-Family: 		
  5/8 x ¾ inch 	50.00 	65.00 
 1 inch 	150.00 	160.00 
 1½ inch 	300.00 	320.00 
 2 inch 	500.00 	510.00 
 3 inch 	750.00 	1,020.00 
 4 inch 	1,200.00 	1,600.00 
 6 inch 	2,400.00 	3,200.00 
Hydrant Meter 	345.00 	
 
(c)  Additional deposit. The city may require a new deposit, where previously waived or returned, or an additional deposit in order to secure payment of current bills provided. The city shall provide the customer with reasonable written notice of not less than thirty (30) days where such request or notice is separate and apart from any bill for service. The total amount of the required water deposit shall not exceed an amount equal to the average actual charge for water service for two (2) monthly billing periods for the 12-month period immediately prior to the date of notice. The total amount of the required wastewater deposit shall not exceed an amount equal to the average actual charge for wastewater service for two (2) monthly billing periods for the 12-month period immediately prior to the date of notice. In the event the customer has had service less than twelve (12) months, the city shall base its new or additional deposit upon the average actual monthly billing available. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 7, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-28. - Connection charge. 
(a)  There shall be a charge for city service connections and for transferring of city accounts from the name of one (1) person to the name of another, which shall be paid before the service connection is made or accounts changed; provided, however, that there shall be no service connection charge when the original service connection is made for which a meter installation and/or service installation fee is paid. The charge for the transfer of service to a new customer account at a previously served location or reconnection of service subsequent to a customer requested disconnection shall be eighteen dollars ($18.00) during normal working hours and twenty-five ($25.00) after normal working hours. 
(b)  When service is discontinued or ordered discontinued because of nonpayment of amounts due, the reconnection fee shall be based on the actual costs incurred by the city, but shall not be less than eighteen dollars ($18.00) during normal working hours and twenty-five ($25.00) after normal working hours. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 8, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-29. - Water and wastewater capital charges; adoption; calculating application: and time of payment. 
(a)  Adoption. The city hereby adopts and establishes pursuant to general law, a water capital charge and a wastewater capital charge, the purpose of which will be to finance capital expenditures and the payment of city indebtedness associated with the expansion of the city's water supply, treatment and transmission system and the wastewater transmission, treatment and effluent disposal system. The water capital charge imposed by the city shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00) per ERU, and the wastewater capital charge shall be one thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($1,650.00) per ERU. 
(b)  Applicability. Except for: 
(1)  Those customers who have previously paid plant capacity charges to the previous owner of the utility and having previously been connected to the system; and 
(2)  Those city retail customers who connect into the Indian River County Wastewater System, the impact fees set forth herein shall be paid by those new customers who (i) connect to said system, (ii) request service from the city, or (iii) request an increase in water and/or wastewater service capacity on or after the date the city acquires the system from GDU. The city may exempt any customer from the payment of all or a portion of the water and wastewater capital charges to the extent that the city accepts a permanent contribution-in-aid-of-construction related to the water supply, treatment or transmission facilities or the wastewater transmission, treatment or effluent disposal facilities having a value of not less than the portion of the water or wastewater capital charges being exempted. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, those city retail customers whose wastewater service capacity is provided via the Indian River County Wastewater System shall pay a wastewater capital charge of two thousand five hundred fifty-one dollars ($2,551.00) per ERU. Except for a different value for the wastewater capital charge, all other provisions of this section, shall apply to said retail customers. 
(c)  Time of payment. Beginning on the date the city acquires the system from GDU, all water and wastewater capital charges shall be paid prior to connection of a structure or structures to be served by the city, or such other time as may be specifically provided by city resolution, ordinance, agreement or permit; provided, however, that the city may permit installment payments of any water or wastewater capital charges upon such tests and conditions as the city deems appropriate. 
(d)  Determination of equivalent residential unit factors for water and wastewater services. 
(1)  For purposes of calculating and imposing the wastewater capital charge provided for in section 109-4, the ERU factor for any particular connections shall be calculated and imposed in the manner provided as follows: 
Establishment 	Unit 	ERU 
Factor 
Residential 		
 Single family home 	per unit 	1.000 
 Duplex (1 or 2 bedrooms) 	per unit 	0.833 
 Duplex (3 or more bedrooms) 	per unit 	1.000 
 Multi-family (1 or 2 bedrooms) 	per unit 	0.833 
 Multi-family (3 or more bedrooms) 	per unit 	1.000 
 Mobile home (1 or 2 bedrooms) 	per unit 	0.667 
 Mobile home (3 or more bedrooms 	per unit 	0.833 
		
Commercial 		
 Auditorium/meeting rooms 	per seat 	0.019 
 Barber/beauty shop 	per opr. sta. 	0.340 
		
Food Service 		
 Restaurant/cafeteria 	per seat 	0.113 
 Restaurant (24-hours) 	per seat 	0.189 
 Restaurant (fast food) 	per seat 	0.057 
 Bar/cocktail lounge 	per seat 	0.075 
		
Hotel/Motel 		
 not including food service banquet & meeting rooms, & guest laundry 	per room 	1.000 
		
Motel (see Hotel) 		
		
Office Building 		
 not including food service and retail space 	per 100 sq. ft. 	0.038 
		
Service Station 	per bay 	1.132 
 Add 	per wash bay 	3.663 
 Add 	per toilet 	1.132 
		
Theater 	per seat 	0.012 
Dinner Theater 	per seat 	0.075 
		
Trailer Park (overnight) 	per space 	0.377 
		
Dentist Office 	per dentist 	0.943 
	per wet chair 	0.755 
Doctor Office 	per doctor 	0.943 
		
Church 	per seat 	0.011 
		
Schools 		
 Middle & high 	per student 	0.075 
 Elementary, day care & nursery 	per student 	0.028 
 Boarding 	per student 	0.472 
		
Laundry 		
 Self-service 	per machine 	1.510 
		
Retail Store /w Self Service 		
 Gas pumps 	per restroom 	1.500 
 (Add remaining fixture units) 		
 (Without pumps use fixture units) 		
		
Automotive Repair & Maintenance 		
 Stores 	per bay 	0.500 
 
(2)  One equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall, for purposes of this section, have an assigned value of 1.00. For wastewater service capacity, one (1) ERU is hereby established and determined to be equal to a flow of two hundred (200) gallons per day, average annual basis (200 GPD), or such other value as may be later approved or determined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(3)  For water service capacity, one (1) ERU is hereby established and determined to be equal to a flow of two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day, average annual basis (250 GPD). 
(4)  The "total equivalent residential unit value" for an establishment shall be calculated by multiplying the ERU factor listed above by the number of units, and shall be rounded up to the nearest 0.5 ERU factor. 
(5)  For all establishments not listed above, the total wastewater equivalent residential unit (ERU) value for wastewater service capacity shall be determined by multiplying the number of fixture units, as published in the Standard Plumbing Code, by thirty (30), and then dividing that numerator by two hundred (200). For example: 
Total Wastewater ERU Value 	= 	Number of Fixture Units × 30 
		200 GPD/ERU 
 
The wastewater capital charge shall be determined by using the following formula: 
Total ERU Value x $ 1,650.00 = wastewater capital charge 
(6)  For all establishments not listed above, the total water equivalent residential unit (ERU) value for water service capacity shall be determined by multiplying the number fixture units, as published in the Standard Plumbing Code, by thirty (30), and then dividing that numerator by two-hundred (250). For example: 
Total ERU Value 	= 	Number of Fixture Units × 30 
		250 GPD/ERU 
 
The water capital charge shall be determined by using the following formula: 
Total ERU Value x $ 1,100 = water capital charge 
(7)  The above ERU Schedule applies to establishments being connected to the City of Sebastian Water and Wastewater System. 
(e)  Capital improvement funds; establishment; expenditure guidelines; application and pledge to revenue bonds. 
(1)  The water capital charges collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited into a fund called the "Sebastian Water System Capital Improvement Fund" and the wastewater capital charges shall likewise be deposited into a fund called the "Sebastian Wastewater System Capital Improvement Fund". The water capital charges so deposited shall be used only for the acquisition of the city's water system and all components thereof and additions thereto, and the construction and acquisition of additions and extensions to the city's water system and all components thereof including raw water supply facilities, transmission facilities, mains, ground storage facilities, new pumping facilities, water treatment plants and distribution facilities in order to provide additional water treatment capacity or water service capacity to those new customers who connect to the city's water system. The wastewater capital charges so deposited in the above-mentioned fund shall be used only for the acquisition of the city's wastewater system and all components thereof and additions thereto, and the construction and acquisition of additions and extensions to the city's wastewater system and all components thereof, including collection facilities, transmission facilities, treatment facilities and effluent disposal facilities, in order to provide additional sewage treatment capacity, effluent disposal capacity or wastewater service capacity to those new customers who connect to the city's wastewater system. 
(2)  The city may by resolution provide for the application of some or all of the water and/or wastewater capital charges to the payment or security for the payment of revenue bonds issued in whole or in part for the purpose set out in subsection (e)(1) hereof, provided that the amount of water and/or wastewater capital charges applied to the payment of such bonds shall not exceed the amount of bond proceeds actually expended for such purpose with interest at the average rate borne by said bonds. Such application or pledge may be made directly in the proceedings authorizing such bonds or in an agreement with an insurer of bonds to assure such insurer of additional security therefor. 
(f)  Application; allocation of water and/or wastewater service capacity. No water and/or wastewater service capacity shall be sold pursuant to the water and/or wastewater permit, nor shall any such permit be issued until application therefore is received by the city. The city may require all information on said application that it deems reasonable and necessary, and may reject applications it determines are incomplete. Any application for a water and/or wastewater permit shall contain a legal description of the land constituting the service area for which the said permit is to be issued. The legal description shall include only those lands owned by the applicant for which the water and/or wastewater permit is to serve. If any such person described hereinabove fails to apply for and purchase water and/or wastewater service capacity under these rules, the city may consider said failure in determining whether or not to grant or deny any development or construction permit or approval or rezoning application filed by said person. The city shall, by separate ordinance, establish rules for the allocation of water and/or wastewater service capacity, and may, by resolution, establish a fee for application review payable by applicants. 
(g)  Annual rate indexing adjustment. The city hereby adopts an annual automatic rate increase to all capital charges set forth herein and which shall be applied to such charges which are in effect immediately prior to the effective date of each such annual increase. The purpose of such annual rate indexing is to provide annual rate adjustments commensurate with the escalation of utility operating expenditures and inflation. The annual rate index shall be the greater of either the Consumer Price Index (CPI) factor or a minimum of 3.0 percent per year for the fiscal years, beginning October 1, 1994 through and including October 1, 1997, and equivalent to the CPI factor thereafter. Each annual increase shall take effect and be imposed on bills rendered on and after October 1st of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 9, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-30. - Responsibility for collection, distribution and transmission costs. 
(a)  In addition to the water and wastewater capital charges, the applicant or customer shall either provide or pay the capital costs (including land costs) of the required capital improvement for: 
(1)  The collection of raw sewage within the boundaries of the property owned by the developer or customer to which the city intends to provide wastewater service capacity; 
(2)  The transmission of sewage from those boundaries to the city's collection and transmission facilities prior to connection to treatment facilities; and 
(3)  The transmission and distribution of water from the city's water treatment facilities to the applicant's or customer's property. 
(b)  The city shall allow the developer or customer to connect to the nearest feasible point as determined by the city. The city is considering the later adoption of a more detailed utility extension policy. Until such time as said policy is adopted, this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 10, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-31. - Returned check charge. 
There shall be a charge for each check returned to the city as a result of insufficient or non-collective funds. The fee shall amount to twenty dollars ($20.00) or five (5) percent of the face amount of each returned check, whichever is greater, for each returned check received by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 11, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-32. - Late payment fees. 
There shall be a charge incurred on those customers delinquent in the payment of the monthly utility bills. The fee shall amount to two dollars ($2.00), plus one and one-half (1.5) percent per month of the unpaid balance but not amounting to less than five dollars ($5.00). 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 12, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-33. - Miscellaneous service charges. 
The city hereby adopts the following miscellaneous water and wastewater system service charges. The amount to be charged to the customer for these specific services are as follows: 
(1)  Schedule. The city council hereby adopts the miscellaneous water and wastewater system service charges, rates and fees schedule set forth herein. 
Park place surcharge (1) 	$ 10.00 Per month 
 
1.  The ten dollars ($10.00) per month surcharge will be billed through August, 1999 in accordance with the July 11, 1989 Takeover Agreement. 
Issuance of duplicate bill 	$ 2.50 
Sewer Tap 	Cost plus overhead 
 
Meter Replacement 
  5/8 x ¾ inch 	$ 100.00 
 1 inch 	125.00 
 1½ inch 	300.00 
 2 inch & larger 	Cost plus overhead 
	
Water Removal 	
  5/8 x ¾ inch 	$ 30.00 
 1 inch 	30.00 
 1½ inch 	40.00 
	
Water Service Connection 	
  5/8 x ¾ inch meter 	$ 400.00 
 1 inch meter 	460.00 
 1½ inch meter 	810.00 
 Larger than 1½ inch meter 	Cost plus overhead 
	
Sewer Service Connection 	
 Residential 	$ 500.00 
 Commercial and other 	Cost plus overhead 
 Paved road cuts 	Cost plus overhead 
	200.00 minimum 
 Road jacking & boring 	Cost plus overhead 
 Grass Restoration 	Cost plus overhead 
 Unauthorized use of fire hydrant 	115.00 
 General service call 	Cost plus overhead 
 Damage repair 	100.00 plus 
	Cost plus overhead 
 Line location 	Cost plus overhead 
	
Engineering Services 	
 Site plan review—under 40 	Cost plus overhead 
 Units & without lift station 	50.00 minimum 
 Site plan review—over 40 	Cost plus overhead 
 Units or with lift station 	150.00 minimum 
	
Inspection Fee 	
 Water per connection 	$ 25.00 
 Sewer per connection 	25.00 
 Hydrant flow test 	60.00 
 Fire protection charge—per year 	170.00 
 
(2)  Annual rate indexing adjustment. The city hereby adopts an annual automatic rate increase to all rates, fees and charges set forth herein and set forth in sections 109-25—109-28, 109-31, and 109-32 of this chapter, and which shall be applied to such rates and charges which are in effect immediately prior to the effective date of each such annual increase. The purpose of such annual rate indexing is to provide annual rate adjustment commensurate with the escalation of utility operating expenditures and inflation. The annual rate index shall be the greater of either the Consumer Price Index (CPI) factor or a minimum of 3.0 percent per year for the fiscal years October 1, 1994 through October 1, 1997, and equivalent to the CPI index thereafter. Each annual increase shall take effect and be imposed on bills rendered on and after October 1st of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 13, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-34. - Establishment of a water system rate schedule. 
The city council shall establish and adopt by separate resolution a water system rate schedule. The city council may modify the water system rate schedule from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 14, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-35. - Establishment of a wastewater system rate schedule. 
The city council shall establish and adopt by separate resolution a wastewater system rate schedule. The city council may modify the wastewater system rate schedule from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 15, 12-1-93)  
Secs. 109-36—109-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OTHER PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 109-51. - Abnormal strength waste surcharge factor. 
For those customers which the city has agreed to serve and either the customer or the city has determined that the strength of the sewage is greater than three hundred (300) parts per million (ppm) of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), or chemical oxygen demand (COD) or total suspended solids (TSS), then an abnormal strength surcharge will be applied to the monthly bill. The greater concentration of either BOD or COD will be used in the surcharge calculation, but not both. The surcharge factor is calculated in the following manner: Concentration of BOD or COD in ppm less three hundred (300) ppm plus concentration of TSS in ppm less three hundred (300) ppm totaled and then divided by three hundred (300) ppm. The total monthly bill is calculated by the addition of one (1), plus the surcharge factor totaled and then multiplied by the normal bill. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 16, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-52. - Enforcement: violations: penalties. 
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements set forth therein, including violation of conditions of any wastewater disposal permit shall be prosecuted as provided by law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered as separate events. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from making such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations, including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction, or terminating service as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 17, 12-1-93)  
Sec. 109-53. - Liberal construction and interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered as a minimum requirement, liberally construed in the favor of the city, and deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state law. This chapter is cumulative and supplemental to existing city laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Where this chapter and the provisions contained herein conflict or overlap with any other city law, ordinance, rule or regulation, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-93-19, § 18, 12-1-93)  
Chapter 110 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Blockage or unreasonable obstruction of natural flow of water prohibited, § 26-2; flood hazard reduction standards for streams, § 46-58; parks and recreation areas, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90. 
  LDC reference— Regulation of waterways, 20A-5.10; storage of boats, 20A-5.16(B); bridges, culverts, 20A-17.1(B); seawalls, bulkheads, piers and docks, 20A-17.2(H). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 110-1. - Authority of city to regulate waterways. 
The city shall have the right to regulate the use of all waterways within the city limits and the conduct of all persons using such waterways, not in conflict with federal or state regulations. All ordinances of the city regulating the conduct of persons on land shall also apply to persons using waterways, insofar as such ordinances are applicable. 
(Code 1980, § 6-3)  
Sec. 110-2. - Penalty for violations of chapter. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 6-15)  
Sec. 110-3. - Refuse disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or throw, or cause to be dumped or thrown, any waste material, refuse, trash, petroleum product, or other debris into any waterway of the city. 
(b)  No one shall throw, drop or leave fish, garbage, trash, refuse, bait or other debris on any dock, wall, park, parkway or other premises within the city except in proper receptacles provided for such trash or debris. 
(Code 1980, § 6-11(a), (c)) 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 50; nuisances, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Littering, F.S. § 403.413.  
Secs. 110-4—110-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATERCRAFT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Vessel registration and safety, F.S. ch. 327. 
 
Sec. 110-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Boat or vessel means and includes every description of self-propelled watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, including all types of boats and all uses thereof. As used in this article, the terms "boat" and "vessel" are synonymous with the term "watercraft." 
Commercial boat means and includes any watercraft used, maintained or operated for profit. 
Commercial fishing boat means and includes any watercraft engaged in fishing whereby fish caught are sold for profit, either by the owner, operator or other person. 
Commercial marina means a licensed facility for docking watercraft and/or providing services to watercraft and the occupants thereof, including minor servicing and repair to boats while in or out of the water, and sale of fuel and supplies. Docks which are accessory to residential uses where no boat-related services are rendered shall not be considered marinas. 
Floating home means any waterborne structure designed for or used primarily as a dwelling which either does not have an operable motor on board at all times, or which is not capable of controlled steering for removal from the dock in the event of a fire or other emergency. 
Moor means to secure a vessel or boat by line, cable or other device to any boat slip, dock, pier, wharf, dockage space or docking facility in such manner as to assure the security of such vessel. Fueling stops are not included in this definition. 
Municipal docks means any bulkheads, walls, docks, approaches and appurtenances which the city owns or may construct from time to time on property owned or acquired for that purpose. 
Private watercraft means and includes any boat or vessel used for pleasure by the owner or others, where no charge is made for fishing or riding upon such vessel. 
Short-term berths means any boat slips, piers, docks, wharves or other dockage spaces or facilities designated at the municipal docks for the mooring of a boat for a period not to exceed 12 continuous hours. 
Sightseeing boat means and includes any watercraft engaged in transporting the public for hire on waterways within the city limits for sightseeing purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 6-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 110-32. - Compliance with chapter. 
For the protection of property owners, the general public, and owners and operators of watercraft in the city, all watercraft of any type whatsoever, operated on or moored, docked or anchored at any place in the lakes, canals, rivers, bays or waters within the corporate limits of city and the owners, operators or occupants thereof, shall be governed by and observe the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 6-2)  
Sec. 110-33. - Evidence of identity of violator. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this chapter governing the operation, mooring, docking or anchoring of watercraft, proof that the particular watercraft described in the citation or summons was violating a provision of this chapter, together with proof that the operator thereof was not present at the time a violation was observed, or was present and did not identify himself as the operator, or denied that he was the operator, the person in whose name such watercraft is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Code 1980, § 6-4)  
Sec. 110-34. - Recognition of federal rules and regulations. 
All operators of watercraft are hereby charged with knowledge of and compliance with all enacted or amended regulations of the U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other federal agencies governing boats, docks, or waterways. 
(Code 1980, § 6-5)  
Sec. 110-35. - Compliance with state rules and regulations governing boats. 
All operators of watercraft are hereby charged with knowledge of and compliance with all rules and regulations of the state governing the licensing, operation and title certification of boats, including F.S. chs. 327 and 328, as amended. Under no circumstances shall any vessel anchor or moor in areas that have been determined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection as protected areas for wildlife and plant life in the submerged lands. 
(Code 1980, § 6-6; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 2, 7-11-01)  
Sec. 110-36. - Speed restrictions; water activities prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any watercraft to operate such watercraft at a speed greater than "slow-down minimum wake" as defined by Florida law, at all times such boat is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a bridge, dock, pier, wharf, mooring or launching area, or is within a lagoon, bay estuary, canal or lake, or is at a place in the Sebastian River or Indian River which has a distance from shore to shore which is three hundred (300) feet or less. 
(b)  Water skiing, aquaplaning or similar activities are prohibited utilizing any watercraft within three hundred (300) feet of any bridge, dock, pier, wharf, mooring or launching area, or upon any bay estuary, canal or lake within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Except for vessels performing a governmental function, boats powered by an internal combustion engine may not operate upon local waterways, canals and lakes within the city limits of Sebastian, however, the Sebastian River and the Indian River Lagoon are excluded from this restriction. 
(Code 1980, § 6-8; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 3, 7-11-01)  
Sec. 110-37. - Excessive noise. 
No operator or owner of a watercraft shall cause or allow excessive noise in the operation or use of watercraft or equipment thereon, including blowers, machinery, motors, horns, etc., on board any watercraft in violation of the nuisance provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 6-10; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 4, 7-11-01) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 66.  
Sec. 110-38. - Health and sanitation rules; disorderly conduct, etc. 
All persons on board any watercraft located upon any waterway within the city limits shall comply with all health and sanitary rules or regulations of the city, and all ordinances of the city relating to the conduct of persons, including acts contrary to health, safety, morals or public peace, and including ordinances prohibiting disorderly conduct or loud or boisterous noises which disturb the peace. All watercraft utilizing the waters of the city shall be maintained in a seaworthy condition, except when in a permitted repair area. 
(Code 1980, § 6-9; Ord. No. O-01-13, § 5, 7-11-01) 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 50.  
Sec. 110-39. - Trash disposal. 
All trash, garbage and other debris accumulated aboard any watercraft moored or docked in the city limits shall be removed from the watercraft and disposed of on land in a proper receptacle to dispose of the items. 
(Code 1980, § 6-11(b)) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Littering, F.S. § 403.413.  
Sec. 110-40. - Equipment for excrement, waste, refuse. 
No person shall use or maintain living quarters on any motorboat, yacht, houseboat, floating home or any other type of watercraft on any of the waters within the city limits, unless such motorboat, yacht, houseboat, or other watercraft shall be equipped with a holding tank and/or chlorinator-maserator or other equipment sufficient for the purpose of containing all excrement, waste and refuse from such craft, and such wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with the rules and regulations established for the disposal of such wastes, but in no event shall any part thereof be released into any of the waters within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6-12) 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 50; nuisances, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 102.  
Sec. 110-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-13, § 6, adopted July 11, 2001, amended § 110-41, which pertained to the repair of watercraft. The former section has been moved to § 54-2-7.8(b) of the Sebastian Land Development Code.  
Sec. 110-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-13, § 7, adopted July 11, 2001, amended § 110-42, which pertained to the use of watercraft as a place of business. See Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 110-43. - Permission required to dock or to make fast to other vessel. 
No person shall moor a boat to a private seawall or dock or beach if upon private property within the city without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 6-13)  
Sec. 110-44. - Period of mooring to municipal docks and piers. 
No boat shall moor or tie up to any municipal docks or fishing piers owned by the city exceeding a one-hour limit, within a twenty-four-hour period. 
(Code 1980, § 6-13.1; Ord. No. O-00-14, § 1, 6-14-00) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90.  
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 90; regulations for utilities franchises, § 102-51. 
 
ARTICLE II. - FLORIDA POWER & LIGHT COMPANY—STREET LIGHTING[3] 
STREET LIGHTING FRANCHISE 
MUNICIPAL STREET LIGHTING AGREEMENT 
THIS AGREEMENT made this 12th day of July, 1951, by and between the City of Sebastian, Florida, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Florida, and its successors (hereafter called Consumer), and FLORIDA POWER & LIGHT COMPANY, a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Florida, its successors and/or assigns (hereafter called Company). 
WITNESSETH: 
THAT for and in consideration of the sum of one dollar ($1.00) paid by each party hereto to the other, and of the covenants and agreements herein set forth, the parties hereto covenant and agree as follows: 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the street lighting franchise agreement of July 12, 1951. Additions made for clarity are enclosed by brackets. 
Cross reference— Electric franchise, app. A, art. VII. 
 
ARTICLE I. - COMPANY AGREES 
 
Section 1. - [Furnishing of service.] 
Insofar as reasonable diligence will enable it to do so, to furnish electric energy and services to consumer for the street lighting system within the corporate limits of Sebastian, Florida, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof.  
Section 2. - [Installation.] 
To install on company's existing distribution poles within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice from consumer, evidenced by a letter from consumer's city clerk, under consumer's corporate seal, setting forth that such installation has been duly authorized by consumer's governing body, overhead bracket street lights, and to connect said street lights to company's overhead street lighting circuits, now or hereafter installed in ___________, Florida, provided however, that in the event it shall be necessary for company to extend its street lighting circuits more than three hundred (300) feet in order to reach any additional overhead bracket street light ordered by consumer, as herein provided, consumer agrees to reimburse company for the cost, in excess of three hundred (300) feet, of making such extension to its street lighting circuits.  
Section 3. - [Service of ornamental lighting.] 
To serve consumer's "White Way" and/or other type of ornamental post or ornamental bracket street lighting system which is now, or may hereafter be, installed or any extension thereof, and to extend company's overhead street lighting circuits to the point of connection with consumer's underground cable connecting together street lights forming consumer's "White Way" street lighting system so constructed by said consumer, provided, however, that in the event it shall be necessary for company to extend its street lighting circuits more than three hundred (300) feet in order to reach such point of connection, consumer agrees to reimburse company for the cost, in excess of three hundred (300) feet, of making such extension to its overhead street lighting circuits.  
Section 4. - [Change in location.] 
To change the location of any street light in use or to substitute for any street light in use at one location any other street light of the same type and ownership, and of the same or greater rating in lumens, candlepower or wattage, not in use at any other location, upon payment by the Consumer of the cost of such change or substitution and upon thirty (30) days' written notice from the Consumer evidenced by letter from Consumer's City Clerk, under Consumer's corporate seal, setting forth that such change in location or substitution of street light has been duly authorized by Consumer's governing body.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSUMER AGREES 
 
Section 1. - [Purchase of services.] 
To purchase from Company all electric energy and services necessary for the operation of the street lighting system within the corporate limits of Sebastian, Florida, which is now, or may hereafter be, installed, the minimum requirements for which shall at all times equal that of the present installation as set forth under Section 1 of Article III hereof, plus that of all additional installations made by Company and/or Consumer, under Article I of this Agreement.  
Section 2. - [Payment.] 
To pay for all the energy and services furnished by Company at the office of the Company in Sebastian, Florida, in accordance with the schedules attached hereto, made a part thereof and marked S-15 and S-17.  
Section 3. - [Construction, repair and maintenance.] 
To construct, renew, repair and maintain the underground cable or overhead conductors connecting its "White Way" and/or other type of ornamental post or ornamental bracket street lighting system and the posts thereof so that at all times said street lighting system shall be in a safe condition and, in the event it shall become necessary to reinforce or rebuild said system in order that it may be properly served in accordance with good electrical practice, to so reinforce and rebuild said system and to protect and save Company harmless from any and all loss, cost, damage or expense that may be caused to Company by reason of the failure on the part of Consumer to properly construct, renew, repair and/or maintain said street lighting system in accordance with the provisions hereof.  
ARTICLE III. - IT IS MUTUALLY AGREED 
 
Section 1. - [Composition of system.] 
That the present street lighting system within the corporate limits of Sebastian, Florida, ___________ consist of: 
31    1000 L 
supported on bracket type fixtures, owned by Company and 
8    2500 L 
supported on "White Way" and/or other type of ornamental post or ornamental bracket fixtures, owned by Company, and 
_____
supported on "White Way" and/or other type of ornamental post or ornamental bracket fixtures, owned by Consumer.  
Section 2. - [Rate schedules.] 
That if, during the term of this Agreement, Company makes effective in the territory served hereunder any other street lighting rate schedule or schedules applicable to the service rendered hereunder which would have resulted in a total net annual bill to Consumer equal to or lower than Consumer's total net annual bill for the 12-month period prior to the effective date of such other street lighting rate schedule or schedules, then Company shall notify Consumer in writing of such other street lighting rate schedule or schedules, and such other street lighting rate schedule or schedules shall be automatically substituted for the rate schedule or schedules now a part of this Agreement, unless Consumer notifies Company in writing within thirty (30) days from the receipt of Company's notice that Consumer objects to such substitution, and, if there is no objection, beginning with the first billing period thereafter, Consumer shall be billed and pay Company in accordance with the terms and conditions of such substituted rate schedule or schedules.  
Section 3. - [Definition.] 
That by "street lighting," as used in this Agreement, is meant the lighting of streets, avenues, alleys, parks, bridges and public places other than public buildings.  
Section 4. - [No liability in certain cases.] 
That no liability to furnish or take service shall exist at any time that either party is prevented from complying with this Agreement by legal proceedings, strikes, lockouts, fires, riots, acts of God or the public enemy, or, in case or cases not under the control of the party thus prevented from compliance, or by reason of any partial, temporary or entire shut-down of service which, in the opinion of Company, is necessary for the purpose of repairing or making more efficient all or any part of its electrical generating or other electrical equipment.  
Section 5. - [Continuous service.] 
That Company shall use reasonable diligence to provide continuous service during lighting hours, and, having used reasonable diligence, shall not be liable for any outage.  
Section 6. - [Substitution of lamps.] 
That Company may substitute for any lamp installed other lamps of at least equal illuminating capacity and efficiency as improvements in the art may make such lamps available, but no change shall be required in the size, style or capacity of any lamps without Company's consent. Company will replace any lamp with one of increased rating in lumens, candlepower or wattage at the written request of Consumer, evidenced by a letter from Consumer's City Clerk, under Consumer's corporate seal, setting forth that such request has been duly authorized by Consumer's governing body, in which case the monthly bill or bills thereafter rendered shall be correspondingly increased.  
Section 7. - [Term.] 
That this Agreement shall be for a term of ten (10) years from August 1st, 1951, and shall extend for a further period or periods of five (5) years from the termination of the said ten (10) years, or any extension thereof, unless by written notice given by either party to the other not more than ninety (90) nor less than thirty (30) days before the date of termination of the said ten (10) years, or any extension thereof, either party shall have signified its desire to terminate this Agreement, provided, however, that Company will not be required to install and/or serve additional street lights at any time or from time to time within two (2) years prior to the expiration of this Agreement or of any extension hereof.  
Section 8. - [Failure of city to perform.] 
That should Consumer fail at any time or from time to time to pay for the electric energy and services furnished hereunder or otherwise fail to perform any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement, Company, at its option, may refuse to make any additional installations under Article I of this Agreement and/or cease to supply electric energy and services to Consumer hereunder until Consumer has made such payments or otherwise fully complied with all the terms and conditions of this Agreement, it being understood and agreed, however, that such refusal to make additional installations and/or discontinuance of the supplying of electric energy and services shall not be a breach of this Agreement by Company nor shall cancel any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement.  
Section 9. - [Supersedes previous agreements.] 
That this Agreement supersedes all previous Agreements or representations, either written or verbal, heretofore in effect between Consumer and Company, made with respect to matters contained herein and, when duly executed, constitutes the Agreement between the parties hereto.  
Section 10. - [Binding of successors of parties.] 
That this Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the successors of Consumer and the successors and/or assigns of Company. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunto caused this instrument to be signed in triplicate by their duly authorized officers and their official seals to be hereunto affixed the day and year first above written. 
[Executed by City and Company under seal] 
FLORIDA POWER & LIGHT COMPANY 
Rate Schedule Number S-15 
Electric Service 
INCANDESCENT STREET LIGHTING—OVERHEAD CONDUCTORS 
BRACKET FIXTURE—COMPANY OWNERSHIP 
APPLICATION: 
For lighting of public streets, alleys, thoroughfares and public parks by incandescent metallic filament lamps in bracket type fixtures owned by Company and installed on existing poles of Company's distribution system. 
CHARACTER OF SERVICE: 
From Company's series or multiple system, at Company's option. 
Service includes installation, maintenance, lamp renewals, patrol and energy from sunset each day until sunrise the following day. 
LIMITATION OF SERVICE: 
Stand-by or resale service not permitted hereunder. 
ANNUAL RATE: 
	Lamp Rating 
Lumens 	Per Lamp 
per Year 
Radial Wave or Unenclosed Unit ..... 	 1000 or less 	$18.00 
Radial Wave or Unenclosed Unit ..... 	 2500 	 22.50 
Globe Enclosed Unit ..... 	 4000 	 28.50 
Globe Enclosed Unit ..... 	 6000 	 36.00 
Globe Enclosed Unit ..... 	10000 	 51.00 
For Center Suspension Mounting—Add ..... 	  3.00 
For Separate Pole Mounting—Wood ..... 	  2.00 
For Separate Pole Mounting—Steel ..... 	  9.00 
 
Monthly Bill: 
One-twelfth of the amount computed at the Annual Rate including the following adjustments. 
Adjustments: 
First,—Minus or plus .4¢ per month per 1000 lumens of lamp rating for each 1¢ below 12¢ or above 18¢, respectively, in Company's cost per million British thermal units of fuel. For this purpose there shall be employed the weighted average delivered cost (including freight, storage and handling costs) is [as] shown by Company's books, of all fuel used during the next preceding month in the generating stations interconnected with Company's main transmission system. 
Second,—Plus the applicable proportionate part of any taxes and assessments imposed by any governmental authority in excess of those in effect January 1, 1937, which are assessed on the basis of meters or customers or the price of or revenues from electric energy or service sold or the volume of energy generated or purchased for sale or sold. 
TERM OF SERVICE: 
Not less than 10 years. 
FLORIDA POWER & LIGHT COMPANY 
Rate Schedule Number S-17 
Electric Service 
INCANDESCENT STREET LIGHTING—UNDERGROUND CONDUCTORS 
ORNAMENTAL STANDARD—COMPANY OWNERSHIP 
APPLICATION: 
For lighting of public streets, alleys, thoroughfares and public parks by incandescent metallic filament lamps in ornamental standard fixtures owned by Company, fed by underground conductors. 
CHARACTER OF SERVICE: 
From Company's series or multiple system, at Company's option. 
Service includes installation, maintenance, lamp renewals, patrol and energy from sunset each day until sunrise the following day. 
LIMITATION OF SERVICE: 
Stand-by or resale service not permitted hereunder. 
ANNUAL RATE: 
	Lamp Rating 
Lumens 	Per Lamp 
per Year 
	 2500 	$39.50 
	 4000 	 45.50 
	 6000 	 53.00 
	10000 	 67.50 
 
Monthly Bill: 
One-twelfth of the amount computed at the Annual Rate including the following adjustments. 
Adjustments: 
First,—Minus or plus .4¢ per month per 1000 lumens of lamp rating for each 1¢ below 12¢ or above 18¢, respectively, in Company's cost per million British thermal units of fuel. For this purpose there shall be employed the weighted average delivered cost (including freight, storage and handling costs) as shown by Company's books, of all fuel used during the next preceding month in the generating stations interconnected with Company's main transmission system. 
Second,—Plus the applicable proportionate part of any taxes and assessments imposed by any governmental authority in excess of those in effect January 1, 1937, which are assessed on the basis of meters or customers or the price of or revenues from electric energy or service sold or the volume of energy generated or purchased for sale or sold. 
TERM OF SERVICE: 
Not less than 10 years.  
ARTICLE III. - SOUTHERN BELL TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY[4] 
ORDINANCE NO. 93 
An Ordinance 
Authorizing the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company to use the public streets of the City of Sebastian, Florida, for the purpose of erecting, constructing, maintaining and operating lines of telephone and telegraph thereon and thereunder. 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the telephone franchise, Ordinance No. 93, adopted on May 8, 1969. Additions made for clarity are enclosed by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - [Grant.] 
Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Sebastian, Florida, that permission be and the same is hereby granted to the Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company, its successors and assigns, to construct, maintain and operate lines of telephone and telegraph, including the necessary poles, conduits, cables, fixtures and electrical conductors upon, along, under and over the public roads, streets and highways of the City of Sebastian, Florida, as its business may from time to time require, provided that all poles shall be neat and symmetrical.  
Section 2. - [Supervision of work.] 
The work of erecting poles and constructing underground conduits under this ordinance shall be done subject to the supervision of the City, and the Company shall replace or properly relay and repair any sidewalk or street that may be displaced by reason of such work, and upon failure of the Company so to do, after twenty days' notice in writing shall have been given by the Mayor of the City to the Company, the City may repair such portion of the sidewalk or street that may have been disturbed by the Company, and collect the cost so incurred from the Company.  
Section 3. - [Consideration.] 
In consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted, the Company shall pay to the City annually a sum equal to one per cent (1%) of the gross receipts of the Company from rentals derived from telephones in use within the corporate limits of the City, provided that there shall be credited against such sum the amount of all taxes, licenses, fees and other impositions (except ad valorem taxes and amounts for assessments for special benefits, such as sidewalks, street pavings and similar improvements) levied or imposed by the City upon the Company's property, business or operations and paid during the preceding fiscal year as defined herein. Payment shall be made to the City for each of the years that this ordinance is in effect and shall be based on the receipts of the Company for the preceding fiscal year. For the purposes of this payment, such fiscal year shall end on the last day of the month in which the ordinance becomes effective. Payment shall be made within six (6) months of the end of such fiscal year.  
Section 4. - [Indemnification of company.] 
The Company shall indemnify the City against, and assume all liabilities for, damages which may arise or accrue to the City for any injury to persons or property from the doing of any work herein authorized, or the neglect of the Company or any of its employees to comply with any ordinance regulating the use of the streets of the City, and the acceptance by the Company of this ordinance shall be an agreement by it to pay to the City any sum of money for which the City may become liable from or by reason of such injury.  
Section 5. - [Acceptance by company.] 
The Company shall file with the City Clerk of the City its acceptance of this ordinance within sixty days from the date when it shall take effect.  
Section 6. - [City reserves right to regulate use of streets.] 
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a surrender by the City of its right or power to pass ordinances regulating the use of its streets.  
Section 7. - [Term; right of city to purchase.] 
This ordinance shall be in force and effect for a term of thirty (30) years from and after its passage, and the City hereby reserves the right and requires the said Company, as a condition precedent to the taking effect of this grant, to give and grant to the City of Sebastian, Florida, the right, at and after the expiration of such term, to purchase the telephone and telegraph plant or other property in said City used under or in connection with this grant, or such part of such property as the municipality may desire to purchase at a valuation of the property, real and personal, desired, which valuation shall be fixed by arbitration, as may be provided by law; and the acceptance of this ordinance shall operate as a grant by the said Company to the City of said right to purchase.  
ARTICLE IV. - FALCON CABLE MEDIA CABLE FRANCHISE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. R-02-18, adopted Apr. 24, 2002, approved the transfer of the franchise granted under Ord. No. O-98-21 to a related entity of AT&T Comcast Corporation. Res. No. R-01-38, adopted May 23, 2001, approved the transfer of Falcon Cable Media, a California limited partnership, also known as Charter Communications, Inc., a Delaware corporation, system and franchise, to TCI Cablevision of Missouri, Inc. Formerly, Ord. No. O-98-21, adopted Dec. 16, 1998, granted a franchise to Falcon Cable Media. At the request of the city such ordinance is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. Formerly, Art. IV contained Ord. No. 218-E, adopted Sept. 23, 1981, which granted a non-exclusive franchise to Cable TV Fund VIII-A, a Limited Partnership, Jones Intercable, Inc. Such franchise was assigned to Falcon Cable Television by Res. No. R-87-74. Res. No. 99-42, § 1, adopted July 28, 1999, the city council approved the sale of Falcon Cable Media, to Charter Communications, Inc., as set forth in the Purchase and Contribution Agreement dated May 26, 1999, based upon the assumption of duties and obligations of the franchisee under Ord. No. O-98-21 by Charter Communications, Inc. 
 
ARTICLE V. - CITY OF SEBASTIAN AND WASTE MANAGEMENT, INC. OF FLORIDA—SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FRANCHISE AGREEMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. O-03-12, adopted June 2003, granted an exclusive five year solid waste collection franchise to Waste Management Inc. with an automatic renewal for an additional five years unless either party notified the other to the contrary. The franchise agreement expired on June 30, 2013.  Ordinance No. O-13-03, adopted June 12, 2013, granted an exclusive five year residential and commercial solid waste collection franchise to Waste Management, Inc. of Florida to take effect on July 1, 2013, with an automatic renewal for an additional five years unless either party notifies the other to the contrary in writing by July 1, 2017. The franchise agreement with the automatic renewal will expire on June 30, 2023. 
 Copies of Ordinance No. O-13-3 and the City of Sebastian/Waste Management Inc. of Florida franchise agreement are available in City Hall, 1225 Main Street, Sebastian, FL or by access through Laserfiche Weblink via the City webpage www.cityofsebastian.org - Public Records Search. 
 
ARTICLE VII. - FLORIDA POWER & LIGHT COMPANY—ELECTRIC[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-09-03, §§ 1—16, adopted Apr. 22, 2009, amended App. A, Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former App. A, Art. VII, §§ 1—12, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. O-82-03. Additions made for clarity are enclosed by brackets. 
Cross reference— Street lighting franchise, app. A, art. II. 
 
Section 1. - [Grant.] 
There is hereby granted to Florida Power & Light Company, its successors and assigns (hereinafter called the "Grantee"), for the period of 30 years from the effective date hereof, the nonexclusive right, privilege and franchise (hereinafter called "franchise") to construct, operate and maintain in, under, upon, along, over and across the present and future roads, streets, alleys, bridges, easements, rights-of-way and other public places (hereinafter called "public rights-of-way") throughout all of the incorporated areas, as such incorporated areas may be constituted from time to time, of the City of Sebastian, Florida, and its successors (hereinafter called the "Grantor"), in accordance with the grantee's customary practice with respect to construction and maintenance, electric light and power facilities, including, without limitation, conduits, poles, wires, transmission and distribution lines, and all other facilities installed in conjunction with or ancillary to all of the grantee's operations (hereinafter called "facilities"), for the purpose of supplying electricity and other services to the grantor and its successors, the inhabitants thereof, and persons beyond the limits thereof.  
Section 2. - [Locations and relocation.] 
The facilities of the grantee shall be installed, located, or relocated so as to not unreasonably interfere with traffic over the public rights-of-way or with reasonable egress from and ingress to abutting property. To avoid conflicts with traffic, the location or relocation of all facilities shall be made as representatives of the grantor may prescribe in accordance with the grantor's reasonable rules and regulations with reference to the placing and maintain in, under, upon, along, over and across said public rights-of-way; provided, however, that such rules or regulations; 
(a)  Shall not prohibit the exercise of the grantee's right to use said public rights-of-way for reasons other than unreasonable interference with motor vehicular traffic, 
(b)  Shall not unreasonably interfere with the grantee's ability to furnish reasonable sufficient, adequate and efficient electric serve to all of its customers, and 
(c)  Shall not require the relocation of any of the grantee's facilities installed before or after the effective date hereof in public rights-of-way unless or until widening or otherwise changing the configuration of the paved portion of any public right-of-way used by motored vehicles causes such installed facilities to unreasonably interfere with motor vehicular traffic. Such rules and regulations shall recognize that above grade facilities of the grantee installed after the effective date here should be installed near the outer boundaries of the public rights-of-way to the extent possible. When any portion of a public right-of-way is excavated by the grantee in the location or relocation of any of its facilities, the portion of the public right-of-way so excavated shall within a reasonable time be replaced by the grantee at its expense and in as good condition as it was at the time of such excavation. The grantor shall not be liable to the grantee for any cost or expense in connection with any relocation of the grantee's facilities required under subsection (c) of this section, except, however, the grantee shall be entitled to reimbursement of its costs from others and as may be provided by law.  
Section 3. - [Indemnification of grantor.] 
The grantor shall in no way be liable or responsible for any accident or damage that may occur in the construction, operation or maintenance by the grantee of its facilities hereunder, and the acceptance of this ordinance shall be deemed an agreement on the part of the grantee to indemnify the grantor and hold it harmless against any and all liability, loss, cost, damage or expense which may accrue to the grantor by reason of the negligence, default or misconduct of the grantee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its facilities hereunder.  
Section 4. - [Rates, rules and regulations.] 
All rates, rules, and regulations established by the grantee from time to time shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided by law.  
Section 5. - [Payment of taxes and other impositions.] 
As a consideration for this franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor, commencing 90 days after the effective date hereof, and each month thereafter for the remainder of the term of this franchise, an amount which added to the amount of all licenses, excises, fees, charges and other impositions of any kind whatsoever (except ad valorem property taxes and non-ad valorem tax assessments on property) levied or imposed by the grantor against the grantee's property, business or operations and those of its subsidiaries during the grantee's monthly billing period ending 60 days prior to each such payment will equal 5.9 percent of the grantee's billed revenues, less actual write-offs, from the sale of electrical energy to residential, commercial and industrial customers (as such customers are defined by FPL's tariff) within the incorporated areas of the grantor for monthly billing period ending 60 days prior to each such payment, and in no event shall payment for the rights and privileges granted herein exceed 5.9 percent of such revenues for any monthly billing period of the grantee. 
The grantor understands and agrees that such revenues as described in the preceding paragraph are limited, as in the existing franchise Ordinance No. O-82-03, to the precise revenues described therein, and that such revenues do not include, by way of example and not limitation: (a) revenues from the sale of electrical energy for public street and highway lighting (service for lighting public ways and areas); (b) revenues from other sales to public authorities (service with eligibility restricted to governmental entities); (c) revenues from sales to Railroads and railways (service supplied for propulsion of electric transit vehicles); (d) revenues from sales for resale (service to other utilities for resale purposes); (e) franchise fees; (f) late payment charges; (g) field collection charges; (h) other service charges.  
Section 6. - [Terms if grantee enters into franchise agreement with other municipality in Indian River or Brevard County.] 
If during the term of this franchise the grantee enters into a franchise agreement with any other municipality located in Indian River County, Florida, or Brevard County, Florida where the number of grantee's active electrical customers is equal to or less than the number of grantee's active electrical customers within the incorporated area of the grantor, the terms of which provide for the payment of franchise fees by the grantee at a rate greater than 5.9 percent of the grantee's residential, commercial and industrial revenues (as such customers are defined by FPL's tariff), under the same terms and conditions as specified in Section 5 hereof, the grantee, upon written request of the grantor, shall negotiate and enter into a new franchise agreement with the grantor in which the percentage to be used in calculating monthly payments under Section 5 hereof shall be no greater than that percentage which the grantee has agreed to used as a basis for the calculation of payments to other Indian River County municipality or Brevard County municipalities, provided, however, that such new franchise agreement shall include additional benefits to the grantee, in addition to all benefits provided herein, at least equal to those provided by its franchise agreement with the other Indian River County municipality or Brevard County municipalities. Subject to all limitations, terms and conditions specified in the preceding sentence, the grantor shall have the sole discretion to determine the percentage to be used in calculating monthly payments, and the grantee shall have the sole discretion to determine those benefits to which it would be entitled, under such new franchise agreement.  
Section 7. - [Agreement of grantor not to compete with grantee.] 
As a further consideration, during the term of this franchise or any extension thereof, the grantor agrees: 
(a)  Not to engage in the distribution and/or sale, in competition with the grantee, of electric capacity and/or electric energy to any ultimate consumer of electric utility service (herein called a "retail customer") or to any electrical distribution system established solely to serve any retail customer formerly served by the grantee, 
(b)  Not to participate in any proceeding or contractual arrangement, the purpose or terms of which would be to obligate the grantee to transmit and/or distribute, electric capacity and/or electric energy from any third party(ies) to any other retail customer's facility(ies), and 
(c)  Not to seek to have the grantee transmit and/or distribute electric capacity and/or electric energy generated by or on behalf of the grantor at one location to the grantor's facility(ies) at any other locations(s). 
Nothing specified herein shall prohibit the grantor from engaging with other utilities or persons in wholesale transactions which are subject to the provisions of the Federal Power Act. 
Additionally, nothing herein shall prohibit grantor from adopting or complying with "green initiatives" (defined as environmental or alternative energy initiatives including both conversation and the generation or use of electricity provided in whole or in part by wind, solar, tidal, geothermal, ocean currents, biomass or other natural processes) which enable or require grantor to generate electrical energy for consumption at facilities owned or operated by grantor, provided that such initiatives and implementation of same do not violate any of the terms or conditions of this new franchise agreement, specifically including but not limited to sections 7(a), 7(b) and 7(c) of this agreement as more fully stated above. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit the grantor, if permitted by law, (i) from purchasing electric capacity and/or electric energy from any other person, or (ii) from seeking to have the grantee transmit and/or distribute to any facility(ies) of the grantor electric capacity and/or electric energy purchased by the grantor from any other person; provided, however, that before the grantor elects to purchase electric capacity and/or electric energy from any other person, the grantor shall notify the grantee. Such notice shall include a summary of the specific rates, terms, and conditions which have been offered by the other person and identify the grantor's facilities to be served under the offer. The grantee shall thereafter have 90 days to evaluate the offer and, if the grantee offers rates, terms and conditions which are equal to or better than those offered by the other person, the grantor shall be obligated to continue purchase from the grantee electric capacity and/or electric energy to serve the previously-identified facilities of the grantor for a term no shorter than that offered by the other person. If the grantee does not agree to rates, terms and conditions which equal or better the other person's offer, all of the terms and conditions of this franchise shall remain in effect.  
Section 8. - [Termination of franchise.] 
If the grantor grants a right, privilege or franchise to any other person or otherwise enables any other such person to construct, operate or maintain electric light and power facilities within any part of the incorporated areas of the grantor in which the grantee may lawfully serve or compete on terms and conditions which the grantee determines are more favorable than the terms and conditions contained herein, the grantee may at any time thereafter terminate this franchise if such terms and conditions are not remedied within the time period provided hereafter. The grantee shall give the grantor at least 60 days' advance written notice of its intent to terminate. Such notice shall, without prejudice to any of the rights reserved for the grantee herein, advise the grantor of such terms and conditions that it considers more favorable. The grantor shall then have 60 days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the terms and conditions complained of by the grantee. If the grantee determines that such terms or conditions are not remedied by the grantor within said time period, the grantee may terminate this franchise agreement by delivering written notice to the grantor's clerk and termination shall be effective on the date of delivery of such notice.  
Section 9. - [Consequence of legislative, regulatory or other action by the United States or the State of Florida.] 
If as a direct or indirect consequence of any legislative, regulatory or other action by the United States of America or the State of Florida (or any department, agency, authority, instrumentality or political subdivision of either of them) any person is permitted to provide electric service within the incorporated areas of the grantor to a customer than being served by the grantee, or to any new applicant for electric service within any part of the incorporated areas of the grantor in which the grantee may lawfully serve, and the grantee determines that is obligations hereunder, or otherwise resulting from this franchise in respect to rates and service place it at a competitive disadvantage with respect to such other person, the grantee may, at any time after the taking of such action, terminate this franchise if such competitive disadvantage is not remedied within the time period provided hereafter. The grantee shall give the grantor at least 90 days' advance written notice of its intent to terminate. Such notice shall, without prejudice to any of the rights reserved for the grantee herein, advise the grantor of the consequences of such action which resulted in the competitive disadvantage. The grantor shall then have 90 days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the competitive disadvantage. If such competitive disadvantage is not remedied by the grantor with said time period, the grantee may terminate this franchise agreement by delivering written notice to the grantor's clerk and termination shall take effect on the date of delivery of such notice.  
Section 10. - [Forfeiture of grant by grantee.] 
Failure on the part of the grantee to comply in any substantial respect with any of the provisions of this franchise shall be grounds for forfeiture, but no such forfeiture shall take effect if the reasonableness or propriety thereof is protested by the grantee until there is final determination (after the expiration or exhaustion of all rights of appeal) by a court of competent jurisdiction that the grantee has failed to comply in a substantial respect with any of the provisions of this franchise, and the grantee shall have six months after such final determination to make good the default before a forfeiture shall result with the right of the grantor at its discretion to grant such additional time to the grantee for compliance as necessities in the case require.  
Section 11. - [Forfeiture of grant by grantor.] 
Failure on the part of the grantor to comply in any substantial respect with any of the provisions of this ordinance, including but not limited to: (a) denying the grantee use of public rights-of-way for reasons other than unreasonable interference with motor vehicular traffic; (b) imposing conditions for use of public rights-of-way contrary to Florida law or the terms and conditions of this franchise; (c) unreasonable delay in issuing the grantee a use permit, if any, to construct its facilities in public rights-of-way, shall constitute breach of this franchise and entitle the grantee to withhold all or part of the payments provide for in Section 5 hereof until such time as a use permit is issued or a court of competent jurisdiction has reached a final determination in the matter. The grantor recognizes and agrees that nothing in this franchise agreement constitutes or shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of the grantee's delegated sovereign right of condemnation and the grantee, in its sole discretion, may exercise such right.  
Section 12. - [Examination or audit by grantor.] 
The grantor may, upon reasonable notice and within 90 days after each anniversary date of this franchise, at the grantor's expense, examine the records of the grantee relating to the calculation of the franchise payment for the year preceding such anniversary date. Such examination shall be during normal business hours at the grantee's office where such records are maintained. Records not prepared by the grantee in the ordinary course of business may be provided at the grantor's expense and as the grantor and the grantee may agree in writing. Information identifying the grantee's customers by name or their electric consumption shall not be taken from the grantee's premises. Such audit shall be impartial and all audit findings, whether they decrease or increase payment to the grantor, shall be reported to the grantee. The grantor's right to examine the records of the grantee in accordance with this section shall not be conducted by any third party employed by the grantor whose fee, in whole or part, for conducting such audit is contingent on findings of the audit. 
Grantor waives settles and bars all claims relating in any way to the amounts paid by the grantee under the current franchise agreement embodied in Ordinance No. O-82-03.  
Section 13. - [Severability.] 
The provisions of this ordinance are interdependent upon one another, and if any of the provisions of this ordinance are found or adjudged to be invalid, illegal, void or of no effect, the entire ordinance shall be null and void and of no force or effect.  
Section 14. - [Definition.] 
As used, herein "person" means an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a business trust, a joint stock company, a trust, an incorporated association, a joint venture, a governmental authority or any other entity of whatever nature.  
Section 15. - [Repeal of conflicting ordinances.] 
Ordinance No. O-82-03 passed and adopted May 10, 1982 and all other ordinances and parts of ordinances and all resolutions and parts of resolutions in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed.  
Section 16. - [Effective date.] 
As a condition precedent to that taking effect of this ordinance, the grantee shall file its acceptance hereof with the grantor's clerk within 30 days of adoption of this ordinance. The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date upon which the grantee files such acceptance.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PIVOTAL HOLDINGS INC. D/B/A FLORIDA CITY GAS 
Ordinance No. O-14-05 
This NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT (the "Agreement") is entered into this 8th day of October, 2014 between the City of Sebastian, a political subdivision of the State of Florida, ("City"), and Pivotal Utility Holdings, Inc., a New Jersey corporation d/b/a Florida City Gas ("Franchisee"). (City and Franchisee shall sometimes be collectively referred to as the "Parties" and, individually, as a "Party"). 
WITNESSETH: 
WHEREAS, the City desires to grant a non-exclusive franchise to permit the construction, maintenance and operation of natural gas facilities within the City; and 
WHEREAS, the Franchisee is capable of providing such services. 
NOW, THEREFORE, the Parties agree as follows: 
 
Section 1. - Definitions. 
a.  "City" shall mean the City of Sebastian, a political subdivision of the State of Florida. 
b.  "Franchise" shall mean this Agreement and the rights granted to Franchisee hereunder. 
c.  "Franchisee" shall mean Pivotal Utility Holdings, Inc., a New Jersey corporation d/b/a Florida City Gas, and its successors and approved assigns. 
d.  "Gas System Facilities" or "Facilities" shall mean and include, but not be limited to, gas mains, pipes, supply pipes, conduits, ducts, service connections, manholes, regulators, drip pots, control devices, and any other hardware or other appurtenances used as a means of conveying, distributing or selling natural gas for the purpose of supplying natural gas to the meter of the Customer, constructed both prior to and during the term of this Agreement. 
e.  "Customers" shall mean all residences, businesses, governmental entities and industrial establishments located within the City purchasing natural gas from Franchisee. 
f.  "FPSC" shall mean the Florida Public Service Commission 
g.  "Franchise Fee" shall mean the fees described in Section 8 of this Agreement. 
h.  "Gross Revenues" shall have the meaning ascribed to such term by the FPSC. 
i.  "Natural gas" shall mean natural gas in a gaseous state unmixed or a mixture of natural and artificial gas, whether manufactured, "landfill" or otherwise. 
j.  "Service Area" shall mean the incorporated area of the City of Sebastian, Florida, and shall not include the territory outside the incorporated area of the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
k.  "Uncollectible Accounts" shall mean any account which has been closed and the deposit applied and is sixty (60) days past due.  
Section 2. - Franchise. 
The City hereby grants to the Franchisee, and the Franchisee hereby accepts, the non-exclusive right, privilege and franchise to construct, maintain and operate only Gas System Facilities in, under, upon, over and across the present and future streets, alleys, bridges, easements and other public rights-of-way within the Service Area. The Franchisee shall construct, maintain and operate Gas System Facilities in accordance with established industry practices, and applicable federal, state and local law, including the orders, rules and regulations of the FPSC or any other regulatory body having jurisdiction over the Franchisee and, to the extent permitted by law, the City's installation, maintenance and operation standards in respect of natural gas. The Franchise term shall be the period of time commencing as of the effective date of this Agreement and continuing in full force and effect until expiring at midnight on 30 September 2038; provided, however, that the Franchise will automatically renew for successive ten (10) year terms until such time as one of the Parties notifies the other, with no less than two (2) years written notice, prior to the expiration of the then-current term, that it does not want the Franchise to automatically renew. If either Party elects not to renew the Franchise, then the Franchise shall expire upon the conclusion of the then current term. 
The City acknowledges that the rates, fees, and charges that Franchisee charges its customers pursuant to this Agreement are determined by the FPSC. 
This grant of authority to Franchisee is strictly limited to the provision of natural gas service only. It is explicitly recognized that this Franchise does not limit the Franchisee's ability to operate a liquefied petroleum (commonly referred to as LP gas, bottled gas, or propane) business within the Service Area, similar to any other liquefied petroleum business, nor does it limit the City's ability to assess a franchise fee upon the liquefied petroleum business within the limits permitted under Florida law. In the event Franchisee desires to use its existing Facilities or to construct new Facilities for the purpose of providing other utility or non-utility services to existing or potential Customers, including but not limited to providing public communications, leased fiber optic capacity, video services, telecommunication services or any other services other than the provision of natural gas services, or providing any other use to existing or potential Customers, Franchisee shall seek additional and separate permission from the City for such activities. 
The Franchisee shall not sell, assign, lease or otherwise alienate and transfer this Franchise without the prior consent of the City, provided that such consent shall be granted or withheld in accordance with Chapter 59-1380, Section 4(g), of the Laws of Florida. To the extent that applicable law requires a public hearing before such consent may be given, the City shall a public hearing in compliance with applicable law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Franchisee shall have the right, without obtaining the City's consent, to transfer or assign this Franchise as a result of a total or complete merger or consolidation of Franchisee with a third Party, or sale of the Franchisee's natural gas division assets. Any sale, assignment, lease or other alienation and transfer this Franchise shall be subject to the conditions that the successor-in-interest to the Facilities and/or the rights under this Franchise shall have agreed in writing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this Agreement. Any dispute relating to or arising out of the provisions of this paragraph shall be subject to the non-binding arbitration provisions set forth below, in Section 19 of this Agreement. 
Franchisee may, without obtaining the City's consent, pledge this Franchise and/or the facilities as security.  
Section 3. - Use and maintenance of public rights-of-way. 
Franchisee's Gas System Facilities shall be located or relocated and so constructed as not to interfere with, including but not limited to, sanitary sewers, drainage systems, water pipes, electrical conduits, communications cables or other public utility service facilities, existing at the time of such location, relocation or construction. The Franchisee's Facilities shall not obstruct or interfere with the public uses of streets, roads, highways or alleys, or create any conditions which are or may become dangerous to the traveling public. Above grade facilities shall be kept to a minimum, and shall be installed as near to the outer boundaries of the public rights-of-way as reasonably possible. The location or relocation of all Facilities shall be made after Franchisee has received all applicable permits, approvals and permissions from the City and such other governmental entities as may be necessary, and the location(s) or relocation(s) shall be subject to the City's supervision and approval. In consideration for the Franchise Fee paid under this Agreement, the Franchisee will not be assessed any permit fees associated with the installation, construction, repair or maintenance of any Gas System Facilities within the public rights-of-way. In the event that Franchisee is acting in its proprietary function as a retail provider of gas equipment or appliances, Franchisee shall seek the appropriate permits from the City. Franchisee shall cooperate with the City at all times by providing timely and complete information regarding the location of its Facilities. Franchisee and City shall cooperate and coordinate their efforts to make the most efficient and economical use of the public rights-of-way and the Gas System Facilities. 
If any street, highway or avenue is to be paved by the City, the City shall give written notice to the Franchisee not less than ninety (90) days prior to the commencement of paving. Provided the Franchisee does not already have a main in the street, highway or avenue to provide natural gas service to the surrounding houses and other structures, Franchisee shall survey the surrounding houses and other structures to determine whether, in its sole discretion, construction of Gas System Facilities in the street, highway or avenue in question is economically feasible. Where such construction is determined to be economically feasible, the Franchisee shall construct such Gas System Facilities in the street, highway or avenue in question prior to paving by the City. However, in the event the Franchisee believes that such construction may not be completed prior to City's planned paving schedule, the Parties will attempt to negotiate a revised paving schedule satisfactory to both Parties; provided, however, that if a delay in paving will cause additional expense to the City, or substantial inconvenience to the residents of the City, the City may proceed with its original paving schedule. 
The Franchisee shall, at its own expense, replace, repair and restore without delay any sidewalk, street, alley, pavement, water, sewer or other utility line or appurtenance, soil, landscaping, dirt or other improvement, property or structure of any nature, that may be damaged or displaced by the Franchisee in the conduct of its operations, and shall, at a minimum, restore all property to a condition equivalent to the condition immediately prior to the work and/or changes made by the Franchisee. Franchisee shall take safety precautions to alert the public of work, which may include, but is not limited to, the use of barricades and signs. 
The Franchisee shall move or remove any Gas System Facilities at no cost to the City, in the event of the widening, repair or reconstruction of any street, road, alley or other right-of-way by the City. The Franchisee and the City shall not be liable for any cost or expense in connection with the location or relocation of its Gas System Facilities at the request of any nongovernmental third party. Such requests shall not be honored until such non-governmental third party has made arrangements to reimburse the Franchisee and/or the City, as the case may be, in a manner satisfactory to such Party(ies).  
Section 4. - Insurance. 
The Franchisee, at all times during the exercise of its Franchise, shall carry general liability insurance in the amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) to indemnify any persons sustaining personal injury or property damage as a result of the actions of the Franchisee in the construction, operation or maintenance of its Facilities, The City shall be named as an additional insured. A certificate of insurance (including additional insured status) shall be filed with the Sebastian City Clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Franchisee may meet the insurance minimum using, in part or whole, any combination of self-insurance and captive insurance. In the event Franchisee elects to meet the insurance minimum using, in part or whole, any combination of self-insurance or captive insurance, the Franchisee shall provide the City with documentation attesting to its qualified status. To insure that the amount of liability insurance or self-insurance is consistent with industry standards, as such standards may change during the lengthy term of the Franchise (including renewals or extensions), the Parties agree to meet approximately every five (5) years to evaluate whether the amount of liability insurance or self-insurance provided under this Agreement is consistent with then-existing industry standards. If the Parties determine in good faith that the amount of liability insurance or self-insurance is less than the then-existing industry standard, the amount of such insurance shall be increased to be consistent with such standard.  
Section 5. - Installation of gas mains; map of gas lines. 
Before the commencement of the construction of any Gas System Facilities, the Franchisee shall provide a drawing to the City establishing the location, lines or any other information reasonably requested by the City in connection with the Gas System Facilities. The laying of such Facilities shall conform to the designated locations, lines or other conditions of the City. After completion of the installation of any Facilities, two (2) copies of complete location maps will be furnished to the City. The Franchisee and the City shall cooperate with respect to the form and format of the location maps. Franchisee agrees that the materials to be used in the construction, operation and maintenance of the Gas System Facilities and the service to be rendered shall be consistent with local industry standards and equivalent to those provided to the Franchisee's other franchised communities. 
The Franchisee shall, at all times, keep an accurate map showing the location of all Gas System Facilities laid and maintained by Franchisee under this Franchise, which shall be accessible for inspection by City officials upon advance written notice during reasonable business hours.  
Section 6. - Accidents or damages; emergencies. 
The City shall not be liable or responsible in any manner whatsoever for any accident, personal injury, property damage or any claim or damage that may occur in the course of the construction, operation or maintenance of any of its Facilities by Franchisee, and its employees, agents, contractors, and any third parties hired by Franchisee to perform any aspect of Franchisee's responsibilities under this Agreement, except for damages specifically caused by or arising out of the negligence, strict liability, intentional torts or criminal acts of the City. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to affect in any way the City's rights, privileges, and immunities under the doctrine of "sovereign immunity" as set forth in Section 768.28, Florida Statutes. 
The City acknowledges that, in the event of an emergency involving the Gas System Facilities, Franchisee's obligations to notify various constituents of such circumstances are regulated by the FPSC.  
Section 7. - Indemnification. 
Franchisee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its Council Members, officers, agents and employees from, and against, any and all claims, suits, actions, regulatory or administrative proceedings (including reasonable attorney's fees, including appeals), liabilities and expenses arising during the term of this Franchise and resulting in personal injury, loss of life or damage to property sustained by any person or entity (collectively "Claims") caused by or arising out of Franchisee's negligence, intentional torts, strict liability, breach of applicable law or breach of this Agreement in connection with the construction, operation or maintenance of its Gas System Facilities within the Service Area, except for Claims caused by or arising out of the negligence, strict liability, intentional torts, breach of applicable law or breach of this Agreement by the City. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to affect in any way the City's rights, privileges, and immunities under the doctrine of "sovereign immunity" as set forth in Section 768.28, Florida Statutes. The provisions of this Section shall survive the termination of this Agreement.  
Section 8. - Franchise fee. 
Within thirty (30) days after the close of the first full billing month (payment for which shall include any prior partial month) following the effective date of this Franchise Agreement, and each month thereafter during the term of this Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee shall pay to the City a Franchise Fee which, when added to the amount of all licenses, excises, fees, charges and other impositions of any kind whatsoever (except ad valorem property taxes and non-ad valorem tax assessments on property) levied or imposed by the City against Franchisee's property, business or operations and those of its subsidiaries, is equal to six percent (6%) of the Franchisee 's Gross Revenues, less any adjustments for Uncollectible Accounts, from the sale, transportation, distribution or delivery of natural gas to Customers within the Service Area. In the event any Uncollectible Account becomes collectible and/or is collected, an adjustment in amount due the City shall be made in the next monthly payment. The Franchise Fee payment shall be deemed paid on time if post-marked within thirty (30) days of the close of the preceding billing month.  
Section 9. - Right of city to intervene. 
The City reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving any provision of this Agreement. Franchisee agrees to advise the City of any such suits.  
Section 10. - Accounts and records; rights to audit. 
The Franchisee shall establish and maintain appropriate accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting methods, and shall maintain records in such detail that Gross Revenues within the limits of the Service Area are consistently declared and identified separately from all other revenues. All records shall be maintained for a minimum of three (3) years, or longer if required by applicable regulatory bodies. The Franchisee further agrees that the City, by any duly authorized representative, shall have the right during business hours, and with prior written notice, to inspect and/or audit the books and records of the Franchisee that evidence the Gross Revenues and computations of Franchise Fee payments made by the Franchisee to the City. If the City decides to inspect and/or audit Franchisee's books and records, specifically Franchise Fee payments made to the City and Franchise Fee computations, the Franchisee shall permit a City representative to review the pertinent portion of the Franchisee's books and records including billing and collection records at the Franchisee's office where these records are housed, during normal business hours. In the event that an audit of Franchisee's books determines that Franchisee made underpayment in any month and that the underpayment exceeded five percent (5%) of the amount actually due in such month, Franchisee shall pay interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum on the amount underpaid or not paid calculated from the date the amount was due to the date it was finally paid. Both the underpayment and interest shall be paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of demand from the ___________.  
Section 11. - Changes to the service area. 
Upon the City's becoming aware that the Service Area has changed due to the annexation or incorporation of any property within the Service Area by a municipality or other body, the City shall promptly notify Franchisee of such circumstances and cooperate with Franchisee to determine any necessary adjustments to the Franchise Fee that may be necessary.  
Section 12. - Forfeiture or revocation of franchise. 
The Franchisee's material failure to comply in any respect with any of the provisions of this Franchise after written notice from City and a reasonable opportunity, no less than one hundred eighty (180) days, to cure shall be grounds for forfeiture of this Franchise pursuant to which the City shall have the right to revoke and cancel all franchise rights granted in this Agreement; provided, however, that Franchisee's failure to comply with any provision of this Franchise as the result of a strike, lockout, or any other cause beyond the reasonable control of the Franchisee (collectively, "Force Majeure") shall not constitute grounds for the City 's revocation and cancellation of any rights hereunder. In the event Franchisee in good faith disputes the City's determination of the Franchisee's material non-compliance with the provision(s) of this Franchise specified in the City's notice, or the City disputes the Franchisee's assertion that its failure to comply with the provision(s) of this Franchise was or is the result of Force Majeure, the Franchisee and the City shall negotiate in good faith to resolve the dispute prior to submitting the dispute to non-binding arbitration as provided below. If any dispute remains unresolved thirty (30) days after the commencement of negotiation s pursuant to this Section, such dispute may, at the election of either Party, be submitted to non-binding arbitration pursuant to the provisions of Section 20 of this Agreement. Nothing in this Section 12 shall be construed as obligating a Party to negotiate or arbitrate a renewal or extension of this Franchise. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, Franchisee acknowledges that nothing contained in this Agreement shall constitute a waiver by the City of any rights it may possess at law (including but not limited to the power of eminent domain), or as afforded under Chapter 166, Florida Statutes.  
Section 13. - Designated representatives. 
The following individuals are designated to represent the City and Franchisee respectively on all matters concerning the Franchise. All written communication shall be given by mail, either regular or certified with return receipt requested, to the addresses provided, or at such other address as either Party may advise the other in writing: 
For the City: City Manager, 1225 Main Street, Sebastian, FL 32958. 
With a copy to: City Attorney, 1225 Main Street, Sebastian, FL 32958. 
For the Franchisee: General Manager, Florida City Gas, 955 East 25 Street, Hialeah, FL 32955. 
With a copy to: AGL Resources Inc., Ten Peachtree Place, Atlanta, GA 30309, Attention: General Counsel.  
[Section 14. - Reserved.]  
Section 15. - No waiver. 
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as a surrender or waiver by the City of (a) its police powers or the authority to regulate the use of the public streets and/or other public places, provided no regulation contravenes the material terms of this Franchise, and (b) its right to sovereign immunity.  
Section 16. - Right to enforce. 
Each Party shall have all rights and remedies available in law or in equity in the event of a material breach of any obligation set forth in this Agreement by the other Party.  
Section 17. - Attorney fees. 
Except as otherwise provided, City and Franchisee agree that if litigation or administrative proceedings become necessary to enforce any of the obligations, terms and conditions of this Franchise, the prevailing Party shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees and court costs, including fees and costs on appeal, from the non-prevailing Party. If the subject matter of the dispute was submitted to non-binding arbitration pursuant to Section 20 below, the term "prevailing Party" in the prior sentence shall mean the Party for whom the final judicial or administrative decision is more favorable than the non-binding arbitration decision.  
Section 18. - Entirety. 
This writing embodies the entire agreement and understanding between the Parties, and there are no other agreements and understandings, oral or written, with reference to this subject matter that are not merged and superseded.  
Section 19. - Governing law. 
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed according to the laws of the State of Florida, and venue shall be in Indian River County, Florida.  
Section 20. - Non-binding arbitration. 
Either Party shall have the right to submit a dispute arising under this Agreement to non-binding arbitration by notifying the other Party of such election in writing within forty-five (45) days after the dispute arises. Within fifteen (15) days following the giving of such a notice by a Party, each Party shall furnish the other Party with the name, address and telephone number of a person designated by that Party to participate with a person designated by the other Party in selecting an individual to act as the sole arbitrator of the dispute. If a Party fails to designate to the other Party a person to participate in the selection of the sole arbitrator, or if the persons so designated by the Parties fail, within thirty (30) days following the giving of notice of the dispute by the Party invoking the provisions of this section, to agree on a sole arbitrator of the dispute, either Party shall have the right to apply to the Circuit Court for the 19th Judicial Circuit of the State of Florida for the appointment of such sole arbitrator. The Parties agree that the timing of, and rules governing the conduct of, the non-binding arbitration proceeding shall, unless otherwise agreed, be determined by the sole arbitrator in accordance with applicable law. Unless otherwise agreed, the place of arbitration shall be Indian River County, Florida. In making any award, the arbitrator shall be subject to any provisions of this Franchise which expressly limit remedies or damages. The Parties shall share equally the compensation and expenses of the arbitrator and the expense of any hearing, and each Party shall bear the compensation and expenses of its own counsel and other representatives (if any). Each Party shall continue to perform its obligations under this Franchise pending final resolution of any dispute submitted to non-binding arbitration pursuant to this section, unless to do so would be impossible or impracticable under the circumstances. Notwithstanding the pendency of any arbitration proceeding hereunder, a Party, without prejudice to the above procedures, may file a judicial or administrative complaint for statute of limitations or venue reasons, or seek a preliminary injunction or other provisional judicial or administrative relief, if in its sole judgment, such action is necessary to avoid irreparable damage or to preserve the status quo. Despite such action, the Parties will continue to participate in good faith in the non-binding arbitration provided for above. Either Party may file judicial or administrative proceedings to obtain a binding decision, if such Party does not agree with the arbitration decision. In such event, Section 17 above shall apply with respect to an award of attorney's fees and court costs.  
Section 21. - Effective date. 
This Franchise Agreement shall become effective upon its acceptance by the Franchisee, which acceptance must be evidenced in writing by signature of this document within thirty (30) days of the City's passage and adoption hereof. 
WHEREFORE, the Parties have caused their duly authorized representatives to execute this Agreement on the date first written above. 


LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF SEBASTIAN, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Adopted: August 28, 1985 
Effective: September 9, 1985 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the City Council  
Republished in 2001 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SEBASTIAN, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Walter Barnes 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ben A. Bishop 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
Joe Barczyk 
James Hill 
Edward J. Majcher, Jr. 
City Council 
____________ 
Rich Stringer 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sally A. Maio 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This volume constitutes the revised Land Development Code for the City of Sebastian Florida, 
adopted by Ordinance No. O-00-15 on June 14, 2000, Exhibit A. 
Section Numbering System 
    The section numbering system used in this publication of the Sebastian Land Development Code is 
the same as that employed in Exhibit A adopted by Ordinance No. O-00-15. Inasmuch as the Land 
Development Code is referenced in the Sebastian Code of Ordinances as chapter 54, the first part of the 
section number is 54 followed by a dash and a number representing a chapter number within the Land 
Development Code; the number following the second dash represents the article number in the Land 
Development Code followed by a point and a number indicating the sequence of the particular section 
within the article; hence, section 3 of article VIII in chapter II of the Land Development Code (referenced 
as chapter 54) appears as Sec. 54-2-8.3. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon 
are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume followed by a number which 
represents the Arabic equivalent of the article designation. The number to the right of the colon 
represents the sequence of the page within that article; thus, page 3 of article VIII of the Land 
Development Code would appear as LDC8:3. The following abbreviations are used in this volume: 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
LDC 
COMPARATIVE TABLE 
CT 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
SRT 
INDEX 
LDCi 
 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed 
under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and 
still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous 
cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the 
particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of 
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory 
legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These 
new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of 
inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. 
As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the 
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher 
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, 
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Wilma W. Reed, Supplement Editor, of the 
Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the 
publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Richard Stringer, City Attorney, and Sally A. Maio, City Clerk, for 
their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their 
efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a publication of the City's Land Development Code 
which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool 
in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION  
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. O-00-15 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SEBASTIAN, INDIAN RIVER COUNTY, FLORIDA, 
REWRITING CITY CODE CHAPTER 20A, THE LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE; PROVIDING FOR 
CONFLICTS; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
    WHEREAS, pursuant to Florida Statutes every municipality is required to adopt land development 
regulations consistent with and in implementation of comprehensive Growth Management Plan Updates 
[e]very five years; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Sebastian adopted such updates to its Comprehensive Plan in January 1999; 
and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that the required adoption of such land development 
regulations is an opportune time to revise the Land Development Code; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council upon due public hearing has considered the proposed revised Land 
Development Code and found it to be in the best interest of the citizens of Sebastian; 
    NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SEBASTIAN, 
INDIAN RIVER COUNTY, FLORIDA, as follows: 
    Section 1. That Chapter 20A, The Land Development Code, referenced as Chapter 54 of the Code 
of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian, is hereby supplanted, amended, and revised as to read as set 
forth in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. 
    Section 2. CONFLICT. All ordinances of parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
    Section 3. SEVERABILITY. In the event a court of competent jurisdiction shall determine that any 
part of this Ordinance is invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected 
and it shall be presumed that the City Council did not intend to enact such invalid of unconstitutional 
provision. It shall further be assumed that the City Council would have enacted the remainder of this 
Ordinance without said invalid or unconstitutional provision. It shall further be assumed that the City 
Council would have enacted the remainder of this Ordinance without said invalid or unconstitutional 
provision, thereby causing said remainder to remain in full force and effect. 
    Section 4. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect following its adoption by the City 
Council, however, all active applications for matters regulated under the previous Land Development 
Code pending as May 24, 2000, shall be processed to completion in accordance with the pre-existing 
land development regulation provisions. 
    The foregoing Ordinance was moved for adoption by Councilmember Hill . The motion was 
seconded by Councilmember Majcher and, upon being put to a vote, the vote was as follows: 
Mayor Walter Barnes 
Aye 
Vice-Mayor Ben A. Bishop 
Aye 
Councilmember Joe Barczyk 
Aye 
Councilmember James Hill 
Aye 
Councilmember Edward J. Majcher, Jr. 
Aye 
 
The Mayor thereupon declared this Ordinance duly passed and adopted this 14th day of June, 2000. 
CITY OF SEBASTIAN, FLORIDA 

/s/ Walter Barnes  
      Mayor Walter Barnes 
 
 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Kathryn M. O'Halloran  
      Kathryn M. O'Halloran,  
      MMC/AAE, City Clerk 

 
 
Approved as to form and legality for  
reliance by the City of Sebastian only: 
/s/ Rich Stringer  
      Rich Stringer, City Attorney 

 
 


Chapter 1 - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 


ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE 


Sec. 54-1-1.1. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be entitled the "City of Sebastian Land Development Code." When hereinafter 
used, unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms this "ordinance" or this "code" refers to the City of 
Sebastian Land Development Code. 


Sec. 54-1-1.2. - Legislative authority and binding effect. 
    The legislative authority for the City of Sebastian Land Development Code is as follows: 
(1) ?Section 163.3201, F.S., mandates that local governments shall adopt or amend and enforce 
land development regulations that are consistent with and implement their adopted 
comprehensive plan. 
(2) ?Section 163.3202, F.S., requires that the land development code shall contain specific and 
detailed provisions necessary or desirable to implement the adopted comprehensive plan and 
shall as a minimum: 
a. ?Regulate the subdivision of land. 
b. ?Regulate the use of land and water for those land use categories included in the land use 
element and ensure the compatibility of adjacent uses and provide for open space. 
c. ?Provide for protection of potable water wellfields. 
d. ?Regulate areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding and provide for drainage and 
stormwater management. 
e. ?Ensure the protection of environmentally sensitive lands designated in the comprehensive 
plan. 
f. ?Regulate signage. 
g. ?Provide for concurrency management. The concurrency management system must require 
that no development order or permit for development be issued unless such order or permit 
is conditioned on the availability of required public facilities and services concurrent with 
the impacts of the development. The concurrency management system is further 
elaborated in chapter IX, Concurrency Management, and the capital improvements 
element, of the City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan. 
h. ?Ensure safe and convenient on-site traffic flow considering needed vehicle parking. 


Sec. 54-1-1.3. - Legislative purpose, intent and scope. 
    The purpose of the city's land development code is to assist implementation of the city's 
comprehensive plan. Specifically the code is intended to carry out more broad based comprehensive plan 
policies concerned with land use; transportation; housing; recreation and open space; conservation; 
public facilities including water, wastewater and drainage system improvements; fiscal management; and 
intergovernmental coordination. Therefore, any violation or inconsistency with the land development code 
shall be interpreted as a violation and/or inconsistency with related policies of the comprehensive plan. 


Sec. 54-1-1.4. - Consistency with comprehensive plan. 
    The City of Sebastian Land Development Code, pursuant to sections 163.3201 and 163.3202 F.S., is 
adopted to assist in carrying out the desired general policies of the comprehensive plan for managing the 
use of land and water within the City of Sebastian. The land development code is and shall remain 
consistent with the comprehensive plan as mandated by chapter 163, Pt. II F.S., County and Municipal 
Planning and Land Development Regulation. The land development code shall be amended as 
necessary to ensure consistency with the City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan. 
(Reference: Comprehensive plan adopted, Code of Ordinances, City of Sebastian, § 78-26.) 


Sec. 54-1-1.5. - Applicability. 
(a) ?General applicability. The land development code shall apply to all development, including 
redevelopment or changes in land use throughout the City of Sebastian. No development, as defined 
herein, or change in land use shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this code. 
The land development code is expressly intended to implement more broad based policies of the 
comprehensive plan. Therefore, any violation or inconsistency with the land development code shall 
be interpreted as a violation and/or inconsistency with the comprehensive plan. 
(b) ?Status of previously issued construction permits. The provisions of this code and any amendments 
thereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective construction permit if the 
development activity authorized by the permit commenced prior to the effective date of this code, 
and the building permit has not expired. Upon expiration of any such building permit, the developer 
shall comply with the provisions of the land development code as amended as well as the building 
codes as amended in obtaining a new building permit. 


Sec. 54-1-1.6. - Interpretation and conflict. 
(a) ?General interpretations. In the interpretation and application of this code all provisions shall be: 1) 
considered as minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general 
welfare; 2) liberally construed in favor of the city; and 3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other 
powers granted under state statutes. 
(b) ?Conflicts. More specific provisions of this code shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions 
that may be more lenient than or in conflict with the more specific provision. 
    Where the provisions of the code appear to conflict with another law, the most restrictive provision 
shall govern. 


Sec. 54-1-1.7. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is for any reason held 
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the 
remaining portions of this code shall continue in full force and effect. 


Sec. 54-1-1.8. - Repeal. 
    Upon the effective date of this ordinance, chapter 54, Land Development Code, Code of Ordinances 
of the City of Sebastian, Florida is hereby repealed and shall be superseded by the provisions of this 
code. 


Sec. 54-1-1.9. - Saving clause. 
    The obligations, restrictions, rights and/or regulations heretofore existing on land located in the 
corporate limits of the City of Sebastian shall not be impaired, affected or avoided by the adoption of this 
code. 


Sec. 54-1-1.10. - Status of code, prior offenses. 
    Any prosecution arising from a violation of any ordinance repealed by this ordinance, which 
prosecution may be pending at the time this code becomes effective, or any prosecution which may be 
started within one year after the effective date of this code as a consequence of any violation of any 
ordinance repealed therein, which violation was committed prior to the effective date of this code, shall be 
tried and determined exactly as if such ordinance had not been repealed. 


Sec. 54-1-1.11. - Violations and penalties. 
    In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may exercise authority provided for 
through chapter 2, article VI, division 2 of the City of Sebastian Code of Ordinances. 


Sec. 54-1-1.12. - Codification. 
    Provisions of this ordinance shall be incorporated in the City Code of Ordinances and the word 
"ordinance" may be changed to "section", "article", or other appropriate word, and the sections of this 
ordinance may be re-numbered or re-lettered to accomplish such intention. 


Sec. 54-1-1.13. - Enactment and effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption by the city. 


Sec. 54-1-1.14. - Injunction relief. 
    In addition to any penalty provided by law for the violation of any provision of this code or any 
condition duly imposed by the city, the city may bring suit in the circuit court to enjoin, restrain, or 
otherwise prevent the violation of any provision of this code or any condition duly imposed by the city. 


ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 


Sec. 54-1-2.1. - General procedure for legislative and quasi-judicial actions. 
    The general procedures for review of legislative and quasi-judicial rulings as explained below shall 
be established by resolution of the city council. 
(a) ?Classification of legislative and quasi-judicial rulings. The following table "Classification of 
Legislative and Quasi-Judicial Rulings" defines the nature of city rulings affecting land use, 
planning and zoning. 
CLASSIFICATION OF LEGISLATIVE AND QUASI-JUDICIAL RULINGS (1) 
TYPE OF RULING 
LEGISLATIVE  
(Creates Uniform  
Policy) 
QUASI-JUDICIAL  
(Effectuates or  
Applies Adopted  
Policy) 
Comprehensive Plan Adoption 
;check; 

Amendment to the Comprehensive Plan 
;check; 

Change in Future Land Use Map Designation 
;check; 

Adoption of Land Development Code 
;check; 

Amendment of Land Development Code 
;check; 

Generic Change in Zoning Districts 
;check; 

Rezoning for a Specific Site 

;check; 
Conditional Use 

;check; 
Special Use 

;check; 
Planned Unit Development 

;check; 
Variance 

;check; 
Subdivision Plat Approval 

;check; 
Site or Site plan Approval 

;check; 
Appeal of Administrative Decisions 

;check; 
Vesting Determination 

;check; 
Concurrency Management Determination 

;check; 
Tree Removal Permit 

;check; 
Sign Permit 

;check; 
Building Permit 

;check; 
 
Footnote (1): Current as of the effective date of this ordinance. This table shall automatically be 
revised to conform to changes in the laws affecting legislative and quasi-judicial decisions of local 
governments in Florida. 
(b) ?Legislative or quasi-legislative actions and proceedings. Legislative or quasi-legislative actions 
result in formulation of a general public rule or policy that is uniformly applicable to a large area 
or a large number of individuals, interests, or activities. 


Sec. 54-1-2.2. - Enforcement. 
(a) ?Organization. 
(1) ?Planning and growth management department. The city shall have a planning and growth 
management department administered by the planning and growth management director who 
shall be appointed by the city manager. The planning and growth management director shall 
provide assistance to the local planning agency, the planning and zoning commission, the city 
council and other entities involved in implementing functions delegated to the local planning 
agency pursuant to section 163.3174, F.S., or any other planning and land development 
regulatory functions assigned by the city manager. In addition, the planning and growth 
management director shall coordinate with other public agencies to facilitate intergovernmental 
coordination issues underlying land development and resource conservation decisions. As 
necessary the planning and growth management director shall obtain professional consultation 
to interpret, implement, administer and enforce provisions of the adopted comprehensive plan 
and the land development code. Whenever the term planning and growth management director 
is used herein, such term shall mean the planning and growth management director or such 
designee as may be duly appointed by the city manager. 
(2) ?Building department. The building department shall be headed by the building director who 
shall be appointed by the city manager. The building director shall be qualified by education and 
training to perform the duties of the building director as established in the land development 
code and the standard building code, or such other code(s) as may be adopted by the city 
council. Neither the building director nor anyone under his direction shall enter any private 
property without consent of the owner, unless the city finds that an imminent threat to the 
health, safety and welfare exists. The repair, vacation or demolition of unsafe buildings or 
structures shall be administered pursuant to the standard unsafe building code as herein 
amended. The building director shall be responsible for the enforcement of the building code, 
electrical code, energy code, fire prevention code, gas code, housing code, mechanical code, 
plumbing code, unsafe building code and swimming pool code, as adopted by the city from time 
to time. 
(b) ?Application, purpose and conflict. The planning and growth management director shall apply the 
provisions of these regulations as minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, 
safety, or the general welfare of the public. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, 
abrogate or annul requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed 
restrictions or any lawful easements, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that 
where these regulations impose a greater restriction, the provisions of these regulations shall prevail. 
(c) ?Violations and enforcement procedures. 
(1) ?Reporting violations. Any person may report a violation of the land development code to the 
code enforcement division. Such reports shall be maintained in writing stating the causes and 
basis for the complaint. Complaint investigations may also be based upon field inspections 
performed by the code enforcement division or other appropriate city staff. 
(2) ?Investigation. In conducting investigations of violations, city code enforcement officers shall 
have the authority, where lawful, to inspect property, obtain the signed statements of 
prospective witnesses, photograph violations, and do such other gathering of evidence as is 
necessary for the complete investigation of a land development code violation. 
(3) ?Procedure when violation is determined. Where it is determined that a probable violation of this 
code exists, code enforcement provisions of chapter 2, article VI, division 2, of the Code of 
Ordinances shall be applied to remedy the violation. 
(d) ?Final orders and decisions by an administrative official and appeals thereto. Pursuant to section 54-
1-2.2(a), the intent of the land development code is that all questions of interpretation, administration 
and enforcement shall first be presented to the planning and growth management director. The 
planning and growth management director may bring questions of interpretation to the planning and 
zoning commission and may seek professional consultation as necessary to interpret, implement, 
administer, and enforce the comprehensive plan and land development code. Where an aggrieved 
party decides to appeal a decision, including a final order, of the planning and growth management 
director or other administrative official, the appeal shall be presented to the board of adjustment 
pursuant to section 54-1-2.5(d)(1). However, appeals to the decisions of city staff on administrative 
site plans shall be to the planning and zoning commission and shall be filed within ten days following 
the city staff decision. Similarly, appeals to city staff decisions on subdivisions shall be directed to the 
city council and shall be filed within ten days following the decision and shall follow the procedures 
stated in section 54-1-2.4(g). 
(e) ?Penalties and other legal remedies. The city shall pursue each misdemeanor and any lawful civil 
action or proceeding as deemed necessary in compliance with section 1-10 (General penalty; 
continuing violations) and section 2-192 (Enforcement methods) of the Code of Ordinances. 


Sec. 54-1-2.3. - Required permits. 
(a) ?Building permits. Within the corporate limits of the City of Sebastian, no building or other structure 
shall be erected, demolished, moved, added to, or structurally altered without the owner, contractor, 
builder or authorized agent of the owner receiving a duly processed building permit therefore, issued 
by the building director. All building permits issued shall be in conformity with the provisions of the 
fire codes, the building codes, and the land development code. No building permit shall be granted 
unless the developer has submitted all requisite plans and permits required by the city and other 
entities having jurisdiction. No building permit shall be issued until concurrency management 
program requirements are met. Any required supportive written documentation from other essential 
public facility and service agencies must be submitted and shall demonstrate that sufficient capacity 
exists to support the proposed development. 
(1) ?Application for building permit. All applications for building permits for any structure shall be 
filed with the building director. Such applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall be 
accompanied by a site plan, if required pursuant to article XVIII of the land development code. 
Where site plan approval is required, the approved site plan, including a construction 
management plan and schedule (reference section 54-4-18.4.(j)), if the construction period is 
anticipated to exceed one year, and all other required components, shall be submitted with the 
building permit application. 
If no site plan is required pursuant to article XVIII, the application for a building permit shall 
include an acceptable scale drawing, in triplicate for commercial projects and duplicate for 
residential projects, showing the following: 
a. ?A survey prepared and certified by a Florida registered land surveyor showing the actual 
dimensions and shape of the lot or lots to be built upon; 
b. ?The exact sizes and locations on the lots of buildings already existing, if any; 
c. ?The location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration; 
d. ?When applicable, the required parking spaces, loading and unloading spaces, 
maneuvering space and openings for ingress and egress; 
e. ?When applicable, grading and drainage plans meeting the St. Johns River Water 
Management District requirements and showing any and all cuts, fills and provisions for 
adequately carrying off surface water on the premises, plus provisions for any surface 
water which would naturally flow over or through the area. Such plans shall be reviewed 
and approved by the city engineer or designees; 
f. ?Such other information as required by the planning and growth management director, city 
engineer or building director, including, but not limited to, existing or proposed building 
construction or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of 
families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; 
conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine 
conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, the land development code. One 
copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building director, after the 
building director shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved as 
attested to by signature of the building director on the copy. The original and one copy of 
the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building division. 
(2) ?Building permit expiration. A building permit shall be null and void if any of the below cited 
conditions fail to occur. Barring an act of nature, no extension shall be granted once a building 
permit has expired. 
a. ?The construction shall commence within 180 days from the time the building permit was 
released; 
b. ?The structures accommodating the principal use(s) shall be entirely completed within two 
years following the release of the building permit or within the period identified in the site 
plan's construction management plan and schedule; 
c. ?The construction activity shall be continuous and no period of dormancy shall exist for six 
months or more; and 
d. ?The developer shall call for and achieve approved inspections within a 120-day interval as 
required pursuant to the building code or the approved construction management plan and 
schedule. 
(3) ?Notice requirement for expired building permits. If any conditions identified above fail to occur, 
the building director shall cancel the permit and give written notice to the permittee. In cases 
where construction has commenced the notice shall also be sent to the contractor. The notice 
shall describe the nature of the violation and/or the condition causing the permit expiration and 
state that no further work described in the canceled permit shall proceed unless and until a new 
building permit has been obtained. 
Notwithstanding, if the development was the subject of a construction management plan which 
included a city approved schedule for construction activity beyond a one-year period, the terms 
of the construction schedule shall be used as the basis for rendering decisions regarding permit 
expiration. Barring an act of nature, no extension shall be granted once a building permit has 
expired. 
(4) ?Phased projects. Large scale developments may be phased. However, no single phase of 
development shall exceed a period of two years. Prior to commencing each phase of a phased 
development, the permittee shall be required to obtain a new building permit unless the multi-
phased project has a construction span less than two years. No building permit shall be valid for 
a period longer than two years. 
(b) ?Certificates of occupancy and occupational licenses. No certificate of occupancy and no 
occupational licenses shall be granted unless and until the applicant presents the city written 
documentation from appropriate city officials, including but not limited to the city engineering 
department and such other agencies as appropriate, which states that the respective public facilities 
have sufficient existing capacity to supply the proposed development, or that capacity will exist upon 
completion of the proposed development. In addition, the below stated provisions shall be satisfied. 
(1) ?Conditional certificate of occupancy. A conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued by 
the building director to accommodate extraordinary conditions for a period not exceeding 90 
days during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that 
such temporary certificate may require special conditions and safeguards which the city deems 
necessary to protect the safety of the occupants and the public. Violations of provisions 
contained in the temporary certificate of occupancy or other related violations occurring on 
properties operating pursuant to a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of the 
building code and/or land development code, as applicable, and shall be punishable as 
provided in section 1-10 (General penalty; continuing violations) and in sections 2-193, 2-194, 
2-195 (Enforcement procedures) of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2) ?Certificate of occupancy or use required. No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected 
or altered shall be used until the building director shall have issued a certificate of occupancy 
stating that such land, building, or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are found to be in 
conformity with the provisions of the land development code and the building regulations within 
chapter 26, City Code of Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the building director to make a final 
inspection of the building or premises and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, 
building, or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the land 
development code and the building regulations within chapter 26, City Code of Ordinances; or, if 
such certificate is refused, to state such refusal in writing together with the cause. Failure to 
obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be deemed a violation of the land development code. 
(3) ?Occupational licenses. No land or building or part thereof hereafter erected or altered in its use 
or structure shall be used until the applicant for the new use has received an occupational 
license pursuant to chapter 30, City Code of Ordinances. Prior to issuing the occupational 
license, the city clerk shall coordinate with the planning and growth management director to 
ensure that such land, building, or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are found to be in 
conformity with the provisions of the land development code and the building regulations within 
chapter 26, City Code of Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the building director to make a final 
inspection of the building or premises and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, building 
or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the land development 
code and the building regulations within chapter 26, City Code of Ordinances; or, if such 
certificate is refused, to state such refusal in writing together with the cause. Failure to obtain a 
certificate of occupancy shall be deemed a violation of the land development code. 
(c) ?Construction and use to be as provided in applications, permits and certificates of occupancy. 
Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved 
by the building director or designee shall authorize only the use, arrangements, and construction set 
forth in approved plans and application. No other arrangement or construction shall be allowed 
unless new buildings permits or a new certificate of occupancy is issued and such use complies with 
all applicable requirements of the land development code as well as all adopted building regulations 
and fire code, including advisory standards of the national fire protection association code. 
Unauthorized use, arrangement, or construction activity shall be deemed a violation of the land 
development code. 
(d) ?Violations and penalties . Proceeding with any type of construction or use without an approved 
authorization for a building permit or land use shall be a violation of the land development code and 
punishable as provided in section 1-10 (General penalty; continuing violations) and in sections 2-
193, 2-194, 2-195 (Enforcement procedures) of the Code of Ordinances. 


Sec. 54-1-2.4. - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a) ?Established and designated local planning agency. Pursuant to and in accordance with the City 
Charter and section 163.3174, F.S., of the County and Municipal Planning and Land Development 
Regulation Act, the city council finds that planning of land use and continuing growth management 
evaluation within the City of Sebastian is a public purpose benefiting the safety, economic and 
cultural welfare of the citizens of Sebastian. The city council further finds that this public purpose can 
best be achieved by establishing the Sebastian Planning and Zoning Commission, which is hereby 
established and designated as the local planning agency (LPA) for the city. The Sebastian Planning 
and Zoning Commission shall abide by the City Charter, as amended, and all applicable provisions 
of the Florida Statutes. The planning and zoning commission shall have the authority and 
responsibility to review land use in the city and evaluate planning and regulatory techniques for 
resolving physical, economic, social, environmental and fiscal issues. The city council directs the 
planning and zoning commission to carry out functions and powers herein identified. The planning 
and zoning commission shall use the power and authority conferred upon it by the land development 
code to further its stated public purpose. 
(b) ?Membership, terms and removal. The Sebastian Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of 
seven members and two alternates. The qualifications, term and appointment of members shall be 
done in accordance with chapter 2, article VI, division 1 of the Code of Ordinances, City of 
Sebastian. 
(1) ?Alternate members and their duties. The alternate members may attend all meetings of the 
planning and zoning commission but shall act only in the absence, disability or disqualification 
of a regular member thereof. When an alternate member acts, the minutes of the planning and 
zoning commission shall reflect the name of the absent, disabled or disqualified member in 
whose place and stead the alternate member is acting. Each alternate member shall fill in for a 
regular member who is absent, disabled, or disqualified on a rotating basis with the most senior 
alternate member to be the first in the initial rotation. If more than one regular member is 
absent, disabled or disqualified, then both alternate members shall act as members of the 
planning and zoning commission. 
(2) ?Vacancies and reappointment of commission members. Appointments to fill any vacancy, shall 
be for the remainder of the unexpired term of office of the vacated planning and zoning 
commission seat being filled by the appointment. 
(3) ?Removal of commission members and alternates. The removal of members shall be done in 
accordance with chapter 2, article VI, division 1 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sebastian. 
(c) ?Compensation of planning and zoning commission members. All members shall serve without 
compensation but, as authorized by the city council, may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred 
in connection with their duties. 
(d) ?Functions and powers. The Sebastian Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and 
authority to carry out the duties and responsibilities conferred upon it by the land development code 
consistent with section 163.3174, F.S. and shall perform these duties in the best interests of the 
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Sebastian. The planning and zoning commission shall 
have the following functions, acting either as the local planning agency (LPA) or as the city's 
planning and zoning commission: 
(1) ?Acting as the local planning agency (LPA), the LPA shall: 
a. ?Be responsible for preparation, review, and any proposed amendment of the 
comprehensive plan, and deliberations of proposed changes to the plan and prior to any 
recommendations to the city council; 
b. ?Hold at least one public hearing with due public notice on the proposed plan or element, or 
portion thereof, pursuant to section 163.3174(4)(a), F.S., and make recommendations to 
the city council concerning enactment; 
c. ?Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan, review any 
proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan, prepare periodic reports required 
pursuant to section 163.3191, F.S., and make recommendations to the city council 
concerning enactment; 
d. ?Review proposed land development code and amendments thereto and make 
recommendations to the city council as to the consistency of the proposed land 
development code and amendments thereto with the adopted comprehensive plan or 
element, or portion thereof, pursuant to section 163.3174(4)(c), F.S. 
(2) ?Acting as the planning and zoning commission, the commission shall: 
a. ?Review site plans submitted pursuant to article XVIII of the land development code; 
b. ?Keep the city council and general public informed and advised as to the physical 
development of the city, undertake special studies related to growth management and 
resource conservation, including but not limited to annexation, land acquisition, community 
improvement strategies, including but not limited to annual update and revision to the 
capital improvement program and budget, and other related issues; 
c. ?Review conditional uses (reference article VI), which may be part of an administrative or 
major site plan; 
d. ?Review subdivision proposals submitted pursuant to article XIX, land development code, 
and street dedication and reconfiguration proposals, and make recommendations to the 
city council regarding compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
e. ?Conduct such public hearings as may be required to carry out the functions set forth 
herein; and 
f. ?Review proposals for special use permits and special exceptions per section 54-1-3.1 and 
make recommendations to the city council regarding compliance with applicable laws and 
ordinance. 
g. ?Pursuant to section 163.3174(4)(d), F.S., perform any other duties, which are assigned to 
the Sebastian Planning and Zoning Commission by the city council or by general or special 
law. 
(3) ?In carrying out the respective functions and duties prescribed above, the planning and zoning 
commission shall: 
a. ?Acquire and maintain such information and materials as are necessary to an understanding 
of past trends, present conditions, and forces at work to cause changes in these 
conditions. Such information and material may include maps and photographs of manmade 
and natural physical features of the area concerned, statistics on past trends and present 
conditions with respect to population, property values, economic factors, land use, and 
such other information as is important or likely to be important in determining the amount, 
direction and kind of development to be expected in the area and it's various parts; 
b. ?Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the physical development of the city; 
c. ?Advise and consult with administrative staff and others as may be directed by the city 
council in preparing the comprehensive plan, recommending amendments to the plan 
based on continuing plan evaluation; and recommending to the city council courses of 
action and proposed ordinances and regulations designed to promote orderly development 
as may be necessary to implement the plan or to carry out any function of the commission; 
d. ?Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and 
requirements of the comprehensive plan as to growth and improvement; 
e. ?Keep the city council and the general public informed and advised as to the physical 
development of the city; 
f. ?Conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the 
preparation, establishment and maintenance of the comprehensive plan, as well as all 
other public hearings provided for hereby or by the city council; 
g. ?Consider, review and make recommendations concerning special studies on the location, 
condition, and adequacy of specific facilities in the area. These may include, but are not 
limited to, studies on housing, commercial, and industrial conditions and facilities, public 
and private utilities, and traffic, transportation and parking; 
h. ?Consider all plats subdividing lands, as well as all newly proposed streets or extensions 
thereto, and recommend acceptance, modification or rejection thereof; prepare regulations 
for the subdivision and platting of land; review all plans for such streets and subdivisions, 
including required community facilities such as drainage, water and wastewater facilities, 
and all required community facilities, and all other needed public improvements; and 
forward to the city council written recommendations on such matters; 
i. ?Consider, review and make recommendations concerning studies of city public land needs 
and recommend site acquisition for the same, including development plans and requisite 
facilities; 
j. ?Annually prepare, in conjunction with the city engineer, a list of the capital improvements 
recommended for construction during the next fiscal year and the four-year period following 
it, showing recommended order of priority thereof, the year recommended for beginning 
construction, the year recommended for completing construction, and the estimated costs 
thereof; 
k. ?Carry out powers of site plan review as stipulated in article XVIII of the land development 
code; 
l. ?Perform any other duties, which lawfully may be assigned to the commission. 
    In performing functions set forth in section 54-1-2.4, the planning and zoning commission shall act 
only in an advisory capacity to the city council. When the planning and zoning commission reviews and 
recommends actions regarding a major site plan approval as defined in article XVIII, the decision of the 
planning and zoning commission shall be final, unless said decision is appealed to the city council within 
ten days of the decision, as provided for in the land development code. 
(e) ?Appropriation of funds. The city council shall appropriate funds necessary for expenses incurred by 
the planning and zoning commission in its performance of the above listed functions. The planning 
and zoning commission shall not have the power to contract with private or governmental persons or 
entities, or to commit or expend funds of the city. 
(f) ?Rules of procedure . The planning and zoning commission shall establish and adopt rules of 
procedure, which shall include, but not be limited to, election and duties of officers; meeting 
schedule, time, and place; establishing order of business and method of transaction; procedure for 
action and voting by members; conduct of public hearings; rules of conduct; parliamentary 
procedure; maintenance of records; and method of amending same. 
(1) ?Officers. From among its members the planning and zoning commission annually shall elect a 
chairperson and a vice chairperson at the first regular meeting of the commission held at the 
beginning of each calendar year. Whenever possible, the persons selected as the chairperson 
and vice chairperson of the commission shall have served two years as a regular member of the 
commission and shall have attended at least 90% of the meetings of the planning and zoning 
commission which such member was not otherwise excused from attending by the chairperson 
at such meetings of the commission. The planning and growth management director shall 
appoint a city employee to serve as secretary to the planning and zoning commission and take 
minutes of the meetings of the commission. 
(2) ?Regular meetings. The planning and zoning commission shall meet at regular intervals to be 
determined by a majority of the commission or at such other times as the chairperson or 
commission may determine. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and keep a 
properly indexed record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations. Such 
record shall be a public record. All meetings of the commission shall be public. 
(3) ?Notice. All meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall be open to the public and 
notice of such meetings shall be posted at city hall. At any special or regular meeting the 
planning and zoning commission may set a future meeting date. 
(4) ?Procedures for local planning agency. Rules of the planning and zoning commission shall apply 
to the planning and zoning commission acting under the powers extended to the local planning 
agency in chapter 163, F.S. Members of the local planning agency shall continue to be 
appointed and follow such rules of procedure, methods of choosing officers, setting of public 
meetings, providing of financial support, and accomplishing its duties as provided in ordinances 
and resolutions adopted by the city council. All meetings of the local planning agency shall be 
public meetings and all agency records shall be public records. The local planning agency shall 
encourage public participation. 
(5) ?Meeting agenda to be prepared. A written agenda shall be prepared prior to each meeting with 
an agenda submission deadline as established by the planning and zoning commission. The 
planning and zoning commission, by unanimous consent of all of the planning and zoning 
commission members present at a meeting, may add or modify the written agenda by adding 
additional items thereto, but the planning and zoning commission shall not take action on any 
items added to the written agenda at such meeting when prohibited by law. 
(6) ?Funding of local planning agency. The city council shall appropriate funds at its discretion to 
the local planning agency for expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. The local planning 
agency may, in order to accomplish the purposes and activities/required by the Local 
Government Comprehensive Planning Act of 1975, expend all sums so appropriated and other 
sums made available for use from fees, gifts, state or federal grants, state or federal loans, and 
other sources, provided acceptance of loans or grants must be approved by the city council. 
(7) ?Establish a schedule for comprehensive plan review. The planning and zoning commission 
rules of procedure shall establish a schedule for the review of the comprehensive plan pursuant 
to section 163.3191 F.S. to determine whether comprehensive plan amendments are desirable. 
(8) ?Quorum. Four members of the planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum for 
the transaction of business, but a smaller number may act only to adjourn meetings for lack of a 
quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be required to pass any action 
of the planning and zoning commission. 
(g) ?Appeals of planning and zoning commission decisions to the city council. Appeals of decisions by 
the planning and zoning commission shall be final unless otherwise stated herein. However, any 
affected party, including the city manager on behalf of staff, aggrieved by a decision of the planning 
and zoning commission may appeal the decision by filing a written appeal with the planning and 
growth management director within ten days of the decision of the planning and zoning commission. 
It shall require four affirmative votes of the city council to override the planning and zoning 
commission decision. 
    In considering and acting upon appeals of final decisions of the planning and zoning commission, the 
following procedures shall be observed: 
(1) ?Procedure and time limitation for appeal. For purposes of computation, the time for filing an 
appeal to a development order or decision by the planning and zoning commission shall begin 
on the date at which the planning and zoning commission made such decision. The original and 
one copy of the notice of appeal form provided by the planning and growth management 
director, together with all the documents, plans, papers or other materials constituting the record 
upon which the action appealed from was taken, shall be filed with the planning and growth 
management director who shall ensure that copies thereof are provided to the city council, the 
city manager and the city attorney, or to the applicant if the appeal is taken by the city manager. 
Appeals not so filed shall be deemed waived. 
(2) ?Date of hearing for appeals. Hearings of appeals by the city council shall be held at a date and 
time fixed by the city manager and shall in no event be less than 30 nor more than 60 days after 
the filing of the notice of appeal. 
(3) ?Notice. Upon notification by the city manager of the date fixed for hearing on any matter subject 
to the provisions of this section, the city clerk shall ensure publication of due notice consistent 
with section 54-1-2.8 herein. 
(4) ?Scope of review by city council. In reviewing an appeal of a final order or a decision of the 
planning and zoning commission, the city council shall be limited to review of the testimony, 
documents, plans, papers or other materials constituting the record upon which the action was 
taken. The city council may, upon appeal, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or modify the order, 
requirement, decision, or determination made by the planning and zoning commission and may 
make any necessary further order, requirements, decisions or determinations respecting the 
subject of the appeal and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the planning and zoning 
commission respecting such matter. The concurring vote of no less than four members of the 
city council shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or 
determination of the planning and zoning commission. 
(5) ?Appearance and argument. At any hearing upon any matter subject to the provisions of this 
code, the appellant seeking review by the city council and any other party desiring to be heard 
may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The appellant shall be entitled to make an initial 
presentation respecting the appeal, and at the conclusion of presentations or statements by all 
other parties, shall be entitled to offer a statement in rebuttal to such presentations if the 
appellant so desires. The presiding officer may, at the commencement of the hearing, or at any 
time during such hearing, require that parties desiring to make a presentation identify 
themselves, and may specify the time to be allowed for each party to make such presentation. 
(6) ?Reserved. 
(7) ?Decision and order by the city council. Action by the city council upon any matter subject to the 
provisions of this section shall be announced by the presiding officer immediately following the 
vote determining such action and shall thereafter be embodied in a written order prepared by 
the city clerk and executed by the presiding officer and the city clerk. Such written order shall be 
incorporated into the minutes of the meeting at which such action occurred. 
(8) ?Finality of decision. When the city council has taken action respecting an appeal of a planning 
and zoning commission action, no application for the same relief shall be accepted by the city 
for consideration by the commission for a period of two years from the date of such action, 
provided however, after one year, an applicant may request that the city council waive the 
provision of this section for proper cause based on changed conditions and/or the advent of 
new information which substantially impacts material issues. If a request for such waiver is 
submitted by the applicant, the city council shall determine if the changed conditions and/or the 
new information is sufficient to convene a new hearing on the applicant's appeal. If the city 
council determines that a hearing should be held on the applicant's appeal, the city manager 
shall direct the city clerk to provide due public notice of the scheduled public hearing in the 
same manner as required for the original appeal as described in section 54-1-2.8. 
(9) ?Judicial review of decisions. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a 
decision of the city council respecting an appeal of a decision by the planning and zoning 
commission, may apply by writ of certiorari in the manner provided by law, to the Indian River 
County Circuit Court for judicial relief within 30 days after rendition of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. O-14-07, § 1, 12-10-2014) 


Sec. 54-1-2.5. - Board of adjustment. 
(a) ?Establishment. The city council shall act as the board of adjustment. 
(b) ?Authority, power and rules of procedure. 
(1) ?Authority. In no instance shall the board grant any use of land in any zoning district other than 
those uses allowed in such district as a permitted use or a conditional use. 
(2) ?Duties and powers. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers: 
a. ?Hear and decide administrative appeals. Hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that 
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an 
administrative official in the enforcement of any land development code or regulation 
adopted pursuant to this act, unless otherwise provided herein. 
b. ?Hear and decide requests for variances. Hear and authorize upon appeal such variance 
from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest pursuant to 
section 54-1-2.5(c)(2). 
c. ?Require attendance at hearings and administer oaths. The board of adjustment shall have 
the authority to compel the attendance of witnesses at hearings or meetings and to 
administer oaths. 
(3) ?Rules of procedure. The city council may establish and adopt rules of procedure by resolution 
for the board of adjustment. All records and official minutes of the board of adjustment shall be 
filed with the office of the city clerk. 
(c) ?Criteria for determinations by the board of adjustment. 
(1) ?Criteria for review of administrative orders. In review of administrative orders, the board of 
adjustment may, upon appeal and in conformity with provision of this act, reverse or affirm, 
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an 
administrative official in the enforcement of any land development regulation or regulation 
adopted pursuant to this act, and may make any necessary order, requirement, decision, or 
determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is 
taken. 
(2) ?Criteria for determining variances. In order to authorize any variance from the terms of this 
code, the board of adjustment must find the following: 
a. ?Existence of special conditions or circumstances. That special conditions and 
circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and 
which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district. 
b. ?Conditions not created by applicant. That the special conditions and circumstances do not 
result from the actions of the applicant. 
c. ?Special privileges not conferred. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the 
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, buildings, or 
structures in the same zoning district. 
d. ?Hardship conditions exist. That literal interpretation of the provisions of the ordinance would 
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning 
district under the terms of the ordinance and would create unnecessary and undue 
hardship on the applicant. 
e. ?Only the minimum variance granted. That the variance granted is the minimum variance 
that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
f. ?Not injurious to the public welfare or intent of ordinance. That the granting of the variance 
will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and this 
code, and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise 
detrimental to the public welfare. 
g. ?Conditions and safeguards may be imposed. In granting any variance, the board of 
adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with 
chapter 163 F.S., the comprehensive plan, and any ordinance enacted under its authority. 
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which 
the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the ordinance. 
h. ?Time limit may be imposed. The board of adjustment may prescribe a reasonable time limit 
during which the applicant shall commence and/or complete the subject actions and 
conditions approved by the board. 
i. ?No use variance permitted in specified instances. Under no circumstances shall the board 
of adjustment grant a variance to permit a use not generally permitted in the zoning district 
involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of the ordinance in 
the zoning district. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in 
the same zoning district and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings; in other 
zoning districts shall be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance. 
(d) ?Procedures for processing matters before the board. 
(1) ?Appeal proceedings. As provided in section 54-1-2.2(d), appeals to the board of adjustment 
concerning interpretation or administration of the land development code may be taken by any 
aggrieved person or by any person or officer of the city's governing body affected by any 
decision of the planning and growth management director or designated administrative 
personnel. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed ten days after 
the rendering of the order, requirement, decisions, or determination appealed, by filing with the 
planning and growth management director a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
The appeal shall be in the form prescribed by the rules of the board. The administrative officer 
from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon notification of the filing and prior to the hearing date, 
transmit to the board of adjustment all papers or materials constituting the record upon which 
the action appealed was taken. 
(2) ?Hearing of appeal, notice required. The board of adjustment shall establish a reasonable time 
for the hearing of appeal, give public notice thereof consistent with section 54-1-2.8, as well as 
notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing 
any party may appear in person or be represented by an agent or by an attorney at law 
authorized to practice in the state. Appellants may be required to assume such reasonable 
costs in connection with appeals as may be determined by the city council through resolution in 
setting of fees to be charged for appeals. 
(3) ?Procedures for processing variances. A variance from the terms of these regulations shall not 
be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
a. ?A written application specifying the grounds for the variance is submitted. See section 54-
1-2.5(d)(1), Administrative appeal. 
b. ?Notice of public hearing shall be given as identified in section 54-1-2.8 herein. 
c. ?The public hearing shall be held, with the aggrieved parties appearing in person or 
represented by an attorney at law authorized to practice in the state. 
d. ?The board of adjustment shall determine that the application is complete and that granting 
the variance meets the criteria for granting variance and that the variance is the minimum 
variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(4) ?Reserved. 
(5) ?Expiration of variance determinations. Variances shall become void if not exercised within six 
months of the date granted, unless specifically determined otherwise in writing by the board of 
adjustment. 
(6) ?Extension of variance determinations. Before this six months period has expired, the applicant 
may make a request to the board of adjustment by letter for an additional six months' extension. 
Any further extensions of time shall require a new application to be processed as a new case. 
(7) ?Recommendation filed. On all proceedings held before the board of adjustment, the planning 
and growth management director shall review the application and file a recommendation on 
each item. Such recommendations shall be received, heard and filed prior to final action on any 
item before the board, and shall be part of the record of the application. (In reference to 
administrative appeals, a summary explanation shall be filed in place of a recommendation). 
(e) ?Review of board of adjustment decisions. Appeals of decision by the board of adjustment shall be 
final unless otherwise stated herein. However, any affected party aggrieved by a decision of the 
board of adjustment may seek certiorari review before the circuit court of the decision on the record 
in the manner provided by law within 30 days of the decision of the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. O-02-04, § 1, 2-13-2002; Ord. No. O-14-07, § 2, 12-10-2014) 


Sec. 54-1-2.6. - City council's role. 
(a) ?Legislative intent. The legislative intent of the land development code is to provide the city council of 
the City of Sebastian regulatory powers necessary to implement the comprehensive plan consistent 
with enabling legislation of chapter 163, F.S. 
(b) ?Powers and duties of the city council. 
(1) ?Enact or amend land development code. The city council shall adopt a land development code 
consistent with section 163.3202, F.S. Following receipt of a written report from the city planning 
and zoning commission, the city council may amend or supplement the regulations and districts 
fixed by the adopted city land development code. The city council shall hold a public hearing on 
such matters, as required by Florida Statutes, if any change is to be considered, and shall act 
on the proposed change after such hearing. In cases where the recommendation of the city 
planning and zoning commission is adverse to the proposed change, such change shall not 
become effective except by an affirmative vote of a majority of four members of the city council, 
after due process. 
(2) ?Establish fees and appropriate funds. The city council may, by resolution, establish fees, 
charges, and expenses imposed by the adopted land development code. 
(3) ?Consider and act on development issues as required. The city council shall consider and act on 
development and growth management issues pursuant to this code, chapter 163, F.S., and 
other applicable laws and regulations. 
(4) ?Enforce land development code. The city council shall enforce the land development code, 
including carrying out appropriate legislative actions. 
(5) ?Appoint and confirm members of requisite boards and commissions. The city council shall 
appoint and confirm members of the planning and zoning commission, the board of adjustment, 
and any other board, commission or committee as may be deemed necessary by the city 
council or applicable laws. 
(6) ?Take other actions necessary to implement the land development code. The city council may 
take such other action not delegated to the planning and zoning commission, board of 
adjustment, code enforcement board, or other entities as the city council may deem desirable 
and necessary to implement the provisions of the comprehensive plan and the land 
development code. 


Sec. 54-1-2.7. - Amendments to the land development code. 
(a) ?Purpose and intent. For the purpose of guiding and accomplishing coordinated and harmonious 
development in accordance with existing and future needs and in order to protect, promote, and 
improve public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare, 
the City of Sebastian, in accordance with the conditions and procedures specified in this act, may 
enact or amend and enforce a land development code after a public hearing as required by Florida 
Statutes. In such ordinance the city shall be divided into districts of such number, shape, and size as 
may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this act, and within these districts may 
regulate, determine, and establish: 
(1) ?Height, number of stories, size, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, reconstruction, 
alteration, and use of buildings and other structures for trade, industry, residence, and other 
purposes; 
(2) ?Use of land and water for trade, industry, profession, residence, and other purposes; 
(3) ?Size of yards, courts and other open spaces; 
(4) ?Percentage of lot that may be occupied; 
(5) ?Density of population; 
(6) ?Conditions under which various classes of nonconformities may continue, including authority to 
set fair and reasonable schedules for the elimination of nonconforming uses; 
(7) ?Use and types and sizes of structures in those areas subject to seasonal or periodic flooding, 
so that danger to life and property in such areas will be minimized; and 
(8) ?Performance standards for use of property and location of structures thereon. 
    All such regulations shall be uniform throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may 
differ from those in other districts. For each district designated, regulations may specify those uses that 
shall be excluded or subjected to reasonable requirements of a special nature. Uses permitted in one 
district may be prohibited in other districts, to the end that incompatibility of uses is minimized or 
eliminated. Regulations and district boundaries shall protect, promote, and improve public health, safety, 
comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare and shall be made with 
reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the districts and their special suitability 
for particular uses and with a view to conserving property values and encouraging the most appropriate 
use of land throughout the city. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide a means for changing the text of the land development code 
or the boundaries of the official zoning map. It is not intended to relieve particular hardships, nor to confer 
special privileges or rights on any person, but only to make necessary adjustments in light of changed 
conditions. In determining whether to grant a requested amendment, the city council shall consider, in 
addition to the factors set forth in this section, the consistency of the proposed amendment with the intent 
of the comprehensive plan. 
(b) ?Procedures for adopting, supplementing or amending the land development code. 
(1) ?Initiating amendments to the land development code. Amendments to the land development 
code or official zoning map may be initiated by: 
a. ?City council. The city council may initiate a land development code or official zoning map 
amendment by approving a written statement expressing its intent to amend this land 
development code and shall submit such written statement and any relevant supportive 
material to the city planning and zoning commission for review and action pursuant to 
section 54-1-2.7(b)(3) of this chapter. 
b. ?Planning and zoning commission. The city planning and zoning commission may initiate a 
land development code or official zoning map amendment. 
c. ?Property owner(s). An amendment to the land development code may be initiated by an 
application signed by a property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner. Such 
petition shall be submitted to the planning and growth management director together with a 
fee as shall be determined by resolution of the city council. As many lots or parcels of 
property as the applicant may desire may be included in any single petition if they are 
contiguous. The petition shall be submitted on an application form prescribed by the 
planning and growth management director. Applications for changes to the official zoning 
map shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1. ?Property description. Where applicable, the application shall include a legal 
description of the property that is the subject of the application, as well as its street 
address. 
2. ?Comprehensive plan land use map designation. The current and, where applicable, 
the proposed comprehensive plan land use map designation for the subject property 
shall be identified. 
3. ?Current and proposed zoning. The current and proposed zoning for the subject 
property shall be identified. 
4. ?Existing use. The existing use of the subject property shall be stated. 
5. ?Disclosure of ownership. The application shall include a verified statement showing 
each and every individual person having a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in 
the property upon which the application for rezoning is sought, except publicly held 
corporations, in which case the names and addresses of the corporate officers shall 
be sufficient. 
(2) ?Administrative review. The planning and growth management director shall forward land 
development code or official zoning map change petitions, for which appropriate fees have been 
submitted, to all appropriate administrative staff for their review and comment. The application 
shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of this chapter. The planning and 
growth management director shall summarize the staff's comments and make a 
recommendation to the planning and zoning commission. 
(3) ?Planning and zoning commission review. The planning and zoning commission, regardless of 
the source of the proposed zone change petition or change to the land development code, shall 
hold a public hearing. If the official zoning map is proposed for amendment, the public hearing 
shall be conducted after proper public notice is given as required by section 54-1-2.8. The 
planning and zoning commission shall submit a written report and recommendation concerning 
the proposed change to the official zoning map or to the land development code to the city 
council for official action. In its deliberations the planning and zoning commission shall consider 
the following criteria: 
a. ?Consistency with plan. Whether the proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
The commission shall identify any inconsistencies. 
b. ?Conformance with ordinances. Whether the proposal is in conformance with any applicable 
substantive requirements of the City of Sebastian Code of Ordinances. 
c. ?Changed conditions. Whether, and the extent to which, land use and development 
conditions have changed since the effective date of the existing regulations involved which 
are relevant to the amendment. 
d. ?Land use compatibility. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in any 
incompatible land uses, considering the type and location of uses involved. 
e. ?Adequate public facilities. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in 
demands on public facilities and services, exceeding the capacity of such facilities and 
services, existing or programmed, including transportation, utilities, drainage, recreation, 
education, emergency services, and similar necessary facilities and services. 
f. ?Natural environment. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in 
significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment. 
g. ?Economic effects. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would adversely affect 
the property values in the area, or the general welfare. 
h. ?Orderly development. Whether the proposal would result in an orderly and local 
development pattern. Any negative effects on such pattern shall be identified. 
i. ?Public interest; enabling act. Whether the proposal would be in conflict with the public 
interest, and whether it is in harmony with the purpose and interest of this ordinance and its 
enabling legislation. 
j. ?Other matters. Other matters which the planning and zoning commission may deem 
appropriate. 
(4) ?City council review. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the requested zoning map 
amendment or land development code amendment pursuant to Florida Statutes. The city 
council shall then act on the proposed change. In its deliberations the city council shall consider 
the criteria identified in section 54-1-2-7(b)3 above, together with the findings and 
recommendations of the planning and zoning commission. 
Any modifications or revisions to the city planning and zoning commissions recommendation 
which involve a greater area of land to be rezoned or a more intensive zoning classification shall 
be the subject of an additional public hearing before the city council with notice prior to action by 
the city council. 


Sec. 54-1-2.8. - Procedures for public hearings. 
    The following notice requirements are in addition to the requirements as established by Florida 
Statutes. The notice provisions contained herein regarding notice by mailing are directory only and failure 
to mail such notice shall not affect any action taken on the application. The planning and growth 
management director shall establish procedures for the processing of all applications including setting 
required application filing deadlines to meet the requirements of this section. 
(a) ?Public hearing. A proceeding requiring a public hearing shall be conducted only after a notice 
has been published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first 
publication of which shall be at least 15 days before the hearing. However, nothing contained 
herein shall be inconsistent with Florida Statues governing notices. The public notice shall 
contain all information required by Florida Statutes and include at least the following items: 
(1) ?The date, time and place of meeting; 
(2) ?The title of the board conducting such meeting; 
(3) ?A brief description of the matter to be considered; and 
(4) ?A legal description of the property and other appropriate information identifying the 
property involved. 
The giving of public notice of hearing shall be deemed sufficient when a notice has satisfied the 
requirements as established by Florida Statutes. In addition, a copy of such notice shall be mailed to all 
property owners within 300 feet of the outer boundary of the property involved in the application including 
contiguous property under the same ownership, as shown in the records of the county property appraiser. 
If the property involved in the application is a condominium, then the required notice shall be by certified 
mail to the condominium association and by regular mail to the individual owners. The applicant shall 
provide the list of the required property owners to the planning and growth management department with 
the application for the proposed action at least 20 days before the hearing and shall pay for the mailing 
costs. 


Sec. 54-1-2.9. - Procedures for amending comprehensive plan. 
(a) ?Initiating comprehensive plan amendments. Amendments to the comprehensive plan may be 
initiated by: 
(1) ?City council. The city council may initiate a comprehensive plan amendment by approving a 
written statement expressing its intent to amend the comprehensive plan and shall submit such 
written statement and any relevant supporting material to the city planning and zoning 
commission for review and action pursuant to section 54-1-2.9(c) of this chapter. 
(2) ?Planning and zoning commission. The city planning and zoning commission may initiate a 
comprehensive plan amendment. 
(3) ?Resident; property owner(s). An amendment to the comprehensive plan may be initiated by an 
application signed by a property owner or the authorized agent of the property owner. Such 
application shall be submitted to the office of the planning and growth management director, 
together with a fee as shall be determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. As 
many lots or parcels of property as the applicant may desire can be included in any single 
application if they are contiguous. The application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by 
the planning and growth management director. The application shall include, but not be limited 
to, the following: 
a. ?The applicable section(s) of the comprehensive plan sought to be amended; 
b. ?The proposed amendments sought to the comprehensive plan; 
c. ?The impact that the proposed change has on other elements of the comprehensive plan 
and applicable ordinances of the city; 
d. ?If the application relates to an amendment to the land use element, said application shall, 
in addition to the foregoing, include: 
1. ?Property description. A legal description and a description by street address, where 
possible, of the property to be affected by the proposed change. 
2. ?Current and proposed comprehensive plan land use map designation. Current and 
proposed comprehensive plan land use map designation for the subject property. 
3. ?Current and proposed land development. The existing and proposed land 
development for the subject property. 
4. ?Existing and proposed use. The existing and proposed use of the subject property, if 
applicable. 
5. ?Disclosure of ownership. A verified statement showing each and every individual 
person having a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the property upon which 
the application for comprehensive plan amendment is sought, except publicly held 
corporations, in which case the names and addresses of the principal corporate 
officers shall be sufficient. 
e. ?No application under this section shall be reviewed by staff or any board, commission or 
the city council until such application is fully completed and submitted with the appropriate 
fee. 
(b) ?Administrative review. The planning and growth management director shall forward comprehensive 
plan amendment applications to all appropriate staff for their review and comment. The application 
shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of this chapter. The planning and growth 
management director shall summarize the staff's comments and make a recommendation to the 
planning and zoning commission. 
(c) ?Planning and zoning commission review. The planning and zoning commission, regardless of the 
source of the proposed comprehensive plan amendment, shall hold a public hearing thereon. The 
planning and zoning commission shall submit a written report and recommendation concerning the 
proposed comprehensive plan amendment to the city council for official action. In deliberating, the 
commission shall consider the following: 
(1) ?Consistency with other elements of plan. Whether the proposal is consistent with the other 
elements of the comprehensive plan. The commission shall identify any inconsistencies. 
(2) ?Conformance with ordinances. Whether the proposal is in conformance with any applicable 
substantive requirements of the City of Sebastian Code of Ordinances, particularly the land 
development code, and/or whether the proposed amendment will require amendments to any 
ordinances of the city. 
(3) ?Changed condition. Whether, and the extent to which, land use and development conditions 
have changed since the effective date of the existing regulations involved which are relevant to 
the proposed amendment. 
(4) ?Land use compatibility. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in any 
incompatible land uses, considering the type and location of uses involved. 
(5) ?Adequate public facilities. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in public 
facilities and services exceeding the capacity for such services and facilities existing or 
programmed, including transportation, utilities, drainage, recreation, education, emergency 
services and similar necessary facilities and services. 
(6) ?Natural environment. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would result in 
significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment. 
(7) ?Economic effects. Whether, and the extent to which, the proposal would adversely affect the 
property values in the area, the general health, safety and welfare and impact the financial 
resources of the city. 
(8) ?Orderly development. Whether the proposal would result in an orderly and local development 
pattern. Any negative effects on such patterns shall be identified. 
(9) ?Public interest enabling act. Whether the proposal would be in conflict with the public interest, 
and whether it is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and its enabling 
legislation. 
(10) ?Other matters. Other matters which the planning and zoning commission may deem 
appropriate. 
(d) ?Action following review by city planning and zoning commission. After review of the proposed 
comprehensive plan amendment, and the revision relating thereto, the planning and growth 
management director shall place the proposed ordinance amending the comprehensive plan, with 
comments from the planning and zoning commission, on the next available meeting agenda for city 
council action. The applicant shall be advised of the time and place of the city council meeting. The 
amendment shall be considered as required by Florida Statutes. 


Sec. 54-1-2.10. - Vacation of public rights-of-way. 
(a) ?Proposals to vacate. A proposal to vacate a public right-of-way may be initiated by a vote of the city 
council or upon the filing of an application, as specified herein, by one or more owners of property 
within the City of Sebastian. A fee vacation of public right-of-way shall be established by resolution of 
the city council. 
(b) ?Application and staff review. The planning and growth management director shall review all 
applications for vacation of public rights-of-way. Any proposal for vacation of public rights-of-way 
shall be submitted as an application to the planning and growth management director. The planning 
and growth management director shall prescribe the form and content of the application for vacation 
of public rights-of-way and shall coordinate a thorough staff review of such applications with all other 
relevant public entities providing public services within the city. 
(1) ?Information to be included on the application. The application, at a minimum, shall identify the 
following information: 
• ?The specific location and legal description of the right-of-way; 
• ?The current use of the right-of-way; 
• ?The projected future use or re-use of the right-of-way; 
• ?The projected impacts of the proposed vacation on public services now and in the future; 
and 
• ?The impact on adjacent properties as well as major areas or land uses currently benefiting 
from a public service or system that uses the subject right-of-way. 
(c) ?Findings of no public purpose. In considering applications for vacating public rights-of-way, the 
planning and growth management director and all relevant city staff shall review whether any public 
purpose is served by the subject right-of-way. This evaluation shall consider all relevant public 
purpose options associated with drainage systems; water service; sanitary sewer services; 
roadways, pedestrian and/or bicycle ways, and alleys; public safety, including emergency service 
access and egress; communication systems; power and/or fuel networks; or other public or semi-
public services essential to the public welfare and safety. Consideration shall include present and 
future needs for the right-of-way for purposes of accommodating or improving delivery of public 
services and/or ensuring convenient access for service and/or maintenance or other public benefit 
now or in the future. In order to affirmatively recommend vacation of rights-of-way, the planning and 
growth management director shall render a finding that no current or future public purpose can be 
identified for the subject right of way. 
(d) ?Public hearing, notice and final determination by city council. The city council shall render the final 
determination regarding a vacation of a public right-of-way after convening a public hearing pursuant 
to section 54-1-2.8 and written notice to the applicant and/or property owner and providers of public 
services, as identified in section 54-1-2.10(c), setting forth the time, place and purpose of the 
hearing. 
    Prior to rendering a final decision the city council shall consider the report prepared by the planning 
and growth management director. The city council shall not approve the vacation of a public right-of-way 
unless the finding is consistent with the following criteria: 
(1) ?No current use of the right-of-way beneficial to the public interest exists; 
(2) ?No projected future use or re-use of the right-of-way beneficial to the public interest exists; 
(3) ?No adverse impacts on public services caused by the proposed vacation now or in the future 
can be identified; and 
(4) ?No adverse impacts to adjacent properties as well as major areas or land uses currently 
benefiting from a public service or system that uses the subject right-of-way can be identified. 
    The city council shall cite specific findings in support of a final decision to vacate a public right-of-
way, including an absence of public purpose for the subject right-of-way. Similarly the city council shall 
identify specific findings in support of any decision to retain the public right-of-way. Any decision to vacate 
a public right-of-way shall be by resolution of the city council. 


Chapter II - DISTRICT AND GENERAL REGULATIONS 


ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL USE, SPECIAL EXCEPTION AND TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 


Sec. 54-2-3.1. - Procedures and criteria for review of special uses and special exceptions. 
    Special use. A use which is not specifically provided for in the zoning regulations. The planning and 
zoning commission and city council may permit such uses in such zoning districts or classifications as 
special uses only if the applicant meets specific provisions and conditions deemed appropriate. 
    Special exception. A use, which is provided for in the zoning regulations for a particular zoning 
district or classification and if controlled would not affect the public safety, health or general welfare by 
allowing the use in an additional zoning district or classification. The planning and zoning commission and 
city council may permit such uses in such zoning districts or classifications as special exceptions only if 
the applicant meets specific provisions and conditions deemed appropriate. 
(a) ?Uncertainty. Wherever uncertainty exists regarding whether a specific use is allowed as a 
permitted use, approved as a conditional use, or is prohibited in the zoning district regulations of 
article V, the planning and zoning commission and city council shall apply the following 
procedures and criteria for reviewing such uses. 
(1) ?Criteria for review. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the city council may, in its 
sole discretion, grant a special use permit in any district for a use, which is not provided for 
in the zoning regulations. All such uses shall not be otherwise illegal, shall not be 
specifically prohibited pursuant to the comprehensive plan or other applicable law or 
regulations, and shall satisfy the following findings of fact by the city council. 
(2) ?Procedures for review. 
a. ?Application. Application for approval of a special use or special exception shall be filed 
with the planning and growth management department on a form prescribed by the 
planning and growth management director. Seven copies of the application and all 
supporting information shall be included. 
b. ?Staff review. The planning and growth management director shall distribute the 
application and supporting information to the appropriate staff for review and 
comment. The staff can include outside agencies. 
c. ?Recommendation to planning and zoning commission. The planning and growth 
management director shall summarize the staff's comments and make a 
recommendation to the planning and zoning commission. 
d. ?Planning and zoning commission public hearing. The commission shall hold a public 
hearing pursuant to section 54-1-2.8 and shall indicate whether, in their opinion, the 
proposed special use or special exception meets the required findings of facts and 
review criteria established in section 54-2-6.2(d), including criteria of article VI. The 
planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council to 
approve, approve with condition, or deny the application for the special use. 
e. ?City council public hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing with notice 
pursuant to section 54-1-2.8. By resolution of the city council, the application for 
approval of a special use or special exception permit may be approved, upon a finding 
that the requirements of section 54-2-6.2(d), including criteria of article VI, are met. If 
the application is denied, the city council shall state the reasons for denial. 
(3) ?Required findings of fact. The city council shall not approve an application for a special 
use or special exception under this section unless it finds, based upon the evidence 
presented, that the following conditions are satisfied: 
a. ?The approval of the application for a special use or special exception will not be 
detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or be injurious to other properties or 
improvements within the immediate vicinity in which the property is located based on 
criteria established in article VI; and 
b. ?The use requested is consistent with the purpose and intent of the respective district, 
and can be demonstrated to be similar in nature and compatible with the uses allowed 
in such district; and 
c. ?The requested use is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the Code of 
Ordinances. 
(4) ?Conditions of approval. In approving an application for a special use under this section, 
the city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the 
objectives and intent of the zoning regulations. 


Sec. 54-2-3.2. - Procedures and criteria for review of temporary uses. 
    A temporary use shall be allowed for transient merchants and special events as defined in section 
54-5-22.2, and held on privately-owned property (with the exception of circuses, and sales of motor and 
recreational vehicles; provided, however, that this prohibition on the sales of motor and recreational 
vehicles shall not include boats) upon issuance of a temporary use permit by the city manager or his 
designee, based upon compliance with all applicable regulations of this chapter and other city regulations. 
(a) ?A temporary use permit will be issued if the following requirements and standards are met: 
(1) ?Maximum of six events per calendar year per host site. 
(2) ?Only temporary pavilions may be erected and utilized for the operation. All facilities used 
shall be self-contained and mobile or portable. No mobile homes or trailers that exceed 
300 square feet in area may be utilized. All temporary facilities designed to be occupied by 
the public must be inspected by the fire department after installation, and prior to 
occupancy. 
(3) ?No utility connection shall be permitted except for temporary electrical power which must 
be approved by the building department. 
(4) ?If the applicant is not the owner of the event location, a cash bond in the amount of 
$200.00 shall be submitted to the city. Within seven days after a temporary use permit 
expiration, all items related to the operation or event shall be removed from the site. The 
city may use the entire amount of submitted funds to pay for disposal of all related items 
remaining on the site seven days after permit expiration. The city may also use such funds 
to remove prohibited off-premise signs during and/or after the event. Upon vacating and 
cleaning up a site, an applicant may request, in writing, return of the submitted funds. 
Permit applicants will be refunded the submitted cash bond amount if: 
a. ?The city has not used the funds under the conditions described above; and 
b. ?The site is inspected by the city, it is verified that the site has been cleaned up, and all 
temporary use items have been removed. 
c. ?In cases where the city has used the $200.00 cash bond for site cleanup or off-
premise sign removal, no subsequent temporary use permits shall be issued to the 
same applicant whose vacated operation caused cash bond default and resultant 
cleanup by the city. 
(5) ?Holders of temporary use permits for an activity shall not be required to obtain a business 
tax receipt for that activity provided that no permanent modifications are made to the site to 
accommodate re-occurring events. Permanent modifications will require a site plan 
application and business tax receipt. 
(6) ?No temporary use shall operate within a public right-of-way. No operation within an 
easement shall be permitted unless specifically allowed by all parties having interest in 
such easement. 
(7) ?Location of event shall be on an improved lot within a commercial or public service district. 
Events held within a public service district in a residential area shall be restricted to non-
commercial uses. 
(8) ?A maximum of 30% of the required parking stalls of the host site may be utilized by the 
temporary use. This percentage may be increased based on satisfactory documentation 
indicating additional parking and/or transportation needs have been provided for the total 
impact of the proposed event. 
(9) ?Food concessions, including food trucks, as accessory to the temporary use are prohibited 
unless provided by the host site. In addition, alcohol sales accessory to the temporary use 
are prohibited unless the host site holds a current alcohol license. 
(10) ?Temporary toilet facilities may be required by the applicant depending on location and 
size of the event. Amount will be determined by the building official based on estimation of 
attendance of the event. 
(11) ?Applicant must provide, at his own expense, additional and/or special crowd control and 
security if determined necessary by the police chief based on the size of the event. 
(12) ?[Reserved.] 
(13) ?Prior to city manager review, approval must be obtained from the police chief and the 
building director. Approval or denial shall be based on items (1) through (11) above and 
consideration shall be reviewed on the total magnitude of impact that may be detrimental to 
the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. O-14-06, § 1, 1-14-2015; Ord. No. O-15-03, § 1, 3-11-2015) 


Sec. 54-2-3.3. - Time limits. 
(a) ?Transient merchants of any seasonal sales merchandise such as Christmas tree and firework sales 
or other similar use shall be in operation not more than 45 consecutive days per sale/event on any 
given site. 
(b) ?Transient merchants of any non-seasonal sales merchandise shall be in operation not more than 
ten consecutive days per sale/event on any given site. 
(c) ?Special events shall be in operation not more than seven consecutive days per sale/event on any 
given site. 
(Ord. No. O-14-06, § 1, 1-14-2015; Ord. No. O-15-03, § 1, 3-11-2015) 


Sec. 54-2-3.4. - Application. 
(a) ?Temporary use permits shall be obtained by furnishing a completed application for such permit to 
the community development department. The following information as applicable shall be provided: 
(1) ?Application to be made by the owner or lessee of the host site. 
(2) ?Location of site and the specific location for the requested use. 
(3) ?Beginning and ending dates of the event. 
(4) ?Hours of operation of the event. 
(5) ?Name of individual in charge of the event. 
(6) ?After hours emergency phone number for person responsible for event. 
(7) ?A drawing showing dimensions of the site or an existing site plan for the host site including 
location and dimensions of all existing driveways, entrances, exits, and parking spaces. 
(8) ?A drawing depicting location and dimensions of all temporary pavilions, displays areas, sanitary 
facilities, and concessions for the temporary use. 
(9) ?Indicate how parking and traffic flow will be directed on to and within the event site. 
(10) ?Estimation of maximum peak hour attendance of the event to determine sanitary needs, 
parking and traffic impact. 
(11) ?If existing parking spaces of a permanent use (such as a shopping plaza) are to be utilized by 
patrons and employees of the temporary use event during normal operating hours, calculations 
shall be submitted demonstrating that the event will not utilize more than 30% of the required 
parking stalls of the existing host site. If usage does exceed 30% percent, documentation 
indicating additional parking and/or transportation arrangements must be provided for the total 
impact of the proposed event. 
If the event is being held during non-operating hours for the host site, the 30% restriction may 
be lifted upon demonstration that there will still be sufficient parking available for patrons of the 
temporary event. 
(12) ?[Reserved.]. 
(13) ?All applications must be made on the form prescribed by the city and submitted no later than 
21 days prior to the scheduled event. Fees for temporary uses shall be established by 
resolution of the city council. Applicants may include multiple similar events on one application. 
Applications submitted less than 21 days before the scheduled event will be assessed a fee as 
established in the Resolution to be used for expedited processing. Fees may not be waived for 
any application, except by the city manager upon a finding of good cause. 
(b) ?A copy of the application and all supporting documents will be forwarded to the police chief and the 
building official for review and comments. All comments and recommendations will then be attached 
to the application and forwarded to the city manager or his designee for approval or denial. 
(c) ?The application, with all the supporting documents, will be reviewed by the city manager, or his 
designee. If approved by the city manager, the applicant shall post the $200.00 cash bond, if 
required, prior to the issuance of the temporary use permit. If denied, applicant will be notified, along 
with the reasons for denial. The police department and the fire department will be notified on all 
approved requests for temporary use permits. 
(d) ?Any decision of the city manager, or the city manager's designee, may be appealed to the city 
council. Any appeal shall be filed within five days of the decision, and shall be presented to the city 
council at its next available meeting. 
(Ord. No. O-14-06, § 1, 1-14-2015; Ord. No. O-15-03, § 1, 3-11-2015) 


Sec. 54-2-3.5. - Signs. 
(a) ?All signs being utilized on site must conform to the city sign regulations as outlined in the land 
development code and must be removed upon expiration of the temporary use permit or upon 
vacation of the site. 
(b) ?Signs used in conjunction with approved activities or special events for which a temporary use 
permit has been obtained shall not be calculated against the three banner signs permitted per site 
per year. 
(Ord. No. O-15-03, § 1, 3-11-2015) 


ARTICLE IV. - LAND USE COMPATIBILITY 


Sec. 54-2-4.1. - Comprehensive plan implementation. 
    In order to implement the comprehensive plan in a manner consistent with section 163.3201, F.S., 
the city land development code is hereby established. The land development code is intended to assist in 
managing comprehensive planning issues surrounding the use and/or development of specific lots, 
parcels, and tracts of land or any combination thereof within the City of Sebastian. 
State Law reference— Comprehensive plan, article III; planning, ch. 78, Code of Ordinances of 
the City of Sebastian, Florida. 


Sec. 54-2-4.2. - Future land use map (FLUM) designations and zoning districts. 
    Table 54-2-4.2 "Future Land Use Map (FLUM) Designations and Compatible Zoning Districts" 
references adopted FLUM designations contained in the land use element of the City of Sebastian 
Comprehensive Plan and identifies corresponding zoning districts which are hereby established in order 
to implement the FLUM designations, respectively. 
TABLE 54-2-4.2  
FUTURE LAND USE MAP DESIGNATIONS AND  
COMPATIBLE ZONING DISTRICTS 
Comprehensive Plan  
Future Land Use Map Designation 
Corresponding Compatible Zoning Districts 
C 
Conservation 
C: 
Conservation 
LDR 
Low Density Residential 
RE-40:  
RS-20:  
RS-10:  
PUD(R): 
Residential Estate  
Single-Family Residential  
Single-Family Residential  
Residential Planned Unit Development 
MDR 
Medium Density Residential 
RM-8:  
?  
?PUD(R): 
Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential  
?  
Residential Planned Unit Development 
HDR 
High Density Residential 
PUD(R): 
Residential Planned Unit Development 
MH 
Mobile Home Subdivisions 
R-MH:  
PUD-MH 
Mobile Home Subdivisions (1)  
Mobile Home Planned Unit Development 
C-512 
Commercial CR-512 Corridor 
C-512: 
C-512 Commercial District 
CL 
Limited Commercial 
CL: 
Commercial Limited 
CG 
General Commercial 
CG:  
PUD(C): 
Commercial General  
Commercial Planned Unit Development 
RMU 
Riverfront Mixed Use 
CR:  
CWR:  
?  
RM-8:  
?  
PUD(R):  
?  
PUD(C): 
Commercial Riverfront  
Commercial Waterfront Residential  
Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential  
Residential Planned Unit Development  
Commercial Planned Unit Development 
IN 
Industrial 
IN:  
?  
AI  
PUD(I): 
Limited Industrial  
Airport and Industrial Facilities  
Industrial Planned Unit Development 
INS 
Institutional 
PS: 
Public Service 
 
    NOTE:(1) Manufactured housing is permitted in all residential districts within the city if the units 
comply with the following standards: 
1. ?City's adopted building code; 
2. ?State mandated criteria governing construction in coastal areas; 
3. ?State of Florida buildings standards of F.S. chapters 320 and 553; and 
4. ?U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction 
and Safety Standards of 1974 (i.e., F.S. § 320.823) 
The official zoning map may correct drafting and clerical errors or omissions in the prior official zoning 
map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the code or any subsequent amendment 
thereto without duly noticed public hearings as provided herein. When any official zoning map is replaced, 
the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved together with all available 
records pertaining to its adoption and amendment. 


Sec. 54-2-4.3. - Official zoning map and district boundaries. 
(a) ?Map adoption. The boundaries of each zoning district are on the official zoning map for the City of 
Sebastian, Florida. The boundaries of the districts, together with all explanatory statements thereon, 
are hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of this code. 
(b) ?Map amendment. No changes or amendments to the official zoning map shall be made except in 
compliance and conformity with all procedures set forth in this code. If changes or amendments are 
made to district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such 
changes or amendments shall be made promptly after official adoption of the change or amendment 
as provided for herein. The city's planning and growth management director shall be responsible for 
assuring that the physical updating and amendment of the official zoning map is carried out in a 
timely manner. 
    Where a proposed rezoning affects a large portion of the land area of the City of Sebastian, it shall 
be considered to be legislative in nature and shall be enacted in accordance with legislative standards 
contained in the Florida Constitution, Florida Statutes, the city's comprehensive plan and the city land 
development code. 
    Where a proposed rezoning affects a limited number of persons or property owners, or is contingent 
on a fact or facts arrived at from distinct alternatives presented at a hearing, and where the decision can 
be functionally viewed as policy application rather than policy setting, it shall be considered to be quasi-
judicial in nature and the rules contained in this paragraph shall apply. The property owner shall have the 
burden of proving that the rezoning proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan and that it 
complies with all procedural requirements of the zoning ordinances. Should the property owner prove 
these elements, the burden shifts to the city council to show that maintenance of the existing zoning 
classification with respect to the property accomplishes a legitimate public purpose and to show that 
denial of rezoning approval is not arbitrary, discriminatory, or unreasonable. In rendering a decision, the 
city council shall not be required to make a finding of fact. City council action on a rezoning request for a 
limited number of persons or property owners shall be reviewable by petition for writ of certiorari in 
accordance with the Florida rules appellate procedure. The standard for review shall be "strict scrutiny," 
by which is meant the same standard as that used in the review of other quasi-judicial decisions and not 
constitutional cases. The city council's decision should be upheld if the city can show that there was 
competent substantial evidence presented to the city council to support its ruling. 


Sec. 54-2-4.4. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    The following shall apply when there is uncertainty as to the district boundaries on the official zoning 
map: 
(1) ?Center lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, 
highways and alleys shall be construed as following such lines. 
(2) ?Lot, section and tract lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines, 
section or tract lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3) ?Political boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundaries shall 
be construed as following such political boundaries. 
(4) ?Shorelines. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed as following the 
mean high water line (MHW), and in the event of change in the MHW, the shoreline shall be 
construed as moving with the MHW. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the 
centerline of streams, rivers, canals, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such 
centerlines. 
(5) ?Parallel lines. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in section 
54-2-4.4(1) through (5) shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official 
zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(6) ?Bisecting lines. Where district boundary lines approximately bisect blocks, the boundaries are 
the median line of such blocks, between the center lines of boundary streets. 
(7) ?Uncertainties. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with 
those shown on the official zoning map or in case any other uncertainty exists, the city council 
shall interpret the intent of the official zoning map as to the location of district boundaries. 
(8) ?Street abandonment. Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the 
regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or 
abandoned road, street, or alley. 
(9) ?Excluded areas. Where parcels of land and water areas have been inadvertently excluded from 
a zoning district classification in any manner, said parcels shall be classified in conformance 
with the most restrictive zoning district which abuts the excluded area until or unless changed 
pursuant to amendment procedures contained herein. 
(10) ?Railroad lines. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be 
following the centerline of the railroad right-of-way. 


Sec. 54-2-4.5. - Compliance with district regulations. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building, 
land or water be used for any purpose other than a use permitted in the district in which such building, 
land or water is located. No building or land shall be used so as to produce greater heights, smaller yards, 
less unoccupied area, or higher density or intensity than is prescribed for such building or land within the 
district regulations in which the building or land is located. No lot, which is now or which may be hereafter 
built upon shall be so reduced in area so that the yards and open spaces will be smaller than prescribed 
by this code. 


ARTICLE V. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
    This article describes the purposes and intent of each zoning district, identifies permitted and 
conditional uses by zoning district, and provides size and dimensional regulations for respective zoning 
districts. All proposed new development shall be required to comply with site plan review requirements of 
article XVIII and performance criteria of chapter III. All conditional uses must comply with procedures and 
criteria on article VI. The following sections present the basic purpose and intent of each zoning district 
and the uses permitted therein. 


Sec. 54-2-5.1. - Conservation District (C). 
(a) ?Intent. This district is intended to implement the comprehensive plan policies for preserving areas 
designated "Conservation" on the comprehensive plan future land use map (FLUM). These areas 
primarily consist of environmentally sensitive natural resources and systems including but not limited 
to the Sebastian River, the Indian River, other environmentally sensitive public lands, and mangrove 
fringe protected by Florida Statutes. The intent of this district is to provide for the long term 
preservation of environmentally sensitive natural resources systems designated "Conservation" on 
the comprehensive plan FLUM. 
    No development shall be permitted within the Conservation District unless the applicant for such 
development provides proof of permits or proof of exemptions from all applicable state or federal 
agencies having jurisdiction. 
    The developer/applicant of lands within the Conservation (C) District shall be required to provide a 
site engineered delineation of all environmentally sensitive lands, including, but not limited to, wetlands 
and uplands habitat and shall also indicate the location of lands or waters within the jurisdiction of the 
state and/or federal government. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in determining that 
development plans required pursuant to article XVIII include appropriate mitigation techniques to 
prevent/minimize adverse impacts to wetlands, transitional wetlands, upland habitat, tidal waters and 
estuarine areas, including benthic communities, such as seagrass beds and other live bottom 
communities, or additional environmentally fragile natural systems. An on-site survey by environmental 
professionals shall be submitted by the applicant. Such determinations shall be based on physical and 
biological data obtained from specific site investigations and provided with the earliest application for city 
development approval. These determinations shall be predicated on findings rendered by professionals 
competent in producing data and analysis necessary to support impact assessments, including findings 
regarding the impacts of potential development on the physical and biological function and value of 
environmentally sensitive lands. Any development within the Conservation District shall be required to 
comply with all performance criteria of chapter III, especially article XI, Environmental Protection, as well 
as all other applicable land development regulations. 
(b) ?Uses permitted. All development within the Conservation District shall be by conditional use due to 
the environmental sensitivity of lands within the Conservation District. 
(c) ?Conditional uses. Prior to any development within a Conservation District all state or federal 
agencies having jurisdiction shall have granted requisite permits, including but not limited to, dredge 
and fill permits. As stated in article VI. Conditional Uses, applicants for a conditional use must 
demonstrate that the proposed uses and facilities identified below are compliant with all applicable 
criteria and relevant mitigation measures for conditional use approval, including but not limited to, 
wetland preservation, coastal resource impact analysis and shoreline protection, protection of marine 
life and fisheries, protection of flora and fauna, and flood plain protection. The design of proposed 
conditional use facilities shall be required to apply mitigation measures to prevent and/or minimize 
adverse impacts on natural systems, including but not limit to, habitats, water quality, and the 
physical and biological functions of wetlands. The size and scale of such development shall be 
restricted. 
Waterward of mean/ordinary high water: only water dependent facilities, including: 
(1) ?Fishing piers, docks and related boardwalks, which satisfy state permitting standards. 
(2) ?Watercraft. 
(3) ?Boardwalks not exceeding a width of five feet, which shall be elevated in order to reduce 
adverse impacts on hydrologic functions of wetlands and which satisfy state permitting 
standards. 
(4) ?Water related facilities that satisfy state permitting standards. 
Within areas above mean high water: 
(1) ?Hiking trails not exceeding a width of four feet to avoid adverse impacts on upland habitats and 
those portions traversing waterways shall be elevated in order to reduce adverse impacts on 
hydrologic functions. 
(2) ?Picnic areas. 
(3) ?Observation towers that shall be elevated in order to reduce adverse impacts on hydrologic 
functions of wetlands. 
(4) ?Public and private utilities where such facilities are essential to the public health, safety and 
welfare. 
(5) ?Fishing piers, docks and related boardwalks, which satisfy state permitting standards. 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations. 
(1) ?Maximum density: Not applicable. 
(2) ?Maximum FAR: 1% 
(3) ?Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(4) ?Maximum site alteration: 1% 
(5) ?Lot dimensions: Not applicable. 
(6) ?Minimum setbacks: All development, excepting permitted water dependent uses, must comply 
with requirements for setbacks from wetlands and open waters established in section 54-3-
11.1(c) and section 54-2-5.10(a). 
(e) ?Commercial structures within waters of the state. The City of Sebastian shall regulate the location 
as well as the intensity and character of permanent and temporary water-dependent structures within 
the corporate limits of the City of Sebastian. This subsection does not apply to watercraft. Applicants 
desiring to develop, establish or expand temporary or permanent structures within waters of the state 
shall be required to file a major site plan pursuant to procedures set forth in article XVIII. The 
applicant shall be required to submit a plan compliant with applicable performance criteria set forth in 
chapter III, including but not limited to section 20-3-11.4, Coastal resource impact analysis. 


Sec. 54-2-5.2. - Residential districts (subsections 54-2-5.2.1 through 54-2-5.2.7[5]). 
    The overall purpose and intent of the residential districts is to provide a management framework for 
implementing comprehensive plan residential development objectives and policies directed toward: 
• ?Protecting the quality and character of existing neighborhoods, including compatibility of land use 
and structures; 
• ?Preserving open space; 
• ?Maintaining densities which are compatible with existing and anticipated future developments 
based on the future land use element of the comprehensive plan; 
• ?Promoting compatibility with natural features of the land; and 
• ?Minimizing burden on supportive public services and facilities within the area. 
    All residential development shall comply with the comprehensive plan, performance criteria in 
chapter III, as well as all other applicable land development regulations. Following is a description of the 
intended purpose of each zoning district herein established, including reference to the comprehensive 
plan future land use map designations which shall be implemented through the land development 
regulations. 


Sec. 54-2-5.2.1. - Residential Estate District (RE-40). 
(a) ?Intent: The RE-40 district is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for managing the 
lowest range of densities for land designated low density residential. Supportive public community 
facilities and accessory land uses also may be located within areas designated for use as residential 
estates. 
(b) ?Uses permitted: 
Single-family dwellings 
Home occupations 
Foster care/group homes with ? 6 residents 
Accessory residential uses 
 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents 
Guest houses 
Model homes 
Child care services 
Schools, public or private 
Churches 
Utilities, public and private 
Parks and recreation, public 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Golf courses and support facilities 
Equestrian uses 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum density: One dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(3) ?Lot coverage and open space: 
Maximum building coverage: 25% 
Maximum impervious surface: 55% 
Minimum open space: 50% 

 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet 
Minimum lot width: 125 feet 
Minimum lot depth: 150 feet 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: All development must comply with setback requirements from wetlands 
and open waters established in section 54-3-11.1(c). 
Front: 40 feet 
Side: 20 feet 
Rear: 25 feet 
(6) ?Minimum living area: The minimum floor area required, exclusive of porches, terraces, attached 
garages, carport or unroofed areas, shall be 1,600 square feet. 
(7) ?Required accessory structures: Every single-family dwelling unit shall be required to provide a 
garage or carport. If a carport or similar unenclosed vehicle storage structure is provided, then 
each unit within the principal structure shall contain a fully enclosed utility storage area of at 
least 60 square feet, which shall be designed as an integral part of the principal structure. If a 
fully enclosed garage is provided, then no utility structure shall be mandated. The garage or 
carport shall have a minimum interior clear dimension of ten feet by 20 feet. 


Sec. 54-2-5.2.2. - Single-Family Residential District (RS-20). 
(a) ?Intent: The RS-20 district is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for low density 
residential development on lots of 20,000 square feet. 
(b) ?Uses permitted: 
Single-family dwellings 
Foster care/group homes with 6 ? residents 
Accessory residential uses 
Home occupations 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents 
Guest houses 
Model homes 
Child care services 
Schools, public or private 
Churches 
Utilities, public and private 
Parks and recreation, public 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Golf courses and support facilities 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 

 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum density: One dwelling unit per 20,000 square feet 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(3) ?Lot coverage and open space: 
Maximum building coverage: 30% 
Maximum impervious surface 60% 
Minimum open space: 50% 

 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet 
Minimum lot width: 100 feet 
Minimum lot depth: 150 feet 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from 
wetlands and open waters established in section 54-3-11.1(c). 
Front: 30 feet 
Side: 15 feet 
Rear: 25 feet 
(6) ?Minimum living area: The minimum floor area required, exclusive of porches, terraces, attached 
garages, carport or unroofed areas, shall be 1,400 square feet. 
(7) ?Required accessory structures: Every single-family dwelling unit shall be required to provide a 
garage or carport. If a carport or similar unenclosed vehicle storage area is provided, then each 
unit within the principal structure shall contain a fully enclosed utility storage area of at least 60 
square feet, which shall be designed as an integral part of the principal structure. If a fully 
enclosed garage is provided, then no utility structure shall be mandated. The garage or carport 
shall have a minimum interior clear dimension of ten feet by 20 feet. 


Sec. 54-2-5.2.3. - Single-Family Residential District (RS-10). 
(a) ?Intent: The RS-10 District is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for low-density 
residential development on lots of 10,000 square feet. 
(b) ?Uses permitted: 
Single-family dwellings 
Foster care/group homes with 6 ? residents 
Accessory residential uses 
Home occupations 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents 
Model homes 
Child care services 
Schools, public or private 
Churches 
Utilities, public and private 
Parks and recreation, public 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 

 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum density: One dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet 
(2) ?Maximum height: 25 feet 
(3) ?Lot coverage and open space: 
Maximum building coverage: 30% 
Maximum impervious surface: 55% 
Minimum open space: 50% 

 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 9,500 square feet 
Minimum lot width: 80 feet 
Minimum lot depth: 100 feet 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from 
wetlands and open waters established in section 54-3-11.1(c). 
Front setbacks 25 feet 
Secondary front yard setbacks: 20 feet 
Side setbacks: 10 feet 
Rear setbacks: 20 feet 
(6) ?Minimum living area: The minimum floor area required, exclusive of porches, terraces, attached 
garages, carports or other unenclosed areas, shall be 1,200 square feet. 
(7) ?Required accessory structure: Every single-family dwelling unit shall be required to provide a 
garage or carport. If a carport or similar unenclosed vehicle storage structure is provided then 
each unit within the principal structure shall contain a fully enclosed utility storage area of at 
least 60 square feet which shall be designed as an integral part of the principal structure. If a 
fully enclosed garage is provided, then no utility structure shall be mandated. The garage or 
carport shall have a minimum interior clear dimension of ten feet by 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. O-02-9, § 1, 7-24-2002) 


Sec. 54-2-5.2.4. - Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential District (RM-8). 
(a) ?Intent: The RM-8 District is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for managing 
primarily duplex and multiple-family developments on land designated for medium density residential 
development. 
(b) ?Uses permitted: 
Single-family dwellings 
Duplex dwellings 
Multifamily dwellings 
Foster care/group homes with 6 ? residents 
Home occupations 
Townhouse development 
Accessory residential uses 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents 
Child care services 
Cultural or civic facilities 
Schools, public or private 
Golf courses and support facilities 
Bed and breakfast 
Nursing homes 
Churches 
Utilities, public and private 
Parks and recreation, public 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Model homes 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations (excluding townhouse development): 
(1) ?Maximum density: Shall not exceed eight units per acre. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet (25 feet for properties east of Indian River Drive). 
(3) ?Lot coverage and open space: 
Maximum building coverage: 40% 
Minimum open space: 40% 
Maximum impervious surface: 60% 

 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet 
Minimum lot width: 80 feet 
Minimum lot depth: 100 feet 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from 
wetlands and open waters established in section 54-3-11.1(c). 
Yard 
Setbacks 

1 story 
2 stories 
Front 
25 
25? 
Rear 
25 
25? 
Side (interior) 
10 
15* 
Between residential structures on same lot 
20 
20? 
 
*Plus one (1) foot for each additional two (2) feet in height above twenty-five (25) feet 
(6) ?Minimum living area: 
Single-family dwellings: The minimum floor area required for a single-family dwelling, exclusive 
of porches, terraces, attached garages, carports or other unenclosed areas, shall be 900 square 
feet. 
Duplex dwellings: 750 square feet per unit. 
Multiple-family dwellings: 
REQUIRED MINIMUM LIVING AREA IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS 
Type Dwelling/# Bedrooms 
Required # of Square Feet 
Efficiencies 
600 
One bedroom units 
700 
Two bedroom units 
850 
Three bedroom units 
1,000 
Each additional bedroom after three bedrooms 
100 sq. ft. per Additional bedroom 
 
(7) ?Required accessory structures: Every single-family and duplex dwelling unit shall be required 
to provide a garage or carport. If a carport or similar unenclosed vehicle storage structure is 
provided then each unit within the principal structure shall contain a fully enclosed utility storage 
area of at least 60 square feet, which shall be designed as an integral part of the principal 
structure. If a fully enclosed garage is provided, then no utility structure shall be mandated. The 
garage or carport shall have a minimum interior clear dimension of ten feet by 20 feet. 
(e) ?Dimensional regulations (for townhouse development): 
Maximum density: Shall not exceed eight units per acre on overall site. Individual lots (units) 
shall not exceed eight units per primary building or structure.* 
*For sites of record containing a higher density, the designated comprehensive plan density 
shall apply. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet (25 feet for properties east of Indian River Drive). 
(3) ?Lot coverage and open space: 
Maximum building coverage: 40% 
Minimum open space: 40% 
Maximum impervious surface: 60% 

 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size (prior to platting): 1 acre 
Minimum interior lot size within a site: 1,875 square feet 
Minimum interior lot width: 25 feet 
Minimum interior lot depth: 75 feet 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from 
wetlands and open waters established in section 54-3-11.1(c). 
Yard 
Setbacks 
Front 
25 
Rear 
20 
Side 
10 
Side (interior) between buildings 
15 
 
(6) ?Minimum living area: 900 square feet 
(7) ?Required garages: Every townhouse unit shall be required to provide a garage. The garage or 
carport shall have a minimum interior clear dimension of ten feet by 20 feet. 
(8) ?Special regulations: 
a. ?Access. All dwelling units shall have access to a public street either directly or indirectly via 
an approach, private road, or other area dedicated to public or private use or common 
easement guaranteeing access. The city shall be allowed access on privately owned 
roads, easements, and common open space to ensure police and fire protection of the 
area meet emergency needs, conduct city services and generally ensure the health and 
safety of the residents of the development. 
b. ?Unified control. Title to all land within a proposed site shall be owned or controlled by the 
developer/owner submitting the applications for the development. For purposes of this 
section, the term "controlled by" shall mean that the developer shall have the written 
consent of all owners of the property within the proposed site not owned by the developer. 
The consent shall contain a notarized statement that the developer is authorized to 
represent the owners in the submission of an application under the provisions of this 
section and that the owners shall agree to be bound by the decision of the city council if the 
application is approved. 
c. ?Development standards. The minimum construction requirements for streets or roads, 
sidewalks, utilities, and drainage shall be in compliance with city standards. 
d. ?Common open space. All privately owned common open space shall conform to its 
intended use and remain as expressed in the final development plan through the inclusion 
in all deeds of appropriate restrictions to ensure that the common open space is 
permanently preserved according to the final development plan. Such deed restrictions 
shall run with the land and for the benefit of present as well as future property owners and 
shall contain a prohibition against partition. All common open space, as well as public and 
recreational facilities, shall be specifically included in the development schedule and be 
constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or grater rate than the 
construction of residential structures. The developer shall establish an association or 
nonprofit corporation of all individuals or corporations owning properties within the 
development to ensure maintenance of all common open space. The association or 
nonprofit corporation shall conform to the following requirements: 
1. ?The developer shall establish the association or nonprofit corporation prior to sale of 
any lots. Control of all common open space and recreation facilities shall be passed to 
the association upon sale or transfer of 90 percent or more of the residential units. 
2. ?Membership in the association or nonprofit corporation shall be mandatory for all 
residential property owners within the development, and such association or 
corporation shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders. 
3. ?The association or nonprofit corporation shall manage all common open space and 
recreational and cultural facilities, that are not dedicated to the public; shall provide for 
the maintenance, administration and operation of such land and any other land within 
the development not publicly or privately owned; and shall secure adequate liability 
insurance on the land. The title to all residential property owners shall include an 
undivided fee simple estate in all common open space or an unrestricted easement 
for the use and enjoyment of the common open space. 
(Ord. No. O-01-24, § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-2001) 


Sec. 54-2-5.2.5. - Mobile Home District (R-MH). 
(a) ?Intent. The R-MH District is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for managing 
mobile home and certain non-site building development on land designated for residential 
development satisfying the location requirements and criteria of this section. 
(b) ?Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings stated below: 
(1) ?Mobile home shall mean a structure transportable in one or more sections, which in the 
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when 
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and 
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to 
the required utilities, and including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems 
contained therein. Calculations to determine the number of square feet in a structure will be 
based upon HUD standards, and such structures are subject to the regulations set forth therein. 
(2) ?Manufactured residential building shall mean a closed structure, building assembly or system 
of subassemblies, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation or 
other service systems manufactured in manufacturing facilities for installation or erection, with 
or without other specified components, as a finished residential building or as part of a finished 
residential structure. This does not apply to mobile homes. Residential manufactured buildings 
may also mean, at the option of the manufacturer, any residential building of open construction 
made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site for installation, or 
assembly and installation, on the building site. All residential manufactured buildings shall be 
required to bear the insignia from the Department of Community Affairs, State of Florida (herein 
after DCA) or its successor agency, pursuant to DCA regulations. 
(3) ?Travel trailer shall mean a portable structure built on a chassis designed as a temporary 
dwelling for travel and vacation use and when not exceeding eight feet in width, or whose length 
does not exceed 40 feet and shall not be used as living quarters except in a recreational trailer 
park. 
(c) ?Uses permitted: 
Mobile homes 
Accessory residential uses 
Manufactured residential buildings 
Home occupations 
(d) ?Conditional uses: 
Utilities, public and private 
Model homes 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Parks and recreation, public 
Vehicular storage areas, common 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
(e) ?Location requirements: 
(1) ?Mobile homes and manufactured residential buildings. Mobile homes and manufactured 
residential buildings are a permitted use within the R-MH Mobile Home District and the PUD 
(MH) Mobile Home Planned Unit Development District upon meeting applicable regulations of 
this Code. 
(2) ?Nonconforming mobile home uses. Any nonconforming mobile home use existing within the 
corporate limits on November 9, 1989 shall be allowed to remain, but shall not be allowed to 
expand their facilities beyond their current boundaries. 
(f) ?Construction standards: All residential manufactured buildings and mobile homes shall be 
constructed in compliance with the provisions of chapter 320, Florida Statutes and/or chapter 553, 
Florida Statutes. In addition, all residential manufactured buildings and mobile homes shall be 
constructed in compliance with specifications set forth by the National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA) under the association's Code of Specifications for Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers as 
exists, or as may hereinafter be updated and amended by the NFPA. All construction shall meet the 
above specifications or equal, except to the extent same is inconsistent with the United States 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regarding construction and safety standards 
of mobile homes and with the State of Florida Department of Community Affairs regarding 
construction and safety standards for residential manufactured buildings. The said NFPA 
specifications shall remain on file in the City Hall in the City of Sebastian, Florida, and shall be kept 
current with subsequent NFPA amendments. 
    All mobile homes and manufactured residential building shall be anchored in a manner prescribed by 
the Code of Ordinances consistent with the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development 
standards. The minimum first floor elevation shall be at least 18 inches above the crown of the street. All 
awnings, carports, principal patios and accessories to the building or accessory buildings shall be 
constructed in compliance with the building code and the Land Development Code of the city. In addition, 
all mobile homes and manufactured residential buildings shall be required to have skirting. Such skirting 
shall be of concrete, masonry, stucco, wood or other suitable material, and such skirting may have 
allowable louvers for ventilation. 
(g) ?Size and dimension criteria: 
(1) ?Maximum density: Shall not exceed five units per acre. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(3) ?Lot coverage and open space: 
Maximum building coverage: 40% 
Maximum impervious surface: 50% 
Minimum open space: 55% 

 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet 
Minimum lot depth: 100 feet 
Minimum lot width: 70 feet 

 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from 
wetlands and open waters established in section 54-3-11.1(c). 
Front: 20 feet 
Side: 10 feet 
Rear: 10 feet 
(6) ?Minimum living area: 900 square feet 
(h) ?Common vehicular storage areas: All developments having a R-MH zoning classification shall be 
permitted to provide common areas for the storage of recreational equipment including boats and 
recreational vehicles: 
(1) ?Surface. Storage areas shall have a surface meeting the provisions of section 54-3-10.9. 
(2) ?Screening. All storage areas shall be enclosed by a security fence and properly screened from 
neighboring residences with a Type "A" opaque screen. All storage areas shall be a minimum of 
30 feet from the nearest home site. 
(3) ?Site plan review. Such storage areas shall undergo a site plan review in accordance with article 
XVIII of this Code. 


Sec. 54-2-5.3. - Commercial districts (subsections 54-2-5.3.1 through 54-2-5.3.3). 
General intent of commercial districts. 
    The overall purpose and intent of the commercial districts is to provide a management framework for 
implementing comprehensive plan commercial development objectives and policies. The location and 
distribution of specific types of commercial activities shall be determined based on the following 
considerations: 
• ?Trip generation characteristics, including impact on transportation facilities and off-street parking 
systems; 
• ?Location and site requirements based on specific needs of respective commercial activities, their 
market area, anticipated employment generation and floor area requirements; 
• ?Compatibility with and impact on nearby residential and other surrounding commercial activities; 
• ?Relationship to surrounding land uses and natural systems; and 
• ?Impact on existing and planned community services and utilities. 
    All commercial development shall comply with the comprehensive plan, performance criteria in 
chapter III, as well as all other applicable land development regulations. Following is a description of the 
purpose of each zoning district herein established, including reference to the comprehensive plan future 
land use map designation which shall be implemented through the land development regulations. 


Sec. 54-2-5.3.1. - Commercial-512 District (C-512). 
(a) ?Intent. The C-512 District is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for managing 
land designated for commercial development along segments of C.R. 512. 
(1) ?Traffic impacts along C.R. 512 corridor. The purpose and intent of the C-512 District is to 
provide a well-planned and equitable growth management policy for directing future 
development within the C-512 District boundaries. The existing pattern of development without 
such regulation violates accepted principles and practices of traffic engineering, county road 
policies and standards, and adversely impacts the safety, welfare, and convenience of the 
motoring public. This statement acknowledges the fact that C.R. 512 is identified as an arterial 
highway on the major thoroughfare plans of both the City of Sebastian and Indian River County. 
Both acknowledge that C.R. 512 is a major regional transportation facility linking U.S. 1 and I-
95, and also linking the cities of Sebastian and Fellsmere with Indian River County, and the City 
of Vero Beach urban areas to the south. 
(2) ?Plan for off-street parking and controlled curb cuts. The purpose and intent of the C-512 District 
is also to restrict the location of curb cuts within the district, require compliance with a master 
plan for parking and curb cut control, and regulate the timing and intensity of land development 
in order to alleviate potential traffic congestion along the C.R. 512 corridor. Although presently 
land within this district is relatively undeveloped, if the regulations prescribed herein were not 
duly adopted, future development within this district would generate unsafe and dangerous 
conflicts in traffic flow along C.R. 512. 
(b) ?Uses permitted: 
Cultural or civic facilities 
Churches 
Administrative services, public and private 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 
Business and professional offices, excluding drive-through facilities 
Medical services 
Commercial retail ? 5,000 sq. ft. 
Pharmacies 
Medical marijuana dispensaries 
Home occupations 
Plant nurseries 
Commercial amusements, enclosed 
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities 
Trade and skilled services 
Residential uses accessory to permitted uses 
Accessory uses to permitted uses 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Child care services 
Nursing homes 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Utilities, public and private 
Parks and recreation, public 
Gasoline sales, retail 
Veterinary services 
Commercial retail with > 5,000 sq. ft. 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum FAR: 50% 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(3) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 35%. 
Minimum open space: 20%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80%. 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
Minimum width: 125 feet. 
Minimum depth: 160 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard: If abutting CR 512: 74 feet; 
Otherwise, all other front yards: 10 feet. 
Side yard: None if the building is built to the side property line(s); otherwise a minimum of 10 
feet. 
Rear yard: 10 feet. 
(6) ?Rear yard landscape requirements: a rear yard buffer strip shall be required pursuant to section 
54-3-14.16 in order to provide satisfactory screening of the district from abutting residentially 
zoned property. 
(7) ?Separation requirements: 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any public school, charter school, private school, daycare or childcare facility. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any church, playground, public recreational facility or community center. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from another pharmacy or medical marijuana treatment center, and only one such 
business shall be located any any single shopping center. 
(e) ?Unified control of land. All development proposals having a C-512 designation must demonstrate 
that all land within the project is held under common ownership whether an individual, a partnership 
or corporation, submits the proposal. 
(f) ?Mandatory compliance with Master Parking and Curb Cut Control Plan (MPCCCP). The MPCCCP is 
hereby adopted by reference and shall apply to all developments within the C-512 District. The 
MPCCCP is on file in the planning and growth management department. 
(g) ?Expansion of uses to adjacent lot(s). An existing permitted land use within the C-512 District may be 
expanded to an adjacent lot or lots of less than 80 feet width providing the following conditions are 
met and the planning and zoning commission approves the site plan for the expansion: 
(1) ?The subject lot or lots shall be under unified control with the adjoining subject developed 
properties pursuant to section 54-2-5.3.1(e); 
(2) ?All such extensions must be constructed as a contiguous extension to an existing structure on 
the adjoining lot; and 
(3) ?The proposed development shall comply with all codes and ordinances of the City of Sebastian 
and reasonable conditions affixed to the site plan by the planning and zoning commission 
and/or the city council. 
(h) ?Compatibility of building lines. No structure within the C-512 District shall be set back more than 84 
feet from the front property line in order to ensure a uniform pattern of development along the CR 
512 corridor. 
(Ord. No. O-18-01, § 3, 6-13-2018) 


Sec. 54-2-5.3.2. - Commercial Limited District (CL). 
(a) ?Intent. The CL District is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for managing land 
designated for limited commercial development. Areas designated for limited commercial 
development shall not accommodate large-scale retail sales and trade activities generally serving 
regional markets. Such stores usually differ from limited commercial shops since the former 
generally require a larger floor area, carry a relatively larger inventory, and require a substantially 
greater off-street parking area. 
    Uses which are not accommodated within the limited commercial area include the following: large 
scale discount stores or supermarkets; department stores; wholesale and warehousing activities; sales, 
service or repair of motor vehicles, machine equipment or accessory parts, including tire and battery 
shops; automotive services centers; and fast food establishments with drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
(b) ?Permitted uses: 
Business and professional offices, excluding drive-through facilities 
Cultural or civic facilities 
Medical services 
Commercial retail ? 5,000 sq. ft. 
Pharmacies 
Medical marijuana dispensaries 
Home occupations 
Parking garages 
Churches 
Administrative services, public and private 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 
All uses permitted within the RM-8 Zoning District 
Accessory uses to permitted uses 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Child care services 
Nursing homes 
Commercial retail > 5,000 sq. ft. 
Gasoline sales, retail 
Parks and recreation areas, public 
Utilities, public and private 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Business and professional offices with drive-through facilities 
Qualified affordable housing 
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities 
Veterinary services 
Funeral homes 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum FAR: 60%. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(3) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 30%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80%. 
Minimum open space: 20%. 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
Minimum width: 75 feet. 
Minimum depth: 125 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard: 10 feet. 
Side yard: 5 feet minimum, except 30 feet when abutting a residential district. 
Rear yard: 10 feet; except 30 feet when abutting a residential district. 
(6) ?Separation requirements: 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any public school, charter school, private school, daycare or childcare facility. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any church, playground, public recreational facility or community center. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from another pharmacy or medical marijuana treatment center, and only one such 
business shall be located any any single shopping center. 
(Ord. No. O-01-07, § 1, 4-11-2001; Ord. No. O-12-10, § 1, 10-10-2012; Ord. No. O-18-01, § 3, 
6-13-2018) 


Sec. 54-2-5.3.3. - Commercial General District (CG). 
(a) ?Intent: The CG District is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for areas 
designated "CG" on the comprehensive plan future land use map. 
(b) ?Permitted uses: 
Cultural or civic facilities 
Churches 
Parking garages 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 
Business and professional offices, excluding drive-through facilities 
Medical services 
Commercial retail ? 20,000 sq. ft. 
Pharmacies 
Medical marijuana dispensaries 
Plant nurseries 
Gasoline sales, retail 
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities 
Trade and skilled services 
Hotels and motels 
Vehicular sales and related services 
Administrative services, public and private 
Accessory uses to permitted uses 
Home occupations 
All uses permitted within the RM-8 Zoning District 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Bars and lounges 
Commercial retail > 20,000 sq. ft. 
Business and professional offices with drive-through facilities 
Farmer's market 
Funeral homes 
Pawn shops 
Nursing homes 
Child care services 
Utilities, public and private 
Parks and recreation, public 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Restaurants with drive-through facilities 
Vehicular service and maintenance 
Veterinary services 
Wholesale trades and services 
Commercial amusements, enclosed 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
Mini-storage 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum FAR: 60%. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(3) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 30%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80%. 
Minimum open space: 20%. 
(4) ?Lot dimension: 
Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
Minimum width: 75 feet. 
Minimum depth: 125 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard with sidewalks, curb and gutters: None required. 
Front yard without sidewalks, curb and gutters: 6 feet. 
Side yard: 5 feet minimum, except 30 feet when abutting a residential district. 
Rear yard: 10 feet; except 30 feet when abutting a residential district. 
(6) ?Separation requirements: 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any public school, charter school, private school, daycare or childcare facility. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any church, playground, public recreational facility or community center. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from another pharmacy or medical marijuana treatment center, and only one such 
business shall be located any any single shopping center. 
(Ord. No. O-18-01, § 3, 6-13-2018) 


Sec. 54-2-5.4. - Commercial Riverfront (CR). 
(a) ?Intent: The purpose and intent of the CR District is to provide a management framework for 
implementing comprehensive plan objectives and policies for the riverfront mixed use designation 
illustrated on the future land use map. All development in the Commercial Riverfront District shall 
comply with the comprehensive plan, performance criteria in chapter III, as well as other applicable 
land development regulations. The CR District is intended to preserve the existing character of the 
riverfront area. The existing assets, including historical structures, shall be protected, preserved and 
enhanced. The zoning district is intended to provide for a mixture of uses and a variety of 
opportunities for recreational and commercial uses while protecting the environment. 
(b) ?Permitted uses: 
Cultural or civic facilities 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 
Medical services 
Gasoline sales, retail 
Wet or dry storage of boats 
Trade and skilled services 
Marine power sales and service 
Hotels and motels 
Bait and tackle shops 
Accessory uses to permitted uses 
Educational institutions, marine related 
Administrative services, public and private 
Business and professional offices, excluding drive-through facilities 
Commercial retail ? 10,000 sq. ft. 
Pharmacies 
Medical marijuana dispensaries 
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities 
Bars and lounges 
Home occupations 
Marinas 
Marine fuel sales 
Boat sales and rentals 
Fish markets and packing facilities 
Yacht clubs 
All uses permitted in the RM-8 Zoning District 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Utilities, public and private 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Commercial retail > 10,000 sq. ft. 
Child care services 
Churches 
Plant nurseries 
Funeral homes 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
Parks and recreation, public 
Nursing homes 
Commercial amusements, enclosed 
Restaurants, with drive-through facilities 
Farmer's markets 
Parking lots without buildings on the lot 
Veterinary services 
Business and professional offices with drive-through facilities 
Vehicular service and maintenance 
(d) ?Size and dimension regulations: The following are the minimum size and dimension criteria for lots 
within this district. For lots located in the Riverfront Performance Overlay District, the additional 
requirements of the overlay district shall be complied with: 
(1) ?Maximum FAR: 60%. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet (25 feet for properties located east of Indian River Drive). 
(3) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 30%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80%. 
Minimum open space: 20%. 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
Minimum width: 75 feet. 
Minimum depth: 125 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard with sidewalks, curb and gutters: None. 
Front yard without sidewalks, curb and gutters: 6 feet. 
Side yard: 5 feet, except 10 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
Rear yard: 10 feet, except 30 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
(6) ?Separation requirements: 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any public school, charter school, private school, daycare or childcare facility. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any church, playground, public recreational facility or community center. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from another pharmacy or medical marijuana treatment center, and only one such 
business shall be located any any single shopping center. 
(e) ?Riverfront design standards. Development shall comply with the design standards for the Riverfront 
Performance Overlay District, cited in article XXI. 
(Ord. No. O-12-10, § 2, 10-10-2012; Ord. No. O-18-01, § 3, 6-13-2018) 


Sec. 54-2-5.5. - Commercial Waterfront Residential District (CWR). 
(a) ?Intent. The purpose and intent of the CWR District is to provide a management framework for 
implementing comprehensive plan objectives and policies for the Riverfront Mixed Use designation 
illustrated on the future land use map. All development in the Commercial Waterfront Residential 
District shall comply with the comprehensive plan, performance criteria in chapter III, as well as other 
applicable land development regulations. The CWR District is intended to preserve the existing 
character of the Riverfront area. The existing assets, including historical structures shall be 
protected, preserved and enhanced. The zoning district is intended to provide for a mixture of uses 
and a variety of opportunities for recreational, residential and commercial uses while protecting the 
environment. 
(b) ?Permitted uses: 
Single-family dwellings 
Duplex dwellings 
Multiple-family dwellings up to 8 units per acre 
Timeshare facilities 
Cultural or civic facilities 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 
Commercial retail ? 5,000 sq. ft. 
Foster care/group homes with ? 6 residents 
Boat sales or rental 
Bait and tackle shops 
Fish markets/packing facilities 
Yacht clubs 
Restaurants excluding drive-through facilities 
Bars and lounges 
Trade and skilled services, marine-related only 
Marinas 
Marina fuel sales 
Marine power sales and service 
Home occupations 
Accessory uses to permitted uses 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Model homes 
Educational institutions, marine related 
Commercial retail > 5,000 sq. ft. 
Business & professional offices, excluding drive-through facilities 
Utilities, public and private 
Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents 
Parks and recreation, public 
Hotels and motels 
Parking lots without a building on the lot 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Bed and breakfast 
Wet or dry storage of boats 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
(d) ?Size and dimension criteria: 
(1) ?Maximum density: 8 units per acre. 
(2) ?Maximum FAR: 50%. 
(3) ?Maximum height: 
West of Indian River Drive: 35 feet. 
East of Indian River Drive: 25 feet. 
(4) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 30%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80%. 
Minimum open space: 
Nonresidential: 25%. 
Residential: 50%. 
(5) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 80 feet. 
Minimum lot depth: 125 feet. 
(6) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard: 
Nonresidential, with sidewalk, curb and gutter: None required. 
Nonresidential, without sidewalk, curb and gutter: 10 feet. 
Residential: 25 feet. 
Side yard: 
Nonresidential: 5 feet, except 10 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
Residential: 15 feet plus one foot per each additional 2 feet in height above 25 feet. 
Rear yard: 
Nonresidential: 10 feet, except 30 feet when abutting a residential district or use. 
Residential: 20 feet. 
Minimum distance between residential structures on the same lot: 20 feet. 
(7) ?Minimum living area: 
Single-family dwellings: The minimum floor area required, exclusive of porches, terraces, 
attached garages, carport or unroofed areas, shall be 1,200 square feet. 
Duplex: 750 square feet per unit. 
Multiple family dwellings: 
Required Minimum Living Area in Multiple Family Dwellings 
Type Dwelling/# Bedrooms 
Required # of Square Feet 
Efficiencies 
600 
One bedroom units 
700 
Two bedroom units 
850 
Three bedroom units 
1,000 
Each additional bedroom after three bedrooms 
100 sq. ft. per additional bedroom 
 
(8) ?Required accessory structures: Every single-family and duplex dwelling unit shall be required 
to provide a garage or carport. If a carport or similar unenclosed structure is provided then each 
unit within the principal structure shall contain a fully enclosed utility storage area of at least 60 
square feet which shall be designed as an integral part of the principal structure. If a fully 
enclosed garage is provided, then no utility structure shall be mandated. The garage or carport 
shall have a minimum interior clear dimension of ten feet by 20 feet. 
(e) ?Regulation of sales promotional activity: Sales activities for commercial resort residential units shall 
comply with all of the following criteria: 
(1) ?The original sale of the vacation time sharing plans may be conducted on premises in a sales 
office and in up to a maximum of two model units; 
(2) ?The on-site sales activity shall be limited to original developer sales; 
(3) ?The sales activity shall be conducted inside the sales office and model units so as not to be 
noticeable from the outside, except for permitted graphics; 
(4) ?On-site sales activities shall be terminated upon completion of original sales; and 
(5) ?A minimum of one parking space for each two proposed units shall be provided on site for the 
sales staff and potential purchasers' use during the (marketing) sales promotional and 
construction phases. 
(f) ?Conversions to time-share units: No development involving the conversion of an existing dwelling 
unit to a time-share unit may take place unless the applicant attaches to his application for zoning or 
site plan approval either: 
(1) ?A copy of any information required by the state, including as may be appropriate, a 
condominium declaration, sales prospectus, and/or other documents required by the state in 
regulating the use. Such material shall include a statement in prominent type declaring that 
time-share units will or may be created with respect to units proposed; and/or 
(2) ?An amendment to a prior existing condominium declaration that permits time-share estates to 
be created, which amendment has been executed by each record owner of each unit of the 
condominium and each record owner of each lien on each unit of the condominium. 
(g) ?Other required information. Applicants for a time-share use shall file with the city all public 
documents required by the state in regulating such use. The purpose of this requirement is to 
provide assurance that the applicant has been found in compliance with all requisite state regulations 
governing the use, including method of sales, operations, and other issues of public health, safety 
and welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-12-10, § 3, 10-10-2012) 


Sec. 54-2-5.6. - Industrial District (IN). 
(a) ?Intent. The intent of the IN District is to provide a management framework for implementing 
comprehensive plan objectives and policies for limited industrial development on land designated IN 
on the future land use map. All development in the IN District shall comply with the comprehensive 
plan, performance criteria in chapter III, as well as other applicable land development regulations. 
Salvage yards and junkyards are deemed to generate highly extensive adverse impacts for the 
urban area and shall not be permitted uses in the city limits of Sebastian. Such activities are more 
appropriately located near major regional transportation facilities. 
(b) ?Permitted uses: 
Utilities, public and private 
Business and professional offices with or without drive-through facilities 
Gasoline sales 
Crematory 
Commercial retail with ? 5,000 sq. ft. 
Pharmacies 
Medical marijuana dispensaries 
Commercial amusements, enclosed 
Storage facilities 
Plant nurseries 
Restaurants with or without drive-through facilities 
Trades and skilled services, including marine-related 
Wholesale trades and services 
Farmer's market 
Fish markets and packing facilities 
Veterinary services 
Industrial activities 
Parking garages 
Parking lots without buildings on the lot 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 
Schools, public and private 
Educational institutions, marine related 
Administrative services, public and private 
Vehicular sales and related services 
Accessory watchman facilities 
Medical services 
Vehicular services and maintenance 
Marine power sales and service 
Wet/dry storage of boats 
Accessory uses to permitted uses 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Commercial retail with > 5,000 sq. ft. 
Hotels and motels 
Mini-storage 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Parks and recreation, public 
Commercial amusements, unenclosed 
Adult entertainment establishment 
Flea markets 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum FAR: 50%. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet. No structure shall be erected within the approach zones of active 
runways on the Sebastian Municipal Airport at a height in excess of those permitted by the FAA 
or the city council. All structures shall comply with the City of Sebastian Airport Master Plan. 
(3) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 50%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80%. 
Minimum open space: 20%. 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet. 
Minimum width: 100 feet. 
Minimum depth: 125 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard: 20 feet. 
Side interior yard: None. 
Rear yard: 10 feet. 
No building or structure in an IN District shall be located closer than 30 feet to a residential 
district. 
(6) ?Separation requirements: 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any public school, charter school, private school, daycare or childcare facility. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from any church, playground, public recreational facility or community center. 
• ?Pharmacies and medical marijuana treatment centers shall not be located closer than 500 
feet from another pharmacy or medical marijuana treatment center, and only one such 
business shall be located any any single shopping center. 
(e) ?Processing and storage within the Industrial District: In the Industrial District any use is permitted 
either indoors or outdoors, but in conformance with the applicable performance standards. In the 
Industrial District, all business, servicing, manufacturing or processing within 200 feet of a residential 
district boundary may be outdoors but shall be effectively screened by a solid wall, fence or natural 
landscaping providing a 90 percent opaque screen planting so that the materials shall not be visible 
from the residential district. The requirement shall not apply to airfields for the outside storage of 
aircraft. 
(Ord. No. O-12-10, § 4, 10-10-2012; Ord. No. O-18-01, § 3, 6-13-2018) 


Sec. 54-2-5.7. - Airport and Industrial Facilities District (AI). 
(a) ?Intent. The intent of the AI District is to provide a management framework for implementing 
comprehensive plan objectives and policies for airport facilities and supportive light industrial 
activities and related development within lands designated IN on the future land use map. In 
addition, the district shall implement the policies of the City of Sebastian Airport Master Plan. 
Performance criteria within the Land Development Code requires that land use and development 
within and adjacent to the Sebastian Airport avoid encroaching upon the airport hazard zone. 
Furthermore, land uses proposed within noise impact areas defined in the FAA noise control 
regulations shall comply with FAA guidelines for managing noise impacts through land use 
regulation. The airport district regulations establish the permitted uses and applicable restrictions 
within the air operations area. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations shall govern the 
land use, specifications, and placement of structures within the airport operations area. All 
development in the AI District shall comply with the comprehensive plan, performance criteria in 
chapter III, section 54-2-7.12, Airport height limitations, article XVIII, Site Plan Review Procedures, 
as well as other applicable land development regulations. 
(b) ?Uses permitted: 
Airports and related uses 
Fixed base operators 
Aircraft repair and service 
Aeronautical schools 
Aircraft storage hangars 
Terminal facilities 
Air freight terminals 
Flying clubs 
Airline operations 
Sale or rental of aircraft 
Air taxi and charter 
Aerial survey 
Aerial advertising 
Aircraft manufacturing 
Sales of aircraft parts and supplies 
Aircraft modification 
Airport maintenance 
Airport administration 
Airport security and emergency services 
Aircraft component manufacturing when flight-testing is involved 
Light industries that manufacture, assemble, process, package, store or distribute products that are 
dependent on component parts or raw materials manufactured elsewhere when runway is required 
Skydiving services 
Marine power sales and service 
Wet/dry storage of boats 
Wholesale trades and services 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Hotels and motels 
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities 
The following conditional uses are permitted when combined with a permitted use: 
Car rental 
Fuel storage 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Parks and recreation, public 
Utilities, public and private 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum FAR: 50%. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(3) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 50%. 
Minimum open space: 20%. 
Maximum impervious surface: 80%. 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet. 
Minimum width: 100 feet. 
Minimum depth: 125 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard: 20 feet. 
Side yard: None. 
Rear yard: 10 feet. 
No building or structure in an AI District shall be located closer than 30 feet to a residential 
district. 
(f) ?Airport height limitations. Reference section 54-2-7.12. 
(Ord. No. O-12-10, § 5, 10-10-2012) 


Sec. 54-2-5.8. - Public Service District (PS). 
(a) ?Intent. The PS District is established to implement comprehensive plan policies for managing land 
designated for institutional development. All development in the PS District shall comply with the 
comprehensive plan, performance criteria in chapter III, section 54-2-7.12, Airport height limitations, 
article XVIII, Site Plan Review Procedures, as well as other applicable land development regulations. 
(b) ?Permitted uses: 
Parks and recreation areas, public 
Accessory uses to permitted use 
(c) ?Conditional uses: 
Schools 
Golf course and support facilities 
Churches 
Parks and public recreation areas equipped with stadium type lighting 
Protective and emergency services, public 
Hospitals and intensive care facilities 
Utilities, public and private 
Cultural or civic activities 
Child care services 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 
Administrative services, public and private 
Accessory uses to conditional uses 
(d) ?Dimensional regulations: 
(1) ?Maximum FAR: 60%. 
(2) ?Maximum height: 35 feet (25 feet east of Indian River Drive). 
(3) ?Lot coverage: 
Maximum building coverage: 40%. 
Minimum open space: 45%. 
Maximum impervious surface 60%. 
(4) ?Lot dimensions: 
Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet. 
Minimum width: 100 feet. 
Minimum depth: 125 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard: 30 feet. 
Side yard: 10 feet. 
Rear yard: 25 feet. 
No building or structure in a PS District shall be located closer than 30 feet to a residential 
district. 


Sec. 54-2-5.9. - Table of Land Use by Districts. 
    Table 54-2-5.9, Land Use by Districts, stipulates the permitted and conditional uses by district. 
Permitted uses are uses allowed by right, provided all applicable regulations within the Land 
Development Code are satisfied, as well as all other applicable laws and administration regulations. 
Conditional uses are allowable only if approved by the city pursuant to administrative procedures found in 
article VI. The applicant requesting a conditional use must demonstrate compliance with conditional use 
criteria set forth in article VI. 
    The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in demonstrating compliance with all applicable laws 
and ordinances during the site plan review process. The site plan review process is set forth in article 
XVIII. 
TABLE 54-2-5.9. LAND USES BY DISTRICT MATRIX 

C 
RE-
40 
RS-
20 
RS-
10 
RM-
8 
R-
MH 
C-
512 
CL 
CG 
CR 
CWR 
IN 
AI 
PS 
RESIDENTIAL USES 














Single-family dwellings 

P 
P 
P 
P 





P 



Duplex dwellings 




P 





P 



Multiple-family dwellings 




P 





P 



Townhouses 




P 









Qualified affordable housing 







C 






Mobile homes 





P 








Vehicular storage areas 





C 








Foster care/group home with ? 6 
residents 

P 
P 
P 
P 





P 



Foster care/group homes with > 6 
residents 

C 
C 
C 
C 





C 



Model homes 

C 
C 
C 
C 
C 




C 



Guest houses 

C 
C 











Home occupations 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 



Residential uses accessory to 
permitted uses 






P 







All uses permitted in RM-8 







P 
P 
P 




COMMUNITY FACILITIES 














Airport facilities 












P/C 

Child care services 

C 
C 
C 
C 

C 
C 
C 
C 



C 
Cultural or civic facilities 




C 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 


C 
Schools, public and private 

C 
C 
C 
C 






P 

C 
Educational institutions, marine 
related 









P 
C 
P 


Equestrian facilities 

C 












Golf course and support facilities 

C 
C 

C 








C 
Hospitals and intensive care 
facilities 













C 
Nursing homes 




C 

C 
C 
C 
C 




Churches 

C 
C 
C 
C 

P 
P 
P 
C 



C 
Clubs and lodges, public and private 






P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
P 

C 
Administrative services, public and 
private 






P 
P 
P 
P 

P 

C 
Utilities, public and private 

C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
P 
C 
C 
Parks and recreation, public 

C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
P 
Parks public with stadium lighting 













C 
Protective and emergency services, 
public 

C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES 














Accessory watchman facilities 











P 


Adult entertainment 











C 


Bait and tackle shops 









P 
P 



Bars and lounges 








C 
P 
P 



Bed and breakfast 




C 





C 



Boat sales and rentals 









P 
P 



Business & professional offices, 
excluding drive-through facilities 






P 
P 
P 
P 
C 
P 


Business & professional offices, with 
drive-through facilities 







C 
C 
C 

P 


Car rental (airport) 












C 

Commercial amusement, enclosed 






P 

C 
C 

P 


Commercial amusement, 
unenclosed 











C 


Time share facilities 










P 



Commercial retail ? 5,000 sq. ft. 






P 
P 


P 
P 


Commercial retail > 5,000 sq. ft. 






C 
C 


C 
C 


Commercial retail ? 10,000 sq. ft. 









P 




Commercial retail > 10,000 sq. ft. 









C 




Commercial retail ? 20,000 sq. ft. 








P 





Commercial retail > 20,000 sq. ft. 








C 





Crematory 











P 


Farmer's market 








C 
C 

P 


Fish markets and packing facilities 









P 
P 
P 


Flea market 











C 


Pawn shops 








C 





Fuel storage (airport) 












C 

Funeral homes 







C 
C 
C 




Hotels and motels 








P 
P 
C 
C 
C 

Industrial activities 











P 


Marina 









P 
P 



Marine fuel sales 









P 
P 



Marine power sales and service 









P 
P 
P 
P 

Marine related specialty retail sales 
& service 









P 
P 



Medical marijuana dispensaries 






P 
P 
P 
P 

P 


Medical services 






P 
P 
P 
P 

P 


Mini-storage 








C 


C 


Parking garages 







P 
P 


P 


Parking lots without buildings on the 
lot 









C 
C 
P 


Pharmacies 






P 
P 
P 
P 

P 


Plant nurseries 






P 

P 
C 

P 


Restaurants, excluding drive-
through facilities 






P 
C 
P 
P 
P 
P 
C 

Restaurants, including drive-through 
facilities 








C 
C 

P 


Gasoline sales, retail 






C 
C 
P 
P 

P 


Trade and skilled services 






P 

P 
P 

P 


Trade and skilled services, marine-
related 










P 
P 


Storage facilities 











P 


Skydiving services 












P 

Vehicular service and maintenance 








C 
C 

P 


Vehicular sales and related service 








P 


P 


Veterinary services 






C 
C 
C 
C 

P 


Wet/dry storage of boats 









P 
C 
P 
P 

Wholesale trades and services 








C 


P 
P 

Yacht clubs 









P 
P 



 
    Footnote: Adult life care and nursing homes shall include rest homes and convalescent homes, but 
no commercial offices or retail uses are allowed unless expressly restricted, designed and marketed only 
to serve residents of the facility and not the general public. 
    Footnote: In all zoning districts, accessory uses to permitted uses shall be considered permitted 
uses. In all zoning districts, accessory uses to conditional uses shall be considered conditional uses. 
(Ord. No. O-12-10, § 6, 10-10-2012; Ord. No. O-18-01, § 3(Exh. A), 6-13-2018) 


Sec. 54-2-5.10. - Size and dimension criteria. 
(a) ?Minimum lot or site requirements for all uses. 
(1) ?Table of size and dimensional regulations. Table 54-2-5.10 incorporates required size and 
dimension regulations, which shall be applicable within each respective zoning district, and 
these standards shall be maintained in perpetuity. All developments shall have a total land area 
sufficient to satisfy all standards stipulated within the Land Development Code. 
(2) ?Height regulations and exceptions thereto. The term "building height" as used in the land 
development regulations shall mean the vertical distance from either the required base flood 
elevation or the average construction grade, whichever is greater, of all exterior corners of a 
structure to the highest point of the building, not including those structures specifically permitted 
to extend beyond the height of the building. 
On any site where fill is required to adhere to the base flood elevation, as established by the 
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and as required by other governmental agencies, the 
building height is the vertical distance from the required base flood elevation to the highest point 
of the building not including those structures specifically permitted to extend beyond the height 
of the building. 
Chimneys and radio and television antennas may exceed height limitations upon the prior 
approval of the planning and growth management director and the city engineer based on the 
compliance with all other applicable technical codes. Steeples, silos, windmills, ventilators, 
water tanks, cupolas and other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof 
level and not intended for human occupancy or use may exceed height limitations for the 
respective zoning district by no more than 20% upon the prior approval of the planning and 
zoning commission. All apparatus exceeding height limitations by more than 20% for the 
applicable zoning district height restrictions shall require variance approval by the board of 
adjustment. In no event, however, shall any permitted heights be in conflict with the height 
regulations established by flight angles of state-approved airports in the city. All permitted 
heights shall comply with all requirements of the Federal Aviation Authority and the Federal 
Communications Commission. 
(3) ?Lots of record less than minimum size (grandfather clause). Any legally platted lot of record 
(which conformed with the regulations and procedures governing subdivision of lots) at the time 
of the adoption of this ordinance which contains less lot area, width or depth than required in the 
district in which it is located may be used for a use permitted in such district. The provision shall 
not be construed to permit more than one dwelling unit on a lot with less area per family than 
required for the district in which such lot is located. However, if the substandard lot adjoins other 
land under the same ownership which if used could correct the nonconforming lot area or width, 
then: 
a. ?The substandard lot shall not be permitted a vested development right unless the 
nonconformity is remedied; and, furthermore, 
b. ?Any subsequent sale or ownership transfer of the substandard lot, adjoining lot, or portion 
thereof, shall not result in a vested development right in the subject substandard lot(s) 
unless the transaction corrects deficiencies in the substandard lot(s). 
*This regulation shall not apply to lots of record within the C-512 District, where contiguous 
lots under the same ownership shall carry grandfather rights so long as the development 
lot width is a minimum of 80 feet. 
(4) ?Distance between principal buildings. More than one multiple-family dwelling may be located 
upon a lot, provided that the horizontal open space between such buildings measured at the 
closest point shall be as specified for the district in which it is located, and the distance shall be 
not less than twice the side yard required in the respective district. Such distance shall not be 
less than 20 feet. 
(b) ?Density and intensity of land use. The density and intensity shall be consistent with the 
comprehensive plan. Reference Table 54-2-5.10 for specific density and intensity maximums by type 
of land use. The density and intensity expressed in Table 54-2-5.10 is the maximum 
density/intensity, which can be achieved. However, the maximum density/intensity is not guaranteed 
by right and shall be subject to the performance criteria set forth herein. Maximum gross residential 
density shall be determined by dividing the "maximum allowable units" by the "gross acres of land" 
(i.e., dwelling units/gross land area). Land seaward of mean high water shall not be used in 
calculating density or intensity. 
    All residential densities stipulate the maximum gross densities. Gross land area shall be defined as 
those contiguous land areas under common ownership proposed for residential development. In cases 
where developable land abuts wetlands, waters of the state or other environmentally sensitive land, 
including but not limited to those lands within state and/or federal jurisdiction, the boundary shall be 
delineated as established in section 54-3-11.1(c) or as established by the state or federal government. 
The applicant shall bear the burden of proof in determining that development shall not adversely impact 
wetlands, waters of the state, and other environmentally fragile natural systems. Where the state and 
federal governments have jurisdiction, the applicant for development must obtain all necessary permits, 
including but not limited to a dredge and fill permit, prior to requesting a determination of development 
rights from the city. In addition, site alteration on areas zoned "Conservation" shall be limited to one 
percent of the entire site. Such determinations shall be based on physical and biological data obtained 
from specific site investigations. These determinations shall be predicated on findings rendered by 
professionals competent in producing data and analysis necessary to support impact assessments, 
including findings regarding the impacts of potential development on the physical and biological value and 
function of environmentally sensitive lands. 
    In reviewing applications/site plans for development of particular building sites, the specific 
residential density approved by the city shall meet all applicable performance criteria of chapter III, as well 
as other applicable land development regulations. 
    The maximum intensity stipulated for nonresidential activities is stated in terms of floor area ratio. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) refers to the total floor area of building(s) on any lot, parcel, or site divided by the 
area of the lot, parcel, or site. For purposes of calculating floor area, parking area located beneath the 
building shall be counted only if that first story is over seven feet above finished grade. FAR computations 
shall include all uses on the lot, parcel or site, including both residential and nonresidential floor area. 
    The city shall reserve the power to mandate changes in the site plan as well as mandate reductions 
in the density and/or intensity of development proposed by an applicant/developer if the city finds that the 
proposed site plan does not satisfy provisions of the comprehensive plan and/or the land development 
regulations. The maximum FARs are further restricted by quantitative and qualitative criteria included in 
the land development regulations, including but not limited to, such factors as minimum open space; 
concurrency management and level of service standards for traffic circulation; storm water management 
and other public facilities and services; off-street parking and internal circulation; height restrictions; 
landscaping; other required on-site improvements and design amenities required to achieve land use 
compatibility. Furthermore, the calculations of floor area ratios in mixed use developments shall be 
determined by applying the following procedures. The maximum number of residential units that may be 
allocated to the residential component of a mixed-use development shall be determined by following the 
procedures stated below: 
Step 1.?State the allowable commercial FAR ..... 
=?Maximum allowable commercial 
FAR 
Step 2.?State the proposed commercial FAR ..... 
=?Proposed commercial FAR 
Step 3.?Subtract Line 2 from Line 1 ..... 
=?Unused commercial FAR 
Step 4.?Divide Line 3 by Line 1 ..... 
=?% of unused commercial FAR 
Step 5.?Multiply Line 4 by the maximum allowable units per acre 
..... 
=?Allowable units per acre 
Step 6.?Multiply Line 5 by the number of acres on the total site 
..... 
=?Maximum residential units allowed 
 
    The maximum square footage that may be allocated to the commercial component of a mixed use 
development shall be determined by following the procedures stated below: 
Step 1.?State the maximum allowable unit per acre ..... 
=?Maximum allowable commercial FAR 
Step 2.?State total number of units per acre on the total site 
..... 
=?Total number of units per acre 
Step 3.?Subtract Line 2 from Line 1 ..... 
=?Unused residential density 
Step 4.?Divide Line 3 by Line 1 ..... 
=?% of unused residential density 
Step 5.?Multiply Line 4 by allowable commercial FAR ..... 
=?Maximum commercial FAR 
Step 6.?Multiply Line 5 by the square footage of the total site 
..... 
=?Maximum commercial square 
footage 
 
(c) ?Impervious surface and open space. 
(1) ?Definitions. As applied in the size and dimension requirement of this chapter, the following 
terms shall have the following meanings: 
a. ?Impervious surface. That portion of the land which is covered by buildings, pavement, non-
porous fill, swimming pools, or other cover through which water cannot penetrate. The 
impervious surface ratio requirement controls the intensity of development, by restricting 
the amount of the land covered by any type of impervious surface. 
b. ?Open space. The term "open space" is defined as that portion of land which includes the 
gross area of the site less building coverage, impervious parking areas, vehicular access 
or egress ways, and other cover through which water cannot penetrate. City approved 
recreation and pedestrian site amenities shall be included as open space even if they 
restrict the penetration of water. Water bodies shall not constitute more than 30% of total 
open space area. Water bodies shall be measured from the ordinary water line. Dry 
retention ponds shall be considered open space. 
(2) ?Calculation of ISR. The impervious surface ratio (ISR) is calculated for the gross site by 
dividing the total impervious surface by the gross site area. 
Cluster development or other site design alternatives may result in individual lots exceeding the 
ISR, while other lots may be devoted entirely to open space. The city may require, as a 
condition of approval, deed restrictions or covenants, which guarantee the maintenance of such 
open space in perpetuity. The ISR requirement shall not be bypassed or reduced. However, 
where cluster developments are planned, the intent is to allow maximum flexibility through 
calculating ISR on the gross site, and not on a lot-by-lot basis. 
(3) ?Use of porous material. Only commercially marketed paver blocks approved by the planning 
and growth management director and with the concurrence of the city engineer shall be used in 
satisfying requirements for open space, pedestrian ways and recreation amenities. The city 
shall be the sole judge in determining whether a porous material shall qualify as an alternative 
to conventional pavement and/or meet the city's specification for open space. 
(4) ?Compliance with ISR stipulated in Table 54-2-5.10. All proposed development shall comply 
with the standards given in the table of impervious surface ratios in Table 54-2-5.10. 
(d) ?Building setbacks. Table 54-2-5.10 provides minimum building setbacks for all zoning districts within 
the City of Sebastian. The minimum building setback shall be measured from the subject lot lines of 
the building site. 
(e) ?Regulations for required yards. 
(1) ?Purpose, use and maintenance of yards. The purpose of yards as required in this chapter is to 
provide open space around and between structures for health, safety and aesthetic purposes. 
The purpose is also to prevent the location of structures within dedicated easements. All 
required yards and landscaped areas shall be planted and maintained in lawn, sod, or 
landscaping including flower beds, shrubs, hedges or other generally accepted landscaping 
material approved by the city consistent with article XIV. Landscaping material, including trees, 
shall not obstruct the vision of the motoring public. The landscape requirements of article XIV 
shall further regulate development within all zoning districts, excepting single-family zoned 
districts. 
(2) ?Yards requirements. Table 54-2-5.10 provides the required yard setbacks. These setbacks 
shall be based on the following definitions of regulated yards. 
a. ?Yard defined. An open space at grade between a building setback and the adjoining lot 
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, 
except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining 
the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum 
horizontal distance between the lot line and the required building setback shall be used. 
1. ?Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and 
being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the structure or 
any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered steps and those 
allowed per section 54-2-5.10(e)(2)f. On corner lots and through lots all yards, which 
abut the street, are considered front yards for setback purposes. 
2. ?Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and 
between the rear lot line and the nearest structure. On lots with one front line, the lot 
line opposite the front lot line shall be the rear lot line. On corner lots which abut two 
streets with front lot lines of unequal length, the rear yard line shall be opposite and 
parallel to the shortest front lot line. On a corner lot which abuts three streets, the 
remaining lot line shall be a side yard if it abuts a side yard and shall be a rear yard if 
it abuts a rear yard. 
3. ?Yard, side. A yard between any structure and the side line of the lot, and extending 
from the front lot line to the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance 
between a side lot line and the side of any structure. A yard which is not a front or rear 
yard. 
b. ?Yard and building site requirements. Yards or building sites created after the effective date 
of the land development regulations shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements 
established in the Schedule of District Regulations located herein. No yard or building site 
existing at the time of passage of this article shall be reduced in dimension or area below 
the minimum requirements set forth herein. 
c. ?Special front yard regulations. 
1. ?Lots with double frontage. The front yard regulations shall apply to both streets on 
through lots or double frontage lots. 
2. ?Corner lots. There shall be a front yard on each street side of a corner lot, provided, 
however, that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet; 
accessory buildings may be located forward of the front setback line along the 
boundary of the secondary front yard on an improved corner lot. 
3. ?Encroachment of porches or terraces. An open unenclosed and uncovered porch or 
paved terrace may project into the front yard for a distance of not more than ten feet. 
4. ?Encroachment of gasoline service facilities. Gasoline filling station pump islands may 
be located within a front yard, provided they are not less than 15 feet from any right-
of-way line. 
d. ?Special regulation governing rear yards. Detached structures, such as utility sheds and 
other structures accessory to single-family homes within a single-family zoning district may 
encroach into a required rear yard, provided that any such structure maintain a minimum 
distance of ten feet from the rear property line and not be located within a dedicated 
easement. With the exception of structures that consist solely of screening and beams and 
supports for the screening material, no such structure shall exceed 400 square feet in lot 
coverage and shall not exceed 12 feet in height. Structures that consist solely of screening 
and beams and supports for the screening material, such as screen enclosures for 
swimming pool areas, shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
e. ?Independent yard or open space. No part of a yard or other open space or off-street 
parking or loading space required in connection with any building or site for the purpose of 
complying with the land development regulations shall be included as part of a yard, open 
space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building or site. 
f. ?General encroachments into required yards. Every part of every required yard shall be open 
and unobstructed from its lowest point to the sky, except for ordinary projection of sill, 
cornices, buttresses, ornamental features and eaves; provided, however, that none of the 
before named projections shall project into a minimum front yard more than 18 inches nor 
into the minimum side yard more than 24 inches. In addition the following provisions shall 
govern other encroachments: 
1. ?Residential overhangs may extend 48 inches into required yard space. 
2. ?Commercial roof overhangs may extend 24 inches into required yard space having a 
required setback of less than ten feet and may extend 48 inches into a required yard 
space of more than ten feet. 
3. ?Horticultural growth poles, play equipment, wires, lights, mailboxes, fences, 
ornamental entry columns and gates not exceeding six feet in height are not 
considered as encroachments. 
4. ?Flag poles and outdoor furniture are not considered as encroachments. 
5. ?Chimneys, flues, and bay windows may not project more than two and one-half feet 
into a required yard. 
6. ?Waterfront structures such as docks and other permitted waterfront accessory 
structures are not considered yard encroachments. 
7. ?Mechanical equipment, including air conditioning units, swimming pool equipment and 
similar items of mechanical equipment that are functional and which serve the 
residence on the lot are permitted within the required side yard setback; provided, that 
no such equipment shall exceed a height of 36 inches above grade (except water 
conditioning equipment). No such equipment shall project into a minimum side yard 
more than 36 inches. 
8. ?Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article XVI. 
9. ?Driveways and pedestrian ways shall not be considered encroachments when the 
same are duly approved by the city. 
TABLE 54-2-5.10. SIZE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 

District 
Minimum Lot 
Impervio
us  
Surface  
Ratio  
(%) 
Maximu
m  
Building  
Coverag
e  
(%) 
Minimum Setback 
1 
Max.  
Heigh
t  
(Feet) 
Max
.  
Floo
r  
Are
a  
Rati
o 
Max.  
Density 


Area  
(in  
sq. 
ft.) 
Widt
h  
(in 
feet) 
Dept
h  
(in 
feet) 


Fron
t  
(Feet
) 
Side  
(Feet
) 
Rear  
(Feet
) 



CONSERVATION 











C 
Conservation 
N/A 
N/A 









RESIDENTIAL 











RE-
40 
Residential 
Estate 
40,00
0 
125 
150 
55 
25 
40 
20 
25 
35 
N/A 
1/40,00
0 SF 
RS-
20 
Residential 
Single-Family 
20,00
0 
100 
150 
60 
30 
30 
15 
25 
35 
N/A 
1/20,00
0 SF 
RS-
10 
Residential 
Single-Family 
9,500 
80 
100 
55 
30 
25 
10 
20 
25 
N/A 
1/10,00
0 SF 
RM-
8 
Medium 
Density 
Multifamily 
Residential: 
10,00
0 
80 
100 
50 
40 
(4) 
(4) 
(4) 
35 
N/A 
8/acre 

?One-story 





25 
10 
25 




?Two-story 





25 
15* 
25 



R-
MH 
Mobile 
Home 
7,500 
70 
100 
50 
40 
20 
10 
10 
25 
N/A 
5/acre 
COMMERCIAL 











C-
512 
C-512 
Limited 
Commercial 
20,00
0 
125 
160 
80 
35 

0 or 
10 
10 
35 
50 
n/a 

?Front yard 
abuts [C-
]512 





74 






?All other 
front yards 





10 





CL 
Commercial 
Limited 
10,00
0 
75 
125 
80 
30 
10 
5 
10 
35 
60 
n/a 

?Yard abuts 
residential 






30 
30 



CG 
Commercial 
General 
10,00
0 
75 
125 
80 
30 
6 
5 
10 
35 
60 
n/a 

?With curb 
and gutter 





0 






?Abuts 
residential 






30 
30 



CR 
Commercial 
Riverfront 
10,00
0 
75 
125 
80 
30 
6 
5 
10 
35 
60 
n/a 

?With curb 
and gutter 





0 






?Abuts 
residential 






10 
30 



CW
R 
Commercial 
Waterfront 
Residential 
10,00
0 
80 
125 
80 
30 



35 
50 
8/acre 

East of 
Indian River 
Drive 








25 



Residential 





25 
15* 
20 




Nonresidenti
al 












With curb 
and gutter 





0 






Without 
curb and 
gutter 





10 






Abuts 
residential 






10 
30 




Not abutting 
residential 






5 
10 



INDUSTRIAL 











IN 
Industrial 
15,00
0 
100 
125 
80 
50 
20 
0 
10 
35 
50 
n/a 
AI 
Airport and 
Industrial 
15,00
0 
100 
125 
80 
50 
20 
0 
10 
35 
50 
n/a 
INSTITUTIONAL 











PS 
Public and 
Semi-public 
15,00
0 
100 
125 
60 
40 
30 
10 
25 
35 
60 
n/a 
 
    *Plus one foot for each additional two feet in height above 25 feet. 


Sec. 54-2-5.11. - Residential Planned Unit Development (PUD-R). 
(a) ?Intent. The PUD-R District is established to provide specific regulations governing the development 
of residential planned unit developments (PUD-R) in areas designated for residential development 
on the comprehensive plan future land use map. The district provisions establish a voluntary 
management framework for negotiating innovative development concepts, which protect natural 
features and provide abundant amenities designed to benefit the city as well as the specific 
development. All planned unit developments shall be designed and administered consistent with the 
criteria and administrative procedures in article XX, Planned Unit Development, and shall comply 
with all provisions of the Land Development Code, including but not limited to: article VII, General 
Regulations; chapter III, Performance Criteria; article XVIII, Site Plan Review; article XIX, Subdivision 
and section 54-2-5.10. 
(b) ?Compliance with comprehensive plan and future land use map. A residential PUD must comply with 
the provisions of the Sebastian Comprehensive Plan and satisfy the performance criteria set forth in 
this section. 
(c) ?Location and size. A residential PUD shall have a minimum of 25 contiguous acres under a common 
ownership or control. 
(d) ?Uses permitted. The following land uses are permitted within the PUD(R) District subject to 
compliance with provisions of this Code: Single-family attached or detached dwellings, duplex, and 
multifamily housing; and any other uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning district(s). 
(e) ?Conditional uses. In this district any uses permitted in an underlying district as a conditional use 
may be allowed upon compliance with applicable conditions stated herein and upon compliance with 
all other applicable provisions of this Code, including site plan review and performance criteria. The 
planning and zoning commission shall ascertain if such conditions and provisions are satisfied. 
Appeal of such decisions shall be heard by the city council. Appeal of such decisions shall be heard 
by the city council. In addition, limited commercial development may be allowed subject to the 
following conditions: 
(1) ?Limited commercial development standards: 
a. ?Design and market orientation. Any uses of a commercial nature shall be designated to 
primarily serve the needs of the residents of the planned development in which they are 
located, and such uses shall be designed so as to maintain and protect the residential 
character of the planned development and adjacent residential neighborhoods as well. In 
order to accomplish these purposes: 
1. ?Enclosure. Such commercial uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed 
building with no outside display, except those uses which by their nature must be 
conducted outside a building. Any such outside storage use shall be reviewed by the 
planning and zoning commission and city council. If found acceptable, such use shall 
be screened by a masonry wall or fence or a combination berm and landscaping with 
a wall or fence and shall provide a 90% opaque screen. 
2. ?Land area. At the option of the developer, the maximum total land area, including all 
at-grade off-street parking and loading areas in connection therewith, devoted to said 
commercial uses shall be calculated using one of the following two methods: 
(a) ?The PUD(R) development may contain as much commercial land area as was 
permitted in any underlying commercial zoning district, although the location of 
the commercial activities need not be limited to the boundaries of the underlying 
commercial district; or 
(b) ?The PUD(R) development may contain commercial development based on the 
applicable ratio of: 
i. ?125 square feet of commercial land area per dwelling for PUD(R) with a 
density of five dwelling units per acre or less. 
ii. ?100 square feet of commercial land area per dwelling for PUD(R) with a 
density above five dwelling units per acre. 
b. ?Issuance of building permits. No building permit for any commercial establishment shall be 
issued nor may any building be used for a commercial establishment before building 
permits for at least 50 dwelling units in the PUD project have been issued. 
(f) ?Dimensional regulations. Reference section 54-4-20.1(b) for specific criteria to be applied in 
assessing density, intensity, and other size and dimension requirements for site specific 
development. 
(1) ?Maximum density. The comprehensive plan land use designation shall govern the maximum 
density permitted. No credit shall be given for land used for nonresidential purposes in 
calculating density. 
(2) ?Maximum FAR. Shall not exceed the FAR of the adjacent residential district. If more than one 
residential district abuts the proposed site, the least intensive development shall be required to 
be located adjacent to the dwelling units in the least intensive existing adjacent residential 
development. 
(3) ?Maximum height. Shall not exceed the maximum height established for the adjacent residential 
district. 
(4) ?Lot coverage and open space. A minimum of 50% of the PUD shall be maintained as open 
space; provided that a minimum of 30% of each residential lot must be maintained as open 
space. 
(5) ?Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size, lot width, and lot depth shall be negotiated. The 
average residential lot size for an attached or detached single-family unit shall not be reduced 
by less than 75% of the required minimum lot size in the adjacent single-family residential 
zoning district. There is no minimum lot size for multiple-family residential structures, excepting 
attached single-family units, townhouses, patio homes, and similar clustering of residential units 
which shall follow the guidelines as established above. 
The city retains the authority to require lot sizes along the periphery of the project be designed 
in a manner that is similar in size to abutting lots within adjacent residential single-family zoning 
districts. The transition in lot size should be internalized in order to abate adverse impacts on 
adjacent single-family zoning districts. The city also retains the authority to require more open 
space and/or amenities which have a clearly significant public benefit in return for allowing 
substantial flexibility in the layout and design of the planned unit development. 
(6) ?Minimum setbacks. All development must comply with requirements for setbacks from 
wetlands and open waters established in section 54-3-11.1(c). In order to promote flexibility in 
the layout and design of a residential PUD, the city shall negotiate appropriate minimum 
setbacks which clearly conform to the land use compatibility and open space policies in the 
comprehensive plan and are consistent with the performance criteria in chapter III of the Land 
Development Code. Similarly, all setbacks shall be consistent with adopted fire code and 
standard building code. 
(7) ?Minimum living area. The minimum living area provided within each unit shall be negotiated; 
however, the minimum living area shall not be less than 900 square feet and generally shall be 
consistent with the living area provided in conventional zoning districts that most closely 
approximate the structure type and density proposed within the PUD. 
(8) ?Frontage and accessibility. Every dwelling unit or other use permitted in the PUD(R) District 
shall have access to a public street either directly or via an approved private driveway, 
pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated to public use or private use or common element 
guaranteeing access. 
(9) ?Screening of mechanical equipment utility hardware and waste storage areas. In the PUD(R) 
District all central refuse, trash and garbage collection containers shall be screened from sight 
or located in such a manner that will comply with the provisions of subsection 54-3-10.2(b). 
(10) ?Signs. Signs in the PUD(R) District shall be permitted only in accordance with an approved 
sign plan. Such sign plan should provide for effective sign controls on the type, height, number, 
size and location of all signs in the development, and shall be designated to minimize sign 
proliferation and maximize the architectural integration of all signs into the development. 
(g) ?Perimeter transition area. All proposed development on land classified PUD(R) shall comply with 
perimeter transition regulations in section 54-4-20.1(c) and all other applicable provisions of article 
XX. 
(h) ?Screening and buffer yard requirements. Screening and buffer yard requirements shall comply with 
article XIII provisions regulating required screening of residential and nonresidential uses as well as 
all other applicable provisions of article XX. 
(i) ?Subdivision improvements and urban design amenities. In addition to requirements of article XIX of 
this Code, the open space systems and design amenities incorporated in the planned unit 
development shall reflect best management principles and practices of urban design, including 
streetscape amenities and recreation facilities which promote a harmonious and aesthetic 
environment for residents within the proposed development. This requirement shall be enforced in 
order to implement the purpose and intent of the PUD(R) and section 54-4-20.1(c). 


Sec. 54-2-5.12. - Commercial Planned Unit Development (PUD-C). 
(a) ?Intent. The objective of this zoning district is to establish regulatory standards for controlling the 
location of comprehensively planned commercial centers accessible to arterial roadways. The 
PUD(C) is intended to incorporate a flexible management policy that incorporates urban design 
amenities, including streetscape improvements, and fosters innovative master planning in the design 
and development of commercial centers. The PUD(C) District provides a diversified mix of permitted 
and conditional land uses and higher standards of land planning and site design than are available 
under conventional zoning categories. All planned unit developments shall be designed and 
administered consistent with the criteria and administrative procedures in article XX, Planned Unit 
Development, and shall comply with all provisions of the Land Development Code, including but not 
limited to: article VII, General Regulations; chapter III, Performance Criteria; article XVIII, Site Plan 
Review; article XIX, Subdivision and section 54-2-5.10. 
(b) ?Compliance with comprehensive plan and future land use map. A commercial PUD must comply 
with the provisions of the Sebastian Comprehensive Plan. In addition to meeting the performance 
criteria set forth in this section, all land contained within a commercial PUD must have one of the 
following underlying comprehensive plan future land use map designations: 1) Commercial Limited 
(CL); 2) Commercial General (CG); or Riverfront Mixed Use (RMU). 
(c) ?Location and size. A commercial PUD shall have frontage on a primary arterial roadway, as 
designated on the City of Sebastian Major Thoroughfare Plan. At the time an application for the 
PUD(C) is submitted and approved by the city, the property included in the proposed PUD(C) shall 
have a minimum of 25 contiguous acres under unified control as required pursuant to section 54-
4.20.1(b). 
(d) ?Land use mix. The specific land use mix within a PUD(C) District development shall be determined 
by the underlying comprehensive plan future land use map designations. The location of the various 
land uses shall be determined during the review of the preliminary development plan required 
pursuant to section 54-4-20.3. 
(e) ?Permitted uses. Permitted land uses shall include those land use activities cited below which are 
determined to be consistent with the underlying comprehensive plan future land use map designation 
and shall be permitted by right within an approved PUD(C) development plan. 
(1) ?Commercial limited land use designation. The following principal land uses, as well as all 
accessory uses thereto, are permitted uses within those areas, if any, of a commercial PUD 
having a Commercial Limited (CL) comprehensive plan future land use map designation: 
a. ?Community facilities. Limited to the following: 
1. ?Administrative services (public or private not for profit). 
2. ?Clubs (public or private not for profit). 
3. ?Cultural or civic activities. 
4. ?Protective services. 
5. ?Utilities, public and private. 
b. ?Business and professional offices. 
c. ?Commercial retail ? 5,000 sq. ft. 
d. ?Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities and fast food service. 
(2) ?Commercial general land use designations. Those areas, if any, of commercial PUD(s) having 
an underlying comprehensive plan future land use map designation of Commercial General 
(CG) shall be permitted to have the same permitted and conditional uses as provided for in 
section 54-2-5.3.3 Commercial General (CG) District. 
(3) ?Riverfront mixed use designations: Those areas, if any, of commercial PUD(s) having an 
underlying comprehensive plan future land use map designation of Riverfront Mixed Use (RMU) 
shall be permitted to have the same permitted and conditional uses as provided for in section 
54-2-5.4 Commercial Riverfront and section 54-2-5.5 Commercial Waterfront Residential. 
(f) ?Conditional uses . Conditional uses shall include those land use activities cited below which are: (1) 
consistent with the comprehensive plan future land use map designation; and (2) comply with all 
criteria and procedures of article VI, Conditional Uses, and all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
The planning and zoning commission shall determine if such conditions and provisions are satisfied. 
Appeal of such decisions shall be heard by the city council. All conditional uses allowed within a 
Commercial Limited (CL), Commercial General (CG) or Commercial Riverfront (CR) or Commercial 
Waterfront Residential (CWR) zoning district may be approved as conditional uses within the PUD 
(C) provided that the uses comply with the above cited regulations and conditional use approval 
procedures of article VI. 
(1) ?Residential development. Residential development may be approved as a conditional use in 
the PUD-C District if such residential development is permitted within the underlying 
comprehensive plan future land use map designation. In addition, the residential use must 
comply with the condition use criteria of article VI, the specific criteria below stated and all other 
applicable laws and ordinances: 
a. ?Residential development shall be allowed along the perimeter boundaries of the proposed 
development as a buffer from adjacent off-site residential developments as well as from 
undeveloped adjacent areas off site which are zoned for residential development. 
b. ?The total land area proposed for residential development shall not exceed 25% of the total 
land area of the proposed PUD(C) site. 
c. ?The maximum density shall not exceed eight dwelling units per acre. This density shall not 
be permitted as a matter of right but rather the actual density shall be as determined during 
review of the preliminary development plan pursuant to the provisions of section 54-4-20.3. 
No credit shall be given for land used for nonresidential purposes in calculating density. 
d. ?Residential structure types shall be compatible with surrounding residential development. 
e. ?A minimum of 50% of the total land area proposed for residential development shall be 
preserved as open space. 
(2) ?Light industrial development. Light industrial development may be allowed only in those areas, 
if any, of a commercial PUD zone having a future land use classification of Commercial General 
(CG). The total land area proposed for light industrial development shall not exceed 50% of the 
total developable land area with a general commercial land use designation. 
a. ?All such uses shall comply with all performance standards within this Code and shall take 
place within wholly enclosed buildings. 
b. ?Light industrial development within a commercial PUD(C) shall be limited to the following 
conditional uses: 
1. ?The manufacturing, compounding, processing, packing, or assembly of small electrical 
items, components, or circuitry, jewelry, musical instruments, toys, novelties, and 
other similar items that are dependent on component parts or raw materials 
manufactured elsewhere. 
2. ?Schools, offices, laboratories and other such facilities. 
3. ?Motion picture production studios; professional, scientific, photographic or optical 
instrumentation facilities. 
4. ?Printing, engraving, and related reproduction processes. 
5. ?Publishing or distribution of books, newspapers or other similar printing facilities. 
6. ?Mini-storage. 
(g) ?Perimeter transition area. All uses shall conform to the purposes of the Commercial Planned Unit 
Development District and shall be compatible with all uses, existing or proposed in the vicinity of the 
area covered by the proposed planned development. Where this section is found to be more 
restrictive than other provisions within the City Code of Ordinances, this section shall be the 
controlling regulation. 
(1) ?Compatibility with adjacent residential property. No structure proposed for commercial use shall 
be constructed within 100 feet of adjacent or abutting property zoned for residential 
development. 
(2) ?Compatibility with adjacent nonresidential property. In those cases where the property line 
does not abut and is not adjacent to residential development or residentially zoned land, the 
minimum setback shall be determined as part of the preliminary development plan review. No 
buildings shall be located within 40 feet of the outer boundary of the PUD districts excepting 
entryway security buildings and structures approved by the city council. 
(h) ?Size and dimension regulations. The intent of the PUD(C) is to offer greater flexibility in the design 
of innovative large scale commercial development and to accommodate amenities generally not 
found in conventional development. The location, size, dimensions and design of yards, building 
setbacks, points of vehicular access, parking areas, building characteristics, and all other site 
improvements shall provide for: 
• ?Safe and convenient internal vehicular circulation, including access and sufficient area for 
effective delivery of emergency services such as fire protection; 
• ?Buildings with safe entry and exit from the front and rear of respective buildings; and 
• ?Convenient, well landscaped and designed pedestrian ways and open space systems. 
(1) ?PUD Commercial size and dimension criteria. 
a. ?Minimum lot size. No individual minimum lot size shall be required within a Commercial 
Planned Unit Development. 
b. ?Floor area ratio(FAR). The FAR shall not exceed 60% west of Indian River Drive and shall 
not exceed 40% east of Indian River Drive. The FAR shall comply with section 54-2-5.10(b) 
provisions for mixed-use development. 
c. ?Frontage requirements. All land use activities within a PUD(C) shall have access to a public 
street. 
d. ?Setbacks. There are no required setbacks or yards within the Commercial Planned Unit 
Development except as otherwise provided for herein. 
e. ?Distance between buildings. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet separating structures, 
excepting buildings with immediately adjoining or common walls. However, the minimum 
distance separating any one building over 25 feet in height from an adjacent building shall 
be 20 feet plus one foot for each additional two feet in height above 25 feet. 
f. ?Height. The height of structures shall not exceed 35 feet. 
g. ?Open space. Commercial development shall maintain no less than 25% percent open 
space. Mixed use residential and commercial structures shall maintain no less than 30% 
open space. 
(2) ?Criteria for establishing site specific size and dimension requirements. See section 54-4-20.1(f) 
for specific criteria to be applied in assessing density, intensity, and other size and dimension 
requirements for site specific development proposals. 
(i) ?Screening and buffer yard requirements. See article XIII for specific criteria to be applied in 
assessing the required screening and buffer yard requirements density, intensity, and other size and 
dimension requirements for site specific development proposals. 
(j) ?Subdivision improvements and urban design amenities. In addition to requirements of article XIX of 
this Code as well as open space systems and street furniture, the PUD(C) shall reflect principles and 
practices of urban design, including streetscape amenities which promote a harmonious and 
aesthetic environment for pedestrians and other user groups within the proposed development. This 
requirement shall be enforced in order to implement the purpose and intent of the PUD(C). 
Reference section 54-4-20.1(j) for additional criteria. 


Sec. 54-2-5.13. - Industrial Planned Unit Development (PUD-I). 
(a) ?Intent. The objective of this zoning district is to establish regulatory standards for controlling the 
location of comprehensively planned industrial development located in areas removed from 
residential areas and accessible to arterial roadways. The PUD(I) is intended to incorporate a flexible 
management policy, which fosters innovative master planning in the design and development of 
large scale industrial areas. The PUD(I) District provides for industrial land uses and accessory sales 
and service activities and promotes high standards of land planning and site design. 
(b) ?Compliance with comprehensive plan and future land use map. All industrial PUD's must comply 
with the provisions of the Sebastian Comprehensive Plan. In addition to meeting the performance 
criteria set forth in this section, all land contained within an industrial PUD must have an "Industrial" 
comprehensive land use map designation. 
(c) ?Location and size. An Industrial PUD shall have frontage on a primary arterial roadway, as 
designated on the City of Sebastian Major Thoroughfare Plan. At the time a PUD(I) application is 
submitted and approved by the city the land included in the PUD(I) application shall have a minimum 
of 25 contiguous acres and shall be under unified control as required pursuant to section 54-4-
20.1(b). 
(d) ?Land use mix. The specific land use mix within a PUD(I) District development shall be determined 
by the underlying comprehensive plan future land use map designation. The location of the various 
land uses shall be determined during the review of the preliminary development plan required 
pursuant to section 54-4-20.3. 
(e) ?Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall include those land use activities cited below which are 
determined to be consistent with the underlying comprehensive plan future land use map designation 
and shall be permitted by right within an approved PUD(I) development plan. 
(1) ?Industrial activities as defined in section 54-2-5.6. 
(f) ?Conditional uses. Conditional uses shall include those land use activities as defined in section 54-2-
5.6 and are; (1) consistent with the comprehensive plan future land use map designation; and (2) 
comply with all requirements and conditional use criteria provided in this ordinance and in other 
applicable laws and ordinances. The planning and zoning commission shall determine if such 
conditions and provisions are satisfied. All conditional uses allowed within an industrial (IN) zoning 
district may be permitted within the corresponding comprehensive plan land use map designation 
provided that all conditional use criteria of article VI are satisfied. 
(g) ?Perimeter transition area. All uses shall conform to the purposes of the Industrial Planned Unit 
Development District and shall be compatible with all uses, existing or proposed in the vicinity of the 
area covered by the proposed planned development. 
(1) ?Compatibility with adjacent residential property. No structure proposed for industrial use shall 
be constructed within 200 feet of that part of the perimeter property line adjacent to property 
zoned for residential development. 
(2) ?Compatibility with adjacent nonresidential property. In those cases where the perimeter line 
does not abut an existing residential development or residentially zoned land, the minimum 
setback shall be determined as part of the preliminary development plan review. No building 
shall be located within 40 feet of the outer boundary of the PUD district, excepting entryway 
security buildings and structures approved by the city council. 
(h) ?Size and dimension regulations. The intent of the PUD(I) is to offer greater flexibility in the design of 
innovative large scale development and to accommodate amenities generally not found in 
conventional development. The location, size, dimensions, and design of yards, building setbacks, 
points of vehicular access, parking areas, building characteristics, and all other planned site 
improvements shall provide for: 
• ?Safe and convenient internal vehicular circulation, including access and sufficient area for 
effective delivery of emergency services such as fire protection; 
• ?Buildings with safe entry and exit from the front and the rear of respective buildings; and 
• ?Convenient, well landscaped and designed pedestrian ways and open space systems. 
    All such planned site improvements shall be governed by the following: 
(1) ?Minimum size and dimension of industrial site improvements. 
a. ?Minimum lot size. No individual minimum lot size shall be required within an Industrial 
Planned Unit Development. 
b. ?Floor area ratio(FAR). The FAR shall not exceed 50% and shall comply with section 54-2-
5.6(d) provisions governing FAR in industrial districts. 
c. ?Frontage requirements. All land use activities within a PUD(I) shall have access to a public 
street. 
d. ?Setback and yard requirements. There are no required setbacks or yards within the 
Industrial Planned Unit Development except as otherwise provided for herein. 
e. ?Distance between buildings. There shall be a minimum of 20 feet separating buildings, 
excepting buildings with immediately adjoining or common walls. However, the minimum 
distance separating one building over 25 feet in height from an adjacent building shall be 
20 feet plus one foot for each additional two feet in height above 25 feet. 
f. ?Height. The height of structures shall not exceed 35 feet. 
g. ?Open space. The development shall maintain no less than 25% percent open space. 
Higher standards may be required for conditional uses, which demonstrate consistency 
with standards for open space and green space for such uses within this Code. 
(2) ?General criteria for reviewing size and dimension standards. See section 54-4-20.1(f) for 
specific criteria to be applied in assessing density, intensity, and other size and dimension 
requirements for site specific development proposals. 
(i) ?Screening and buffer yard requirements. See article XIII for specific criteria to be applied in 
assessing the required screening and buffer yard requirements. 
(j) ?Subdivision improvements and urban design amenities. In addition to requirements of article XIX of 
this Code as well as open space systems and street furniture, shall reflect principles and practices of 
urban design, including streetscape amenities which promote a harmonious and aesthetic 
environment for pedestrians and other user groups within the proposed development. This 
requirement shall be enforced in order to implement the purpose and intent of the PUD(C) and 
section 54-4-20.1(j). 


Sec. 54-2-5.14. - Mobile Home Planned Unit Development (PUD-MH). 
    This section provides specific regulations for the development of Mobile Home Planned Unit 
Developments (PUD(MH) in areas designated for residential development on the comprehensive plan 
future land use map. 
(a) ?Permitted uses and structures. The following land uses and structures are permitted in the 
PUD(MH) district subject to compliance with the provisions of this Code: 
(1) ?Single-family detached mobile homes and residential manufactured homes as defined in 
section 54-2-5.2.7(b). 
(2) ?Parks, playgrounds, community facilities and noncommercial recreational facilities such as 
golf courses, game rooms, tennis courts, libraries, and similar uses. 
(3) ?Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and 
subordinate to the above uses and structures, including approved storage facilities. 
(4) ?Public and private utilities. 
(b) ?Conditional uses and structures. In this district as a conditional use a building or premises may 
be used for only the following conditional uses upon compliance with applicable conditions 
stated herein and upon compliance with all other applicable provisions of this Code, including 
site plan review and performance criteria. the planning and zoning commission shall ascertain if 
such conditions and provisions are satisfied. 
(1) ?Recreational vehicle areas. Recreational vehicle areas may be allowed in a PUD(MH) 
district as a conditional use subject to compliance with the standards set forth below: 
a. ?Area requirements. The maximum area allowed for the establishment of a recreational 
vehicle area within a PUD(MH) District is ten acres or ten percent of the total land 
area within the PUD(MH) District, whichever is the lesser land area. 
b. ?Density. The maximum density permitted for recreational vehicles shall be 15 units per 
gross acre of land comprising the recreational vehicle area. The minimum size site for 
each recreational vehicle space shall be 1,500 square feet. 
c. ?Minimum dimensions of each recreational vehicle site. Minimum 30 feet width and 50 
feet depth. 
d. ?Minimum yards for each recreational vehicle site. Minimum ten feet front yard and five 
feet rear and side yards. 
e. ?Required open area. Minimum 50%. 
f. ?Use limitations. No permanent structures such as carports, cabanas, screen rooms, or 
similar structures may be erected or constructed at any recreational vehicle site, and 
the removal of wheels or hitch and the placement of the unit on a foundation or piers 
is prohibited. Notwithstanding, pop-out units and similar equipment integral to the 
recreational vehicle as manufactured shall be permitted. 
g. ?Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
1. ?Recreational vehicle. A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living 
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive 
power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: 
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home. 
2. ?Recreational vehicle park. Land upon which two or more recreational vehicle 
sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by recreational 
vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or 
vacation purposes. 
3. ?Recreational vehicle site. A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park 
intended for the accommodation of either a recreational vehicle, tent, or other 
individual camping unit on a temporary basis. 
h. ?Required buffers. There shall be an open unobstructed landscaped buffer strip not 
less than 50 feet in depth along all major streets abutting a recreational vehicle park, 
and a landscaped buffer strip not less than 50 feet in depth along the other 
boundaries of the recreational vehicle park. 
i. ?Recreation area requirement. A minimum of ten percent of the gross site area for the 
recreational vehicle park shall be set aside as usable recreational open space or 
enclosed recreation facilities. The area shall be exclusive of recreational vehicle sites, 
buffer strips, street right-of-way, storage areas, or utility sites. 
j. ?Permanent occupancy prohibited. No recreational vehicle shall be used as a 
permanent place of abode, dwelling or business, or for indefinite periods of time. Any 
action toward removal of wheels of a recreational vehicle except for temporary 
purposes of repair or to attach the trailer to the grounds for stabilizing purposes is 
hereby prohibited. 
k. ?Required separation between recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be 
separated from each other and other structures by at least ten feet. Any temporary 
accessory structure such as attached awnings or temporary or individual storage 
facilities shall, for purposes of this separation requirement, be considered to be part of 
the recreational vehicle. 
l. ?Stabilization of site. Each recreational vehicle site shall contain a stabilized vehicular 
parking pad of shell, marl, paving or other suitable material approved by the city 
engineer and city council. No part of a travel trailer or other unit placed on a 
recreational vehicle park site shall be closer than five feet to the site line. 
m. ?Parking requirement. At least one and one-half parking spaces shall be provided in 
the park per recreational vehicle site. At least one parking space shall be provided at 
each such site. 
n. ?Accessory uses. Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, dumping 
stations, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities, and other uses and structures 
customarily incidental to operation of a recreational vehicle park and campground are 
permitted as accessory uses to the park. 
(2) ?Conditional uses allowed if determined to be accessory to the principal use. Stores, 
restaurants, beauty parlors, barber shops, and other convenience establishments shall be 
permitted if found to comply with criteria in article VI and providing the following 
requirements are met: 
a. ?Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park. 
b. ?Such establishments shall present no visible evidence from any street outside the 
park of their commercial character, which would attract customers other than 
occupants of the park. 
c. ?The structures housing such facilities shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any 
public street outside of the PUD. 
(c) ?Size and dimension requirements. 
(1) ?Minimum area requirements for a PUD (MH) District. The minimum area allowed for the 
establishment of a PUD(MH) District shall be 25 acres which at the time of application 
submittal and approval are under unified control as required pursuant to section 54-4-
20.1(b). 
(2) ?Minimum allowable density. Density of development within a PUD(MH) District shall be 
regulated by requirements for streets, common recreation areas, open space adjacent to 
units, yard sizes, etc.; however, the overall density shall not exceed five units per gross 
acre. 
(3) ?Minimum lot size requirements: 5,000 square feet. 
(4) ?Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(5) ?Minimum lot depth: 75 feet. 
(6) ?Maximum building height>: 25 feet. 
(7) ?Minimum living area: 900 square feet. 
(8) ?Minimum setbacks. 
Front yard: 20 feet 
Rear yard: 20 feet 
Side yard between mobile home units: 10 feet 
(9) ?Maximum building coverage: 40% 
(e) ?Construction standards. All residential manufactured buildings, mobile homes, travel trailers, 
and similar portable living quarters shall be constructed in compliance with the provisions of 
chapter 320 and/or 553, Florida Statutes. Each mobile home, travel trailer, or other portable 
living quarters shall be anchored in a manner prescribed by the City Code of Ordinances and 
consistent with the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Standards. The minimum first 
floor elevation shall be at least 18 inches above the crown of the adjoining street. All awnings, 
carports, principal patios and accessories to the building and accessory buildings shall be 
constructed in compliance with the building code and Land Development Code. All mobile 
homes shall be required to have skirting which shall be of concrete, masonry, stucco, wood or 
other suitable material, and may have allowable louvers for ventilation. 
(f) ?Open space. Open space shall be comprised of permeable open surfaces, unroofed or screen 
roofed ornamental landscaped areas and recreational areas and facilities which are easily 
accessible and regularly available to occupants of all dwelling units on the lot wherein the open 
space is located. Rooftops, porches, raised decks, parking areas, driveways, utility and service 
areas are not calculated as open space. All PUD(MH) Districts must provide and maintain a 
minimum open space requirement of 55%. The maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 
50%. 
(g) ?Frontage and accessibility. Every dwelling unit or other use permitted in the PUD(MH) shall 
have access to a public street either directly or via an approved private driveway, pedestrian 
way, court, or other area dedicated to public use or common element guaranteeing access. 
(h) ?Required screening and buffer yard. Screening of various uses and structures within the 
PUD(MH) District shall be required as provided in article XIII. 
(i) ?Mobile home undercarriage skirting. The frame, axles, wheels, crawl space storage area and 
utility connection of all mobile homes shall be concealed from view through the use of durable 
all-weather materials manufactured specifically for the purpose of covering the undercarriage 
area. Such skirting shall be fastened in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and provide 
for adequate ventilation. 
(j) ?Community building/shelter. Developments within the PUD(MH) District shall provide for a 
common structure which is easily accessible to all residents and which meets the following 
provisions: 
(1) ?Wind load. Storm shelters must be constructed to withstand a 120 mile per hour wind load 
utilizing chapter 16 of the Standard Building Code for engineering standards. 
(2) ?Minimum capacity of storm shelter. Storm shelters must be provided to 20% percent of the 
proposed total number of residents of the mobile home subdivision. The total proposed 
number of the residents shall be determined utilizing two residents per single-family lot. 
(3) ?Minimum floor area of mobile homes. Storm shelters must be designed to provide a 
minimum of 20 square feet of net floor area per resident. Floor areas shall not include 
bathrooms, corridors, or other areas that cannot be used for temporary lodging of a 
resident in case of an emergency. Storm shelters may be utilized as community buildings, 
but should be designed with minimal glass exposure. 
(k) ?Common vehicular storage areas. All developments having a PUD(MH) zoning classification 
shall provide for a common area for the storage of recreational equipment including boats and 
recreational vehicles: 
(1) ?Surface. Such storage areas shall have a surface meeting the specifications for design of 
off-street parking areas within article XV. 
(2) ?Screening. All storage areas shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any adjacent mobile 
home lot line, enclosed by a security fence, and shall be properly screened from 
neighboring residences. 
(3) ?Minimum area. All storage areas shall provide a minimum of one space for every 19 
mobile homes. All stalls shall have a minimum width of 12 feet and a minimum depth of 30 
feet, and all drives shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide. 
(l) ?Perimeter buffering. All proposed development on land classified PUD(MH) shall comply with 
perimeter transition regulations in section 54-4-20.1(g) and all other applicable provisions of 
article XX. 
APPENDIX A  
Master Plan for Parking and Curb Cut Controls Within the C-512 Zoning District City of 
Sebastian Incorporated by Reference in the Land Development Code 


Sec. 54-2-5.15. - Master plan for parking and curb cut controls. 
(a) ?Intent. The purpose of the master plan for parking and curb cut controls is to implement needed off-
street parking and curb cut controls within the C-512 Zoning District. The nature of existing and 
projected traffic conditions is described within the Land Development Code, section 54-2-5.15. 
    The attached Map 1 "County Road 512 General Impact Area" delineates the County Road 512 
corridor connecting U.S. 1 with I-95 to the southwest. As of February, 1984, Indian River County is 
undertaking a comprehensive study of traffic conditions within the County Road 512 General Impact Area. 
The intent of the city is to coordinate County Road 512 municipal development policies with the county's 
land use and transportation policies impacting this area. Therefore, the provisions of this plan should be 
reevaluated to reflect policy consistent with any changed or unanticipated conditions, needs or policies 
identified in the county's C.R. 512 traffic study. 
    Map 2 "County Road 512 Specific Impact Area" delineates the relationship of the C-512 zoning 
district to that portion of the County Road 512 corridor lying within the City of Sebastian. Based on 
conditions specified within section 20A-3.8A(A), "C-512 zoning district purpose and intent," together with 
the city's desire to be responsive to policies and concerns of Indian River County regarding control of curb 
cuts along County Road 512, the city herein establishes a master plan for parking and curb cut controls 
within the C-512 zoning district. This plan shall be cited as section 54-2-5.15 of the Land Development 
Code. 
(b) ?Location of curb cuts. Maps 3 through 12 "Curb Cut Designations" (by block) designate the location 
of planned curb cuts within the C-512 zoning district. The location of respective curb cuts is 
predicated on, but not limited to, the following considerations: 
(1) ?Street pattern. The existing major thoroughfare plans of Indian River County and the City of 
Sebastian were reviewed together with the characteristics of the street pattern within the C-512 
zoning district. Particular consideration was given to the location and characteristics of major 
and minor intersections along County Road 512, existing and projected traffic flow, and 
comments of the city and county engineers. 
(2) ?Land use. Existing and projected land use within the general impact area was reviewed, with 
particular emphasis directed to existing and projected land use within the C-512 zoning district. 
(3) ?Subdivision layout. The existing layout of the Sebastian Highlands Subdivision units, 
particularly those within the C-512 zoning district, as well as those adjacent to the district, were 
reviewed. Special features such as block lengths and specific block characteristics, including 
block size and configuration, existing curb cuts, alley locations, number of lots within respective 
blocks, and ownership patterns were analyzed. 
(4) ?Potential for curb cut proliferation. The selection of planned future curb cut locations was 
undertaken with a view toward minimizing the proliferation of future curb cuts along County 
Road 512. 
(5) ?Standards for separation of curb cuts. Based on recommendations of the city engineer and 
county engineer, the guideline of 240 feet separation between curb cuts was used as a general 
standard in selecting curb cut locations; however, a general standard of 320 feet was used in 
establishing the separation between a curb cut and a major thoroughfare (i.e. Barber Street, 
Vocelle Avenue, the two intersections of South Wimbrow Drive with County Road 512, and 
Easy Street). These general standards were necessarily adjusted in order to minimize 
proliferation of curb cuts on blocks with differing characteristics. 
Editor's note— The Maps 1 through 12 referenced above are set out following this section. 
(c) ?Compliance with off-street parking and landscaping controls. All subsequent development within the 
C-512 zoning district shall comply with off-street parking requirements of article VIII and landscape 
controls of article XIII. Required landscape strips shall be a minimum of ten feet along the entire 
frontage of the C-512 district. All off-street parking areas shall be designed in such a manner that will 
discourage through-traffic. 
(d) ?Review procedures. All regulations contained in the master plan for parking and curb cut controls 
within the C-512 zoning district shall be considered as part of the site plan review requirements 
stipulated in article X of the Land Development Code. 
    Review procedures for compliance with the Master Plan for Parking and Curb Cut Controls shall be 
the same as those cited for site plan review in article XVIII. The review processes shall run concurrently. 
All site plans for development within the C-512 zoning district shall comply with the following provisions in 
addition to those provisions contained in article XVIII. 
(e) ?Additional site plan review requirements for development within the C-512 zoning district. The 
following additional site plan review requirements shall be incorporated into any site plan submitted 
for review within the C-512 zoning district: 
(1) ?Dedication of easements. All site plans for development within the C-512 district shall include a 
dedicated easement for cross-access and utility purposes. The easement shall run the length of 
the site and include a depth of 74 feet adjacent to the frontage along County Road 512. The 
dedication shall be recorded on a standard form supplied by the city. 
(2) ?Legal assurances. All requisite legal assurances required to demonstrate compliance with 
provisions of the Land Development Code shall be filed as a part of the site plan. Such 
assurances shall be approved by the city attorney. Such legal assurances shall include any 
legal instruments required pursuant to a granting of a temporary curb cut, including a requisite 
performance bond assuring closure of the temporary curb cut, together with appropriate grading 
and landscaping and any other conditions underlying the granting of the temporary curb cut 
permit. 
(f) ?Provisions for temporary cuts. An applicant for site plan review may request a temporary curb cut as 
part of the site plan review procedure. The following provisions shall regulate considerations of such 
requests: 
(1) ?Conditions regulating the granting of a temporary curb cut. A temporary curb cut may be 
granted under the following conditions: 
a. ?No other access to County Road 512 is available from the subject property, from an 
adjacent side street or alley, or from adjacent properties via dedicated cross easements 
and existing curb cuts. 
b. ?The applicant agrees to post a performance bond assuring removal of the temporary curb 
cut pursuant to provisions cited below. 
c. ?The applicant agrees to submit legal assurances which shall be approved by the city 
attorney which assures that all conditions established by the city shall be carried out at the 
applicant's expense and that the city shall be held harmless from incurring any associated 
costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city. 
(2) ?Conditions for denying a temporary curb cut. Any denial of a temporary curb cut shall be 
predicated upon a finding that one or more of the following conditions are evidenced: 
a. ?An existing alternate access is available either on the subject site, on an adjacent side 
street, or is available via dedicated cross-easements to an existing curb cut(s). 
b. ?The city finds that the applicant has not demonstrated compliance with the city's Land 
Development Code or other applicable rules and regulations. 
(3) ?Removal of temporary curb cuts. Whenever a temporary curb cut is granted, the applicant shall 
be required to file legal assurances guaranteeing that the applicant and successors in 
ownership shall comply with the following conditions: 
a. ?A performance bond shall be required which stipulates that the applicant shall remove the 
temporary curb cut within 60 days after a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use of 
an abutting adjacent property which has constructed or has access to a permanent curb 
cut. The performance bond shall assure that the temporary curb cut shall be excavated, 
pavement removed, and requisite landscaping and parking improvements installed 
pursuant to requirements of the Land Development Code. Furthermore, the applicant's 
legal assurance shall include a statement that the temporary curb cut shall be blocked off 
as soon as the certificate of occupancy referred to above is issued. 
b. ?The application for site plan approval is found to comply with all provisions of the City of 
Sebastian Land Development Code and other applicable rules and regulations. 
 
Map 1: CR512 GENERAL IMPACT AREA 
 
Map 2: CR512: SPECIFIC IMPACT AREA 

 
Map 3: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 185 

 
Map 4: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 186 

 
Map 5: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 186, 187 
 
Map 6: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 188, 189 

 
Map 7: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 508, 509 

 
Map 8: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 508, 509 

 
Map 9: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 508 
 
Map 10: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 508, 492 

 
Map 11: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Block 492, 490 

 
Map 12: Proposed Curb-Cut Locations, Blocks 185.490 


ARTICLE VI. - CONDITIONAL USE CRITERIA 


Sec. 54-2-6.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure that a conditional use shall only be permitted on specific sites 
where the proposed use may be adequately accommodated without generating adverse impacts on 
properties and land uses within the immediate vicinity. This section sets forth provisions and criteria for 
consideration of conditional uses on specific sites. Conditional uses shall be permitted only upon a finding 
that the proposed use satisfies the provisions of this article. 


Sec. 54-2-6.2. - Review procedures. 
(a) ?Application. The application for a conditional use shall be filed with the department of planning and 
growth management and shall be submitted on a form provided by the department. Five copies of 
the application and supporting information shall be included. The required supporting information 
shall be submitted with the application. 
(b) ?Staff review. The planning and growth management director shall distribute the application and 
supporting information to the appropriate staff for review and comment. The planning and growth 
management director shall summarize the staff's comments and make a written recommendation to 
the planning and zoning commission concerning appropriate action together with any applicable 
conditions recommended by staff. 
(c) ?Planning and zoning commission public hearing. Upon receipt of the staff recommendations, the 
planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant to section 54-1-2.8, except that 
the newspaper notice is not required. The planning and zoning commission shall approve, approve 
with conditions or deny a proposed conditional use. 
(d) ?Planning and zoning commission findings. Any approval with or without conditions shall be rendered 
only after a finding by the planning and zoning commission that the proposed conditional use 
satisfies the criteria of this article and that the proposed conditional use: 
(1) ?Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated so that the public health, safety and 
welfare will be protected. 
(2) ?Does not present an unduly adverse effect upon other properties in the impacted area in which 
it is located. 
(3) ?Based on the scale, intensity and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, 
traffic, congestion or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties. 
(4) ?Conforms to all applicable provisions of the district in which the use is to be located. 
(5) ?Satisfies specific criteria stipulated for the respective conditional use described in this article. 
(6) ?Is consistent with the Code of Ordinances and comprehensive plan. 
    Upon such finding, the planning and zoning commission shall approve the application for the 
conditional use permit. 
    On all development, the planning and zoning commission's decision shall be final unless that 
decision is appealed to the city council within ten days following the planning and zoning commission's 
action (reference section 54-2-6.3 below). A written record of findings by the board shall be maintained, 
including a written statement of all: 1) conditions of approval; and 2) findings supporting the approval or 
denial of a conditional use. 
    Revisions or additions to a conditional use shall be reviewed based on the criteria of section 54-2-
6.2(a) and (b). A conditional use shall expire if construction has not commenced within 12 months of 
approval. A conditional use may be extended only one time for 12 months by a favorable vote of the 
planning and zoning commission if the applicant submits a petition for such extension at least 30 days 
prior to the development plan's expiration and demonstrated "reasonable cause" for the extension. The 
burden of proof in justifying "reasonable cause" shall rest with the applicant. 
    A conditional use approval, except for home occupation licenses, shall run with the land and is 
transferrable to successors in ownership. However, the use must remain compliant with all applicable 
rules and regulations, including any specific conditions duly mandated by the city as a condition of the 
original conditional use approval. 


Sec. 54-2-6.3. - Appeals of conditional use action. 
    Any applicant for conditional use approval, or any other aggrieved person having an interest therein, 
may file an appeal to the city council to review the action of the planning and zoning commission in 
allowing or disallowing such application for a conditional use approval pursuant to procedures established 
in section 54-1-2.4(g), Appeals of planning and zoning commission decisions. 


Sec. 54-2-6.4. - Specific criteria for approving a conditional use. 
    In addition to satisfaction of the general provisions cited above, a conditional use shall be permitted 
only upon a finding that the proposed conditional use complies with the requirements for the respective 
conditional use as specified below: 
(1) ?Administrative services, public or private not-for-profit: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Public or private not-for-profit administrative services shall be 
permitted as a conditional use within the following zoning district: PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Public and private not-for-profit administrative services will be 
allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?No building shall be located closer than 100 feet to any lot line which abuts a 
residential district. 
2. ?No off-street parking or loading space shall be located closer than 15 feet to any 
property line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-10.2 of this 
chapter. 
(2) ?Adult entertainment establishments: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Adult entertainment establishments shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within the following zoning districts: IN. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria: 
1. ?No site shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any residential district, church or 
other place of worship, public or private school, or park. 
2. ?No site shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any other adult entertainment 
establishment. 
3. ?No site shall be located closer than 200 feet to any bar or lounge. 
4. ?Outside advertising shall be limited to one identification sign, not to exceed 20 square 
feet. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or 
exhibited so as to be visible to the public from a pedestrian sidewalk or walkway or 
from other areas public or semi-public; and such displays shall be considered signs. 
5. ?Buildings shall not be painted in garish colors or such other fashion as will effectuate 
the same purpose as a sign(s). All windows, doors and other apertures shall be 
blacked or otherwise obstructed so as to prevent viewing of the interior of the 
establishment from without. 
6. ?The use shall comply with all applicable state and local codes and ordinances. 
7. ?Necessary measures shall be taken to ensure that the operation of the facility will not 
disturb adjacent property owners and the facility shall comply with the standards for 
nuisance abatement regarding noise as defined in section 54-3-17.4(e) of the Land 
Development Code. 
(3) ?Airport conditional uses: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. All uses identified in section 54-2-5.7 as a conditional use in the 
Airport Industrial District shall be permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning 
districts: AI. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. All uses identified in section 54-2-5.7 as a conditional use in the 
Airport Industrial District will be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?The conditional use criteria for airport industrial uses shall be reserved for 
determination at time of site plan review and planning and zoning commission 
hearing. 
(4) ?Bars and lounges: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts: Bars and lounges shall be permitted as a conditional use within 
the following zoning districts: CG. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria: 
1. ?No site shall be located closer than 100 feet to any residential district, and 450 feet to 
any church or school. 
2. ?The use shall comply with all applicable state and local codes and ordinances. 
3. ?Necessary measures shall be taken to ensure that the operation of the facility will not 
disturb adjacent property owners and the facility shall comply with the standards for 
nuisance abatement regarding noise as defined in section 54-3-17.4(e) of the Land 
Development Code. 
(5) ?Bed and breakfast facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts: Bed and breakfast facilities shall be permitted as a conditional 
use within the following zoning districts: RM-8 and CWR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria: 
1. ?Bed and breakfast facilities shall only be located on property lying on or east of U.S. 1. 
2. ?No required parking facilities shall be located east of Indian River Drive. 
3. ?All side and rear yards abutting or adjacent to residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(6) ?Business and Professional Offices with drive-through facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Business and professional offices with drive-through facilities 
shall be permitted as a conditional use within the following zoning districts: CL, CG, and 
CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Drive-through facilities will be allowed provided the following 
criteria are met: 
1. ?Separate entrances and exits shall be provided and clearly identified and in 
conformance with the sign regulations of article XVI of this Code. Joint entrance/exit 
curb cuts may be allowed for the ingress and egress and for traffic not utilizing the 
drive-through facilities. 
2. ?No more than two curb cuts shall be permitted on any single street frontage. Curb cuts 
shall be limited to a maximum width of 25 feet, shall be located no closer than 35 feet 
to any intersection, and shall be at least ten feet removed from property lines. 
3. ?The site plan shall provide for efficient circulation of vehicles on-site and maintain an 
adequate separation of drive-through and non-drive-through traffic. 
4. ?In the CG and CR District, no business or professional office with drive-through facility 
shall be located within 100 feet of a residential district. In the CL District, no business 
or professional office with drive-through facility may abut a residential zoning district. 
5. ?All side and rear yards abutting or adjacent to residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
chapter. In addition, walls or fences may be required by the planning and zoning 
commission for the sole purpose of screening light beams from motor vehicles utilizing 
drive-through facilities if such light beams will cause undue glare to surrounding 
properties, taking into account the use of the surrounding properties, the distance 
therefrom, and the existence of other obstructions to such light beams. Any such 
requirements imposed by the planning and zoning commission as to walls and fences 
shall be supported by stating the basis for such requirements. This requirement may 
be required by the planning and zoning commission after original site plan approval if 
the use of the adjacent land(s) on the side or rear of the property changes and 
becomes sensitive to glare. 
(6A) ?Business and Professional offices, excluding drive-through facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Business and professional offices excluding drive-through 
facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use within the following zoning districts: CWR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Business and professional offices excluding drive-through facilities 
will be allowed provided the following criteria are met: 
1. ?All side and rear yards abutting or adjacent to residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
chapter. In addition, walls or fences may be required by the planning and zoning 
commission for the sole purpose of screening light beams from motor vehicles utilizing 
drive-through facilities if such light beams will cause undue glare to surrounding 
properties, taking into account the use of the surrounding properties, the distance 
therefrom, and the existence of other obstructions to such light beams. Any such 
requirements imposed by the planning and zoning commission as to walls and fences 
shall be supported by stating the basis for such requirements. This requirement may 
be required by the planning and zoning commission after original site plan approval if 
the use of the adjacent land(s) on the side or rear of the property changes and 
becomes sensitive to glare. 
(7) ?Child care services: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts: Child care services shall be permitted as a conditional use 
within the following zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, C-512, CL, CG, CR, and 
PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Child care services will be allowed provided the following 
conditions are met: 
1. ?The site shall be located on a paved public road with sufficient width to accommodate 
pedestrian and vehicular traffic generated by the use. A facility located within the RS-
10 district shall be located on a major collector street or larger as designated on the 
city's adopted thoroughfare map. A facility located in any other zoning district shall be 
located near a major collector street so as to discourage traffic along residential 
streets in the immediate area. 
2. ?One accessory off-street parking space shall be provided for each five children 
accommodated in the child care facility. 
3. ?No such facility shall be permitted on a lot unless it contains a minimum of 10,000 
square feet. 
4. ?Special passenger loading and unloading facilities shall be provided on the same lot 
for vehicles to pick up or deliver clientele. Such facilities shall include driveways that 
do not require any backup movements by vehicles to enter or exit the premises. 
5. ?All regulations of the State of Florida as amended hereafter that pertain to the use 
shall be satisfied. 
6. ?A fenced area of usable outdoor recreation area of not less than 45 square feet per 
child (based on the maximum capacity of the child care facility as determined by the 
applicable Florida laws) shall be provided and such area shall be delineated on the 
site plan submitted at the time the application is filed. For purposes of this provision, 
the term "usable outdoor recreation area" shall be limited to the following: 
(a) ?That area not covered by building or required off-street parking spaces, which is 
fenced and screened from adjacent property boundaries. 
(b) ?No portion of the front yard. 
(c) ?Only that area which can be developed for active outdoor recreational purposes. 
(d) ?An area which occupies no more than 80% of the combined total areas of the 
rear and side yards. 
(e) ?No usable outdoor recreational area shall be utilized within any dedicated 
easement. 
7. ?Screening: All side and rear yards shall be screened in accordance with the standards 
established in section 54-3-14.16 of this ordinance. 
(8) ?Churches: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Churches, synagogues and other places of worship shall be 
permitted as a conditional use within the following zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, 
RM-8, CR, and PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Churches, synagogues and other places of worship will be allowed 
provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet shall be required. 
2. ?A minimum lot width of 100 feet shall be required. 
3. ?The maximum lot coverage by all impervious surfaces shall not exceed 60% of the lot 
area. 
4. ?No building or structure shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property line 
abutting a residential use or district. 
5. ?Access shall be from a major thoroughfare or as otherwise approved by the city 
engineer. 
6. ?Any accessory residential use or school upon the premises shall provide such 
additional lot area as required for such use by this section and shall further be subject 
to all conditions set forth for such uses by this section. Accessory residential uses 
may include convents, monasteries, rectories or parsonages. 
7. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
ordinance. 
(9) ?Clubs and lodges, public or private: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Public and private clubs and lodges shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within the following zoning districts: PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Public and private clubs and lodges will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?No building shall be located closer than 100 feet to any lot line which abuts a 
residential district. 
2. ?No off-street parking or loading space shall be located closer than 15 feet to any 
property line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
chapter. 
4. ?Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted if the site abuts a residential zoning district. 
(10) ?Commercial amusements, enclosed: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Enclosed commercial amusements shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within the following zoning district: CG and CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Enclosed commercial amusements will be allowed in the CG and 
CR districts provided the following criteria are met: 
1. ?No structure shall be located within 100 feet of a residential district. 
2. ?No off-street parking or loading area shall be located within 50 feet of a residential 
district. 
3. ?The site plan shall provide for efficient circulation of vehicles on-site. 
4. ?The site shall have reasonable access to a major thoroughfare. 
(11) ?Commercial amusements, unenclosed: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Commercial amusements, unenclosed, as defined in this Code, 
shall be permitted as a conditional use within the following zoning districts: IN. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Commercial amusements, unenclosed, will be allowed provided 
the following criteria are met: 
1. ?Approval of a plan of access to a major thoroughfare shall be obtained from the city 
engineer. 
2. ?There shall be no direct access to a major highway, as designated in the 
comprehensive plan, where there is the availability of access to a lesser road. 
3. ?All buildings and structures shall be at least 100 feet from any property line. 
4. ?Drives and parking areas shall be surfaces with a hard and durable material and 
properly drained. 
5. ?Appropriate measures to prevent traffic congestion on adjacent public ways shall be 
taken. 
6. ?Necessary measures shall be taken to subdue any excessive noise when the facility 
abuts a residential district. 
7. ?The entrances and exits shall be located so as to afford unobstructed sight distance 
for 300 feet in each direction. 
8. ?Such use shall not permit adult entertainment activities on the premises. 
(12) ?Commercial retail > 5,000 sq. ft.: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Commercial retail > 5,000 sq. ft. shall be permitted as a 
conditional use in the following zoning districts: C-512, CL, CWR and IN. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Commercial retail > 5,000 sq. ft. will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?The conditional use criteria for Commercial retail > 5,000 sq. ft. shall be reserved for 
determination at time of site plan review and planning and zoning commission 
hearing. 
(13) ?Commercial retail > 10,000 sq. ft.: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Commercial retail > 10,000. ft. shall be permitted as a 
conditional use in the following zoning districts: CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Commercial retail > 10,000 sq. ft. will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?The conditional use criteria for Commercial retail > 10,000 sq. ft. shall be reserved for 
determination at time of site plan review and planning and zoning commission 
hearing. 
(14) ?Commercial retail > 20,000 sq. ft.: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Commercial retail > 20,000. ft. shall be permitted as a 
conditional use in the following zoning districts: CG. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Commercial retail > 20,000 sq. ft. will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?The conditional use criteria for Commercial retail > 20,000 sq. ft. shall be reserved for 
determination at time of site plan review and planning and zoning commission 
hearing. 
(15) ?Cultural or civic facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Cultural or civic facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use 
within the following zoning districts: RM-8 and PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Cultural or civic facilities including public or private facilities, offices 
or services, and which may include civic or community centers, theaters predominantly 
used for live performances, libraries, museums and similar uses, will be allowed provided 
the following conditions are met: 
1. ?No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to any lot line which abuts a residential 
district. 
2. ?No off-street parking or loading space shall be located closer than 15 feet to any 
property line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
chapter. 
4. ?The proposed site shall be located on a major collector street or an arterial street, and 
shall have direct access from the site onto the collector street or the arterial street as 
designated on the city's thoroughfare map. 
(16) ?Educational institutions, marine related: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Educational institutions, marine related shall be permitted as a 
conditional use in the following zoning districts: CWR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Educational institutions, marine related will be allowed provided 
the following conditions are met: 
1. ?The applicant shall submit a description of anticipated service area and projected 
enrollment, by stages if appropriate, and related the same to a development plan 
explaining: 
(a) ?Area to be developed by construction phase. 
(b) ?Adequacy of site to accommodate anticipated facilities, enrollment, recreation 
area, off-street parking and pedestrian and vehicular circulation on-site. 
(c) ?Safety features of the development plan. 
(17) ?Equestrian facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Equestrian facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use in 
the following zoning districts: RE-40. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Equestrian facilities will be allowed provided the following 
conditions are met: 
1. ?Stables, noncommercial (administrative permit: no planning and zoning commission 
review or approval required if associated with a site plan reviewed as an 
administrative approval or minor site plan. 
(a) ?Additional information requirements: The applicant shall submit a site plan which 
shall show the location of all existing and proposed structures and the location of 
any fences, and all other information relevant required in article X. 
(b) ?Criteria for noncommercial stables: 
(1) ?Noncommercial stables shall be allowed in the RE-40 district only as an 
accessory use; 
(2) ?Such uses shall be located on lots having an area no less than five acres; 
(3) ?The number of horses shall not exceed one per acre; 
(4) ?Enclosed structures, such as barns, shall have a minimum setback of 50 
feet from any property lines; 
(5) ?The applicant shall provide a fence which has a minimum height of four feet 
and totally encloses the property to be used in association with the 
equestrian use. 
(18) ?Farmers market: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Farmers markets shall be permitted as a conditional use within 
the following zoning district: CG and CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Farmers markets will be allowed provided the following criteria are 
met: 
1. ?All sales activity and storage shall be in an enclosed structure. 
2. ?No structure shall be located within 50 feet to any lot line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?No off-street parking or loading area shall be located within 15 feet to any property line 
abutting a residential district. 
(19) ?Flea markets: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Flea markets shall be permitted as a conditional use within the 
IN Zoning District. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Flea markets will be allowed provided the following criteria are 
met: 
1. ?All sales activity and storage shall be in an enclosed structure. 
2. ?No structure shall be located within 50 feet to any lot line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?No off-street parking or loading area shall be located closer than 15 feet to any 
property line abutting a residential district. 
(20) ?Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents shall be permitted 
as a conditional use in the following zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, and 
CWR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Foster care/group homes with > 6 residents, including supportive 
staff as defined in section 419.001, F.S., will be allowed provided the following conditions 
are met: 
1. ?Does not otherwise conform to existing zoning regulations applicable to other 
multifamily uses in the city. 
2. ?Does not meet applicable licensing criteria established and determined by the State 
including requirements that the home be located and designed to ensure the safe care 
and supervision of all clients in the home. 
3. ?Would result in excessive concentration of community residential homes. A home that 
is located within a radius of 1,200 feet of another existing community residential home 
in a multifamily zone shall be an over concentration of such homes that substantially 
alters the nature and character of the area. A home that is located within a radius of 
500 feet of an area of single-family zoning substantially alters the nature and 
character of the area. 
4. ?The sites shall also be free of safety hazards, and all structures shall comply with city 
ordinances and applicable state laws including applicable state licensing and program 
requirements. 
(21) ?Funeral homes: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Funeral homes shall be permitted as a conditional use within 
the following zoning districts: CL, CG, and CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Funeral homes will be allowed provided the following conditions 
are met: 
1. ?Such uses shall be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare and a service drive and 
sufficient off-street parking area shall be provided in order that no public road shall be 
used for initiating a funeral procession. 
2. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
ordinance. 
(22) ?Gasoline sales, retail: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Gasoline sales shall be permitted as a conditional use within 
the following zoning districts: C-512 and CL. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Gasoline sales will be allowed provided the following conditions 
are met: 
1. ?All automotive fuel sales shall be accessory to neighborhood convenience stores. 
2. ?The retail establishment shall be a minimum of 50 feet from all fuel pumping areas. 
3. ?No automotive repair or maintenance activities shall be permitted. 
4. ?The location of all gasoline storage tanks and facilities shall be subject to all 
applicable standards of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). 
5. ?No building or structure, gasoline pumps, tanks, vents, pump islands, canopies, 
excluding signs, shall be located within 25 feet of any street right-of-way. 
6. ?All receptacles, tanks or facilities for the storage of combustible products in excess of 
200 gallon quantities shall be located underground and within all required setbacks. 
Flammable materials shall be stored within the building setback lines and in a manner 
satisfactory to the fire department chief and the city engineer. 
7. ?When a service station dispensing flammable liquids becomes vacant for a period 
exceeding 30 days, the property owner or lessor shall be required to remove from the 
site in a safe manner all flammable liquids and materials on the site. Notwithstanding, 
all underground storage tanks shall be secured in accordance with NFPA standards. 
(23) ?Golf courses and support facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Golf courses and support facilities shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within the following zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RM-8, and PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Golf courses and support facilities will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?Golf courses and accessory facilities shall not include freestanding commercial 
miniature golf courses and/or driving ranges. The minimum site comprising the course 
shall be 110 acres of land. 
2. ?No major accessory use or principal building or structure shall be located closer than 
300 feet to any lot line which abuts a residential district. 
3. ?Golf courses shall, to the most reasonable extent, retain and preserve native 
vegetation over at least 30% of the total upland area of the course due to their 
characteristically high water demand and heavy nutrient loads. 
4. ?The lighting of golf courses shall be designed so that lighting is shielded and directed 
away from residential areas. 
5. ?Screening: Accessory facilities adjacent to residential districts or uses shall meet the 
screening requirements established in section 54-3-14.16 of this ordinance. 
(24) ?Guest house: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Guest house apartments shall be permitted as a conditional use 
within the following zoning districts: RS-20 and RE-40. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Guest house apartments will be allowed provided that the following 
criteria are met: 
1. ?Structure shall be an accessory structure or a portion of a principal single-family 
dwelling. 
2. ?No guest house apartment may be utilized for commercial or rental purposes. 
3. ?Total square footage of the guest house shall not exceed 50% of the total square 
footage of the principal structure (including living and non-living space, but the total 
square footage of the guest house shall not, in any event, exceed 1,000 square feet). 
4. ?No detached accessory structure utilized for a guest house shall exceed the height of 
the principal structure. 
5. ?A legal document in a form acceptable to the city attorney shall be provided to the city 
clerk in recordable form to be recorded by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for Indian 
River County, in the public records, which sets forth the limitations of the use on site. 
The cost of recording such legal document shall be paid by the property owner. 
6. ?Minimum lot size shall be 30,000 square feet. 
(25) ?Hospitals and intensive care facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Hospitals and extensive care facilities shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within the following zoning district: PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Hospitals and extensive care facilities will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?The proposed site shall be located on an arterial street and shall have direct access 
from such arterial street as designated on the city's thoroughfare map. 
2. ?The minimum lot size shall be five acres. 
3. ?Density: The number of beds shall be determined by the planning and zoning 
commission based upon recommendations from the city planner. 
4. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
5. ?Adequate provisions shall be made for service vehicles with access to the building at 
a side or rear entrance. 
6. ?Building design shall incorporate provisions for safety which mandate rear and front 
doors for emergency evacuation and require a safe and convenient design of internal 
systems for the transport of patients within these facilities. Sprinkler systems 
approved by the building official shall be required. 
7. ?No building or structure shall be located closer than 30 feet to any lot line which abuts 
a residential district. 
8. ?No off-street parking shall be located closer than 15 feet to any lot line which abuts a 
residential use or district. 
(26) ?Hotels and motels: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Hotels and motels and transient quarters will be permitted 
conditional uses within the following zoning districts: CWR, IN, and AI. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Hotels, motels, transient quarters and similar uses for seasonable 
residents will be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?The facilities shall comply with applicable regulations of the State Division of Hotels 
and Restaurants cited in the Florida Administrative Code. 
2. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
ordinance. 
(27) ?Reserved. 
(28) ?Mini-storage: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Mini-storage shall be permitted as a conditional use in the 
following zoning districts: CG and IN. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Mini-storage will be allowed provided the following conditions are 
met: 
1. ?All setbacks of the respective zoning district shall be used except in no case shall the 
setback be less than 20 [feet.] 
2. ?Screening: All side and rear yards shall be screened in accordance with the standards 
established in section 54-3-14.16 of this chapter. 
3. ?Automobiles, trucks and recreational vehicles may be stored in designated areas as 
shown on the approved site plan. All other proposed outside storage shall be 
reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
4. ?One management office may be included provided it does not exceed 400 square 
feet. 
5. ?No occupational licenses other than for the main use (storage) shall be permitted. 
6. ?No sales, garage sales, manufacturing or repair is permitted. However, this does not 
preclude the use as a depot for such purposes as franchised distribution or temporary 
storage for contractor supplies. 
7. ?There shall not be any storage of flammable, toxic, highly combustible or other 
hazardous materials or substances. 
(29) ?Model homes: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Model homes shall be permitted as a conditional use within the 
following zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, RMH, CWR, and approved 
residential uses in a PUD. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Model homes will be allowed providing the following conditions are 
met: 
1. ?Model homes shall be regulated through the issuance of a model home permit. The 
permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year. The planning and zoning 
commission may renew said permit upon application, provided that the model home 
has been constructed and operated in accordance with this Code. 
2. ?A permit holder may not use the model home as his or her principal place of business. 
The model home shall be used for display purposes only, and not as a contractor's 
office, real estate office, or annex thereof. However, price quotations may be given 
and binders may be executed on the premises. 
3. ?The model home shall meet all district requirements for lot and yard dimensions. 
4. ?No construction materials or construction equipment may be stored in the model, on 
the site, or on adjoining sites. 
5. ?Business activity may be conducted at the model home only between the hours of 
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., seven days per week; and not more than two permanent 
employees (in addition to the owner thereof) shall be authorized to remain in the 
model during the business day. 
6. ?Model homes with a valid conditional use permit may have one sign not to exceed six 
square feet and shall not be higher than six feet. Such signs may be illuminated and 
shall conform with the city sign ordinance. 
7. ?Model homes may be illuminated, but only for security purposes and shall not cause a 
glare or infringe on neighboring properties or impede traffic. 
8. ?At least five parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the model, or on a 
contiguous lot, owned by the contractor or developer, or in the street right-of-way 
immediately in front of said model, and shall be maintained so long as the model 
home is used as such, as follows: 
(a) ?A plan for all parking facilities shall be submitted to the city engineer and 
approved by the city engineer prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(b) ?Any parking area which is located on a corner lot shall be designed so as not to 
obstruct the view of approaching traffic. 
(c) ?Ingress and egress to the parking area shall be a minimum of 30 feet distant 
from any corner and also a minimum distance of ten feet from an interior property 
line. 
9. ?Where a violation of these restrictions on the use of model homes is determined to 
exist by the code enforcement board pursuant to the procedures set forth in division 2 
or article VI of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances, the certificate authorizing such 
model home use shall be revoked and no such certificate shall be reissued for a 
period of one year following the date of the entry of the order of the code enforcement 
board finding the existence of such violation. 
10. ?With respect to model homes in either the RMH or PUD (MH) zoning districts, 
conditions stated in subparagraphs (4) and (9), above, may be waived only for mobile 
home models (removable) when more than two such models are to be placed in a 
cluster as part of a sales center. 
(30) ?Nursing homes (including rest homes or convalescent homes): 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Nursing homes shall be permitted as a conditional use within 
the following zoning districts: RM-8, C-512, CL, CG, and CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Nursing homes will be allowed provided the following conditions 
are met: 
1. ?No building or structure shall be located closer than 30 feet to any lot line which abuts 
a residential district. 
2. ?No off-street parking shall be located closer than 15 feet to any lot line which abuts a 
residential district. 
3. ?Adequate provisions shall be made for service vehicles with access to the building at 
a side or rear entrance. 
4. ?Screening: All side and rear yards shall be screened in accordance with the standards 
established in section 54-3-14.16 of this chapter. 
5. ?Building design shall incorporate provisions for safety which mandate rear and front 
doors for emergency evacuation and require a safe and convenient design of internal 
systems for the transport of patients within these facilities. Sprinkler systems 
approved by the building official shall be required. 
(31) ?Parking lots (without a building or structure on the lot): 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Parking lots without a building or structure on the lot or parcel 
shall be permitted as a conditional use within the following zoning districts: CR and CWR. 
A "structure" for the purpose of this section means an edifice or building of any kind. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Parking lots without a building or structure on the lot or parcel will 
be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?A site plan must be submitted and approved by the planning and zoning commission 
in accordance with article XVIII of this Code. 
2. ?All parking lots must be landscaped in accordance with article XIV of this Code. 
(32) ?Parks and recreation, public: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Public parks and recreation areas shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within all zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, R-MH, C-512, CL, 
CG, CR, CWR, IN, AI. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Public parks and recreation areas, including parks, playgrounds, 
piers, docks and boat launching areas that are publicly owned and used for recreational 
purposes by the general public, will be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?No building or structure shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property line 
abutting a residential district. 
2. ?No off-street parking or loading areas shall be located closer than 15 feet to any 
property line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?Any recreational use equipped with lighting to allow the use of the facility after sunset 
or any facility such as a stadium which attracts large groups of users for specific 
events shall be allowed only as a special exception. 
4. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(33) ?Parks and recreation, public with stadium lighting: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Parks and recreation, public with stadium lighting shall be 
permitted as a conditional use in the following zoning districts: PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Parks and recreation, public with stadium lighting will be allowed 
provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?No building or structure shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property line 
abutting a residential district. 
2. ?No off-street parking or loading areas shall be located closer than 15 feet to any 
property line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?Any recreational use equipped with lighting to allow the use of the facility after sunset 
or any facility such as a stadium which attracts large groups of users for specific 
events shall be allowed only as a special exception. 
4. ?Stadium lighting shall be so arranged as to shield or deflect the light from adjoining 
properties and public streets. 
5. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(34) ?Pawn shops: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Pawn shops shall be permitted as a conditional use within the 
CG zoning district. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Pawn shops will be allowed provided the following criteria are met: 
1. ?All sales activity and storage shall be in an enclosed structure. 
2. ?No structure shall be located within 50 feet to any lot line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?No off-street parking or loading area shall be located closer than 15 feet to any 
property line abutting a residential district. 
(35) ?Plant nurseries: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Plant nurseries shall be permitted as a conditional use in the 
following zoning districts: CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Plant nurseries will be allowed provided the following conditions 
are met: 
1. ?Outside storage shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission provided 
sufficient land area is provided together with adequate screening and buffering to 
prevent any adverse impacts on adjacent lands. 
2. ?No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line abutting a 
residential district. 
3. ?There shall be a minimum lot size of 20,000 sq. ft. 
4. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(36) ?Protective and emergency services: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Public protective services shall be permitted as a conditional 
use within all zoning districts. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Public protective services such as police, fire, rescue and 
ambulance facilities will be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?All public protective services shall provide ingress and egress on to and off of a major 
thoroughfare. 
2. ?No building or structure shall be located closer than 30 feet from any side or rear 
property line abutting a residential district. 
3. ?No off-street parking or loading area shall be located closer than 30 feet from any side 
or rear property line abutting a residential district. 
4. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(36A) ?Qualified affordable housing: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Qualified affordable housing shall be permitted as a conditional 
use within the CL District. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria: 
1. ?To qualify for this conditional use, a project must participate in and comply with a state 
or federally sponsored affordable housing initiative. 
2. ?Maximum density shall be 12 residential units per acre. 
3. ?The minimum living area standards of the RM-8 zoning district shall apply. 
(37) ?Restaurants (excluding drive-through facilities): 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Restaurants (excluding drive-through facilities) shall be 
permitted as a conditional use within the following zoning districts: CL and AI. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Restaurants (excluding drive-through facilities) will be allowed 
provided the following criteria are met: 
1. ?No building shall be located within 50 feet to any lot line abutting a residential district. 
2. ?No off-street parking or loading area shall be located within 15 feet to any property line 
abutting a residential district. 
3. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(38) ?Restaurants, with drive-through facilities: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within the following zoning districts: CG, and CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Restaurants with drive-through facilities will be allowed provided 
the following conditions are met: 
1. ?Separate entrances and exits shall be provided and clearly identified and in 
conformance with the sign regulations of article XVI of this Code. Joint entrance/exit 
curb cuts may be allowed for the ingress and egress and traffic not utilizing the drive-
through facilities. 
2. ?No more than two curb cuts shall be permitted on any single street frontage. Curb cuts 
shall be limited to a maximum width of 50 feet and shall be located no closer than 35 
feet removed from property lines. A 15-foot separation shall be maintained between 
curb cuts. 
3. ?No building, structure or off-street loading or parking area shall be located closer than 
30 feet to any residential use or district. 
4. ?All travel lanes and driveways shall be interpreted as off-street parking, and as such 
shall conform to the landscape requirements of this chapter. 
5. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16 of this 
ordinance. 
(39) ?Schools, public and private: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Public and private schools shall be a conditional use within the 
following zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, PUD(C) and PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Public and private schools, excluding private business, technical 
and commercial schools, dancing and music academies, and public and private colleges 
and universities, will be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?Sites shall have access to city collector streets so as to discourage traffic along local 
residential streets in residential subdivisions. 
2. ?Depending on the type of facility proposed, the minimal spatial requirements for the 
site shall be similar to standards utilized by the Indian River County School Board and 
the State of Florida. 
3. ?No main or accessory building should be located within 100 feet of any property line. 
4. ?The applicant shall demonstrate a program of systematic instruction reasonably 
conforming with customary standards for the respective forms of similar construction. 
5. ?The applicant shall submit a description of anticipated service area and projected 
enrollment, by stages if appropriate, and the same to a development plan explaining: 
(a) ?Area to be developed by construction phase: 
(b) ?Adequacy of site to accommodate anticipated facilities enrollment, recreation 
areas, off-street parking and pedestrian and vehicular circulation on-site including 
loading, unloading and queuing of school bus traffic; and 
(c) ?Screening: All side and rear yards shall be screened in accordance with the 
standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(40) ?Utilities, public and private: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Public and private utilities shall be permitted as a conditional 
use within the following zoning districts: RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, R-MH, C-512, CL, 
CG, CR, CWR, AI, and PS. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Public and private utilities such as electrical substations and 
distribution facilities, sewage pumping facilities and water storage and pumping facilities 
will be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?Site plan proposed by a Florida registered engineer shall show the proposed utility 
together with an existing system of which the proposed system will be an integral part. 
A statement shall be submitted which explains the function of the proposed 
improvement and its consistency with any overall utility system plan as well as the 
comprehensive plan. 
2. ?No portion of the site shall be used for outside storage of materials or equipment, or 
for repairing or servicing vehicles and equipment without sufficient land area and 
appropriate screening to buffer adverse impacts as approved by the planning and 
zoning commission. 
3. ?Screening: All front, rear and side yards shall be screened in accordance with the 
standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(41) ?Vehicular service and maintenance: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Automotive service stations shall be permitted as a conditional 
use within the following zoning districts: CG and CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Automotive service facilities, including those that dispense retail 
automotive fuels and oils for the operation of motor vehicles either as a principal or 
accessory use on the premises, will be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
1. ?The use shall satisfy all of the requirements of section 54-2-7.6. 
2. ?A minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 100 feet on a 
major thoroughfare and a minimum lot depth of 100 feet shall be required. No site 
may abut a residential district. 
3. ?No building or structure, gasoline pumps, tanks, vents, pump island, or canopies, 
excluding signs, shall be located within 25 feet of any street line. 
4. ?No more than two curb cuts shall be permitted to any one street frontage. Curb cuts 
shall be restricted to a maximum width of 30 feet, shall be located no closer than 30 
feet to a right-of-way intersection, and shall be at least ten feet removed from property 
lines. A minimum fifteen-foot separation shall be maintained between curb cuts. 
5. ?The site plan shall provide for efficient internal circulation of vehicles on-site. 
6. ?In cases where a service station is located on-site in conjunction with a retail sales 
establishment such as a neighborhood convenience store, the retail establishment 
shall be adequately separated from the fuel pumps and service areas. The internal 
circulation system and parking areas shall provide for safe and efficient on-site 
maneuvering of all vehicles using the site. 
7. ?Special location requirements: 
(a) ?All receptacles, tanks or facilities for the storage of combustible products in 
excess of 200 gallon quantities shall be located underground and within all 
required setbacks. Flammable materials shall be stored within the building 
setback lines and in a manner satisfactory to the fire department chief and the 
city engineer. 
(b) ?When a service station dispensing flammable liquids becomes vacant for a 
period exceeding 30 days, the property owner or lessor shall be required to 
remove from the site in a safe manner all flammable liquids and materials on the 
site. Notwithstanding, all underground storage tanks shall be secured in 
accordance with NFPA standards. 
(c) ?All services and repairs not of an emergency or short term diagnostic nature 
shall be conducted entirely within a building. All merchandise and material for 
sale shall be displayed within an enclosed building except that oil for use in motor 
vehicles may be displayed or sold from an appropriate rack or compartment at 
the convenience of the customer and station attendant. 
(d) ?Storage of inoperative or unregistered motor vehicles generally shall not be 
permitted on the premises. However, motor vehicles which are being serviced 
may be stored in appropriate outside parking areas for a period not to exceed 
eight days. 
8. ?Landscaping. All vehicle storage areas, aisles, travel lanes, driveways, and other 
outdoor areas designed for the use of vehicles being serviced or maneuvered shall 
conform to landscape requirements for off-street parking areas (reference section 54-
3-14.11(c)). 
(42) ?Vehicular storage area (common): 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Vehicular storage area (common) shall be permitted as a 
conditional use in the following zoning districts: R-MH. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Vehicular storage area (common) will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?Surface: Such storage areas shall have a surface meeting the provisions of section 
54-3-15.9 of this Code. 
2. ?Screening: All storage areas shall be enclosed by a security fence and properly 
screened from neighboring residences in accordance with section 54-3-14.16. All 
storage areas shall be a minimum of 30 feet from the nearest home site. 
3. ?Site plan review: Such storage areas shall undergo a site plan review in accordance 
with article XVIII of this Code. 
(43) ?Veterinary services: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Veterinary medical services shall be a permitted conditional use 
within the following zoning districts: C-512, CL, CG and CR. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Veterinary medical services will be allowed provided the following 
conditions are met: 
1. ?Such uses shall be within a completely enclosed building which shall be adequately 
soundproofed and constructed and utilized so that emission of odor or noise shall not 
detrimentally impact property in the immediate vicinity. 
2. ?There shall be no storage or boarding of animals outside of the fully enclosed and 
soundproofed building. 
3. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
4. ?No buildings or structures associated with these uses shall be located within 30 feet of 
any lot line abutting a residential use or district. 
5. ?No off-street parking shall be located within 15 feet of any lot line abutting a residential 
use or district. 
(44) ?Wet/dry storage of boats. 
a. ?Wet/dry storage of boats shall be conditional use within the CWR district. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria: Dry storage of boats will be allowed provided the following 
conditions are met: 
1. ?Surface: Such storage areas shall have a surface meeting the provisions of section 
54-3-10.10 of this Code. 
2. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
3. ?Site plan review: Such storage areas shall undergo a site plan review in accordance 
with article XVIII of this Code. 
c. ?Conditional use criteria: Wet storage of boats will be allowed provided the following 
conditions are met: 
1. ?Storage areas shall be subject to all applicable regulations of Department of 
Environmental Protection, Army Corps of Engineers, Fish and Wildlife Service, 
submerged land leases, and/or any other applicable jurisdictional authorities. 
(45) ?Wholesale trades and services: 
a. ?Applicable zoning districts. Wholesale trades and services shall be permitted as a 
conditional use within the following zoning districts: CG. 
b. ?Conditional use criteria. Wholesale trades and services will be allowed provided the 
following conditions are met: 
1. ?All operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building and no portion of 
the site may be used for outside storage. 
2. ?Outside storage may be approved by the planning and zoning commission if sufficient 
land area is provided together with adequate screening and buffering to prevent any 
adverse impacts on adjacent lands and residential areas. 
3. ?No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property line abutting a 
residential district. 
4. ?There shall be a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet. 
5. ?Screening: All side and rear yards abutting residential districts or uses shall be 
screened in accordance with the standards established in section 54-3-14.16. 
(Ord. No. O-01-07, § 2, 4-11-2001; Ord. No. O-12-10, §§ 7—18, 10-10-2012) 


ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 


Sec. 54-2-7.1. - Applicability of provisions. 
    The city land development code shall apply uniformly to each district, class or kind of structure or 
land except as hereinafter provided. In interpreting and applying the land development code, all 
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements, adopted to protect the public health, safety, and 
welfare. Whenever the requirements of the land development code are in conflict with requirements of 
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or laws of other governments having jurisdiction in the subject 
issue, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standard shall govern. 


Sec. 54-2-7.2. - Conformance required. 
    No building, structure, or a portion thereof shall hereafter be used, occupied, erected, constructed, 
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein 
specified, including but not limited to compliance with permitted and conditional use provisions by district, 
site plan review procedures and criteria, maximum height limitations, maximum density and/or intensity, 
maximum lot coverage, minimum open space requirements, minimum building setbacks, and minimum 
yard requirements. 


Sec. 54-2-7.3. - Water facilities. 
(a) ?Potable water requirements. All new development shall be required to connect to the Indian River 
County Utilities water system except as herein provided. 
(1) ?Exceptions. 
a. ?Limited scale development. Residential projects with less than 25 lot/units greater than 
one-quarter mile from the Indian River County Utilities water system, but only if such 
exception is consistent with Indian River County policies and standards established to 
regulate infrastructure extensions and potable water service provided by the Indian River 
County Utilities water system. When such a project has any lot(s) less than one-half acre in 
size, an approved central water system is required. 
b. ?Large lot development. Residential projects with a minimum lot size of one-half acre, but 
only if such exception is consistent with Indian River County policies and standards 
established to regulate infrastructure extensions and potable water service provided by the 
Indian River County Utilities potable water system. 
c. ?Single-family or duplex dwelling unit. A single-family residential or duplex dwelling unit 
located on a lot in a subdivision approved prior to the effective date of this code but only if 
such exception is consistent with Indian River County policies and standards established to 
regulate infrastructure extensions and potable water service provided by the Indian River 
County Utilities water system. 
d. ?Nonresidential Projects. Nonresidential projects greater than one-quarter mile of the Indian 
River County Utilities water system, but only if such exception is consistent with Indian 
River County policies and standards established to regulate infrastructure extensions and 
potable water service provided by the Indian River County Utilities water system. 
(b) ?Private wells. Whenever a parcel is not served by a central water system, a private well shall be 
provided as required by the Indian River County Health Department; provided that all wells (irrigation 
and potable water) shall be located within either the portion of the side yard that is not forward of the 
front building line or within the rear yard. 
    The planning and growth management director may approve a variance to this section provided the 
following conditions exist: 
(1) ?Due to existing conditions, the Indian River County Health Department will not issue a permit 
for a well located in the side yard that is not forward of the front building line or within the rear 
yard. 
(2) ?The variance will not render another lot unbuildable. 
The board of adjustment must review all variance requests, which do not meet the above requirements. 
(c) ?Testing of private wells. In addition, the city may undertake any necessary action to prevent or 
remedy water supply and water quality problems. To this the city may request analysis of water 
quality and supply of all permitted private wells based on evolving problems and issues associated 
with water resources. The private well owner may be assessed by the city after due public hearings 
for needed water quality, supply problems, requisite testing, laboratory analysis, and improvements 
deemed necessary and fiscally equitable. 


Sec. 54-2-7.4. - Wastewater facilities. 
(a) ?Wastewater requirements. All new development shall be required to connect to the Indian River 
County Utilities wastewater system except as herein provided. 
(1) ?Exceptions. 
a. ?Limited scale development. Residential projects with less than 25 lot/units greater than 
one-quarter mile from the Indian River County Utilities wastewater system, but only if such 
exception is consistent with Indian River County policies and standards established to 
regulate infrastructure extensions and potable water service provided by the Indian River 
County Utilities water system. When such a project has any lot(s) less than one-half acre in 
size, an approved central wastewater system is required. 
b. ?Large lot development. Residential projects with a minimum lot size of one-half acre, but 
only if such exception is consistent with Indian River County policies and standards 
established to regulate infrastructure extensions and wastewater service provided by the 
Indian River County Utilities wastewater system. 
c. ?Single-family or duplex dwelling unit. A single-family residential or duplex dwelling unit 
located on a lot in a subdivision approved prior to the effective date of this code, but only if 
such exception is consistent with Indian River County policies and standards established to 
regulate infrastructure extensions and wastewater service provided by the Indian River 
County Utilities wastewater system. 
d. ?Nonresidential development. Nonresidential projects generating less than 2,000 gallons of 
domestic wastewater per day and greater than one-quarter mile from the Indian River 
County Utilities wastewater system but only if such exception is consistent with Indian 
River County policies and standards established to regulate infrastructure extensions and 
wastewater service provided by the Indian River County Utilities wastewater system. 
(b) ?Septic tanks. Whenever a lot is not served by an approved sanitary sewer, there shall be provided 
such open space as required by the Indian River County Health Department, for the septic tank and 
drainage field to serve the uses on such lot. Such sanitary installations shall be located in a front or 
side yard, but not closer than five feet to any lot line and not within any easements. No septic tank 
shall be located within 75 feet of mean high water (MHW) along the Indian River or Sebastian River. 
    The planning and growth management director may approve a variance to this section provided the 
following conditions exist: 
(1) ?Due to existing conditions, the Indian River County Health Department will not issue a permit 
for a septic tank located in the front or side yard. 
(2) ?The variance will not render another lot unbuildable. 
The board of adjustment must review all variance requests, which do not meet the above requirements. 


Sec. 54-2-7.5. - Accessory structures. 
(a) ?Presence of principal building required. No accessory structure shall be constructed or placed upon 
a lot until the construction of a principal structure has been started and no accessory structure shall 
be used unless the principal structure has received a certificate of occupancy. 
(b) ?Location: 
(1) ?General rule of location. No accessory structure shall be located in any required yard (setback), 
other than as outlined below. Furthermore, no detached accessory structure shall extend 
beyond the front building line of the principal structure that is located on the same real estate 
parcel or lot. 
a. ?Special regulations governing rear yards. Detached structures, such as utility sheds and 
other structures accessory to a primary dwelling within a residential zoning district may 
encroach into a required rear yard, provided that any such structure maintain a minimum 
distance of ten feet from the rear property line and not be located within a dedicated 
easement. With the exception of structures that consist solely of screening and beams and 
supports for the screening material, no such structure shall exceed 400 square feet in lot 
coverage and shall not exceed 12 feet in height. Structures that consist solely of screening 
and beams and supports for the screening material, such as screen enclosures for 
swimming pool areas, shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
(2) ?Corner lots. Accessory structures may not be located in the secondary front yard of an 
improved corner lot unless the corner lot is joined in unity of title within an interior lot that 
contains the principle structure. However, said accessory structures shall not be located closer 
than 25 feet from the secondary front property line in the RS-10 zoning district, and in all other 
zoning districts shall meet required front yard setbacks. 
(c) ?General regulations of accessory buildings: 
(1) ?No mobile home, travel trailer, tent or similar structure, truck trailer or any portion thereof, or 
motor vehicle shall be permitted as an accessory structure. 
(2) ?No accessory structure shall be constructed or maintained without a building permit being 
issued by the city's building official expressly designating the type of the accessory structure 
(example: garage, shed, pump house). 
(3) ?The building official shall not issue a building permit if the accessory structure does not comply 
with all other provisions of the land development code, comprehensive plan or the Code of 
Ordinances of the City of Sebastian. 
(4) ?No accessory structure shall be constructed or maintained if the height thereof exceeds the 
height of the principal structure that is located on the same real estate parcel or lot. 
(5) ?Attached or detached quonset-type or style accessory structures, usually defined as any self-
supporting structure, typically in an "arch" or curved shape with no interior posts, trusses or 
support beams of any kind and with the exterior sheeting forming the building, are prohibited. 
(6) ?A residential lot will be allowed five square feet of accessory building area (cumulative), for 
every 100 square feet of lot area, not to exceed 1,000 square feet total. Attached garages, 
which are part of the original principal building design, will not be included in the cumulative total 
of accessory building area. Accessory structures, which consist solely of screening and beams 
and supports for the screening material (such as screen enclosures for swimming pool areas) 
will not be included in the cumulative total of accessory building area. 
(7) ?Any attached or detached accessory building over 500 square feet in area, any attached or 
detached carport and/or breezeway over 500 square feet in area, must be reviewed and 
approved by the planning and zoning commission utilizing the following criteria: 
a. ?Accessory structures may not be constructed or maintained from corrugated metal or 
corrugated metal-looking products. 
b. ?The roof of the accessory building must have a minimum pitch of 3:12. 
c. ?Accessory structures 501 square feet to 750 square feet in size shall be compatible with 
the overall general architectural design of the primary residence, including facade and 
materials, colors and trim, roofing materials and pitch. 
d. ?Accessory structures 751 square feet to 1,000 square feet in size shall be of the same 
architectural design of the primary residence, including facade and materials, colors and 
trim, and roofing materials and pitch. Foundation plantings shall be required on all sides of 
the accessory structure excluding entranceways and doorways. Said requirements are as 
follows: One shrub for every three lineal feet, 24 inches in height at planting. 
(Ord. No. O-02-19, § 1, 12-11-2002) 


Sec. 54-2-7.6. - Aboveground storage of gasoline/other combustible fluids. 
    Any aboveground storage of gasoline and other combustible fluids shall be subject to compliance 
with all state and local laws pertaining to aboveground storage of gasoline and other combustible fluids. 


Sec. 54-2-7.7. - Walls and fences. 
(a) ?General regulation of walls and fences. 
(1) ?Permit required. Except as provided in subsection (8), it shall be unlawful for any person, 
association, corporation or other entity to install, erect, alter, or located a fence or wall within the 
city without first obtaining a fence permit for such activity. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a 
fence permit shall not be required for the replacement or repair of an existing fence or wall 
unless the replacement or repair cost exceed 50% or more of the value of the fence or wall 
before its repair or replacement. 
(2) ?Application procedures. Application for a fence permit under this section shall be made to the 
building official and shall include the following: 
a. ?A survey prepared by a licensed surveyor of the State of Florida; 
b. ?The location, length and height of the proposed fence or wall; 
c. ?A description of the materials contained in the proposed fence or wall; and 
d. ?Location of any fire hydrant adjacent to the property. 
(3) ?Issuance of permits. The building official shall issue a fence permit to an applicant under this 
section upon his finding that the propose fence or wall is in compliance with the provisions of 
this article and all other pertinent state and local regulations, and upon payment of the 
appropriate fee. Fence permits issued under this section shall be subject to all other rules and 
regulations pertaining to fence permits in general. 
(4) ?Construction to withstand forces of nature. All fences and walls shall be constructed to 
withstand the force of wind and to allow, and not inhibit, divert or alter, the free flow of surface 
water from the natural course it followed prior to installation of the fence or wall. 
(5) ?Posts and supporting members. If the posts or supporting members of a fence or wall are 
placed in or upon the ground, the posts or supporting members shall be treated or composed of 
materials resistant to decay, corrosion and termites. 
(6) ?Maintenance. All fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair, in a non-hazardous 
condition, and shall not be allowed to become dilapidated. 
(7) ?Height. The height of a fence or wall shall be determined from the highest point of the ground in 
an eight-foot run lying directly beneath the fence or wall. Berms shall not be considered as part 
of the ground. 
(8) ?Temporary construction fences. The building official may require and approve temporary 
construction fences, including those installed as part of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan 
(SWPPP), and which shall be removed no later than ten days after construction is completed. If 
the construction fence is in place for more than 180 days, the building official may re-review the 
necessity of the fence. Temporary construction fences are exempt from permitting and height 
regulations. 
(b) ?Types offences and walls permitted. 
(1) ?Fences and walls shall be constructed and/or composed of at least one of the following groups 
of materials: 
a. ?Termite-resistant species wood or wood which has been treated to resist rot and termites; 
b. ?Steel posts and wire fabric of a minimum 11½ -gauge galvanized or other non-corrodible 
metal; 
c. ?Ornamental iron; 
d. ?Concrete or masonry; 
e. ?Vinyl (PVC) or similar composite. 
(2) ?Any portion of a fence or wall that faces a dedicated street right-of-way shall direct the finished 
side of that portion of the fence or wall towards the street. 
(c) ?Fences and walls in residential areas. 
(1) ?Height of walls and fences. Fences and walls, not exceeding six feet in height, may be placed 
along the boundary of a lot on that portion of the lot lying behind the front setback line and 
behind the front of the main structure. Fences and walls placed in front of the main structure 
shall not exceed four feet in height. 
The community development director may approve a variance to this section for a fence higher 
than six feet, but not higher than eight, and prescribe appropriate terms, provided the following 
conditions exist: 
a. ?The finished floor elevation (FFE) of the residence is a minimum 24 inches above the 
finished grade at the property line(s) where a higher fence is proposed, provided the line is 
not within a secondary front yard; or 
b. ?The FFE of the residence on the adjacent property(ies) is a minimum 24 inches higher than 
the FFE of the residence requesting a higher fence; and 
c. ?The higher fence will be placed on that portion of the line lying behind the front of the 
adjacent neighboring main structure on the side(s). 
The board of adjustment must review all variance requests, which do not meet the above 
requirements. 
(2) ?Exception to height regulations for walls and fences. Notwithstanding the provisions of 54-2-
7.7(c)(1) of the Sebastian Land Development Code, fences and walls, not exceeding eight feet 
in height, may be placed along the boundary of a lot on that portion of the lot lying behind the 
front setback line and behind the front of the main structure on any of the following residential 
lots adjacent to Fellsmere Road, also known as County Road 512, in the City of Sebastian: 
Lots 1—8, Block 41, Sebastian Highlands Unit 1 
Lots 2—19, Lot 28, Block 59, Sebastian Highlands Unit 2 
Lot 16, Block 68, Sebastian Highlands, Unit 2 
Lot 2, Block 72, Sebastian Highlands Unit 2 
Lots 9—18, Block 72, Sebastian Highlands Unit 2 
Lots 1-2, Block 42, Sebastian Highlands Unit 2 
Lots 4—40, Block 42, Sebastian Highlands Unit 2 
Lots 7—8, Block 57, Sebastian Highlands Unit 2 
Lots 1—21, Block 149, Sebastian Highlands Unit 3 
Lot 1, Block 169, Sebastian Highlands Unit 5 
Lots 18—49, Block 169, Sebastian Highlands Unit 5 
Lots 122—124, San Sebastian Springs 
Lots 147—154, San Sebastian Springs 
Lots 1—6, Roseland Acres 
In addition, tennis court enclosures, not exceeding ten feet in height, may be placed along the 
perimeter of said tennis court(s). The fence enclosures(s) shall not be located closer than ten 
feet from the side and rear property lines and shall not be located in any easement(s). 
(3) ?Walls and fences on corner lots. Notwithstanding the provisions of 54-2-7.7(c)(1) or 54-2-
7.7(c)(2), fences and walls six feet in height may be erected on a corner lot provided they do not 
extend into the required secondary front yard setback area. Fences and walls that extend into 
the secondary front yard setback area shall not exceed four feet in height and meet the 
provisions of section 54-2-7.10. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "secondary front yard" shall mean the yard of an 
improved corner lot located between the street and the wall of the main structure facing the 
street where the primary entrance to the main structure is not located. 
(4) ?Trellis structures. Trellis structures that do not form a barrier may be erected at any location on 
a lot except within visibility triangles or dedicated easements. Such trellis structures need not 
satisfy the height limitation and restrictions for residential fences and walls provided in this 
subsection. 
(d) ?Fences and walls in nonresidential districts. 
(1) ?All commercial and industrial zoned properties that are being utilized for residential purposes 
shall comply with the requirements set forth in section 54-2-7.7(c). 
(2) ?Fences and walls not exceeding eight feet in height may be permitted upon approval of the 
community development director. The planning and zoning commission must approve all fences 
and walls exceeding eight feet in height. 
(3) ?Required screens for garbage, refuse, and recycling dumpsters. Notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in this section, all garbage, refuse, and recycling dumpsters, regardless 
of the siting on the property, shall be screened on all four sides by masonry wall, fencing, or 
other materials permitted hereunder, at least six feet in height, and rendering the view of said 
dumpster invisible from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. All proposed refuse 
dumpster screens must be approved by the building official through the issuance of a fence 
permit in accordance with procedures set forth in section 54-2-7.7(a). 
(e) ?Fences within easements. 
(1) ?Fence permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, corporation or other 
entity to erect a fence or wall within any easement unless a fence permit for the fence or wall is 
obtained pursuant to section 54-2-7.7(a) prior to the erection of the fence or wall, and the fence 
or wall is constructed of the materials listed in section 54-2-7.7(b)(1), (2) and (5). Prior to city 
approval of the permit, the property owner shall provide the city a recorded affidavit 
acknowledging that the fence or wall will be located in an easement, and that the city or utility 
company is not responsible for any damages to the fence or wall if they need to access the 
easement area. 
(2) ?Property owner responsible for removal cost. Any fence or wall proposed to be installed within 
a utility or drainage easement that accesses, abuts or provides the city or utility company with a 
maintenance area to lot line ditches, canals, drainage tracts, or rights-of-way, may be of a 
permanent or temporary nature. However, if the city or utility company should later determine 
that removal of the fence or wall is necessary for the installation, maintenance, repair or 
replacement of the drainage or utility facility, the property owner shall be required to remove the 
fence or wall within five days of the owner's receipt of written demand for removal from the city 
or utility company. All cost incurred in the removal and replacement of the fence or wall shall be 
the responsibility of the property owner. The city may remove any fence or wall within the 
easement, as needed, in cases of emergency. 
(3) ?Maintenance. With the exception of drainage ditches maintained by others, the property owner 
shall be responsible for the maintenance of all property within a utility or drainage easement 
regardless of the placement of the fence or wall. 
(f) ?Prohibited fences and walls. 
(1) ?Prohibited types of walls and fences. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, install or maintain 
the following structures: 
a. ?A fence of wall within six feet of a fire hydrant; 
b. ?A fence or wall within any street right-of-way; 
c. ?An electricity charged fence or wall; 
d. ?A fence or wall in a dilapidated condition which appears to be neglected, unkempt, or in 
substantial disrepair, in whole or in part, and as a consequence thereof is either unsound, 
hazardous or ineffectual; 
e. ?Any fence or wall containing hazardous substances such as broken glass, barbed wire, 
(except as provided in paragraph (2) below), spikes, nails, wire, or similar materials 
designed to inflict pain or injury to any person or animal. Any fence constructed of such 
material shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
(2) ?Barbed wire fences. Barbed wire fences may be administratively approved by the community 
development director in commercial and industrial districts if the proposed fence is a minimum 
of six feet and a maximum of eight feet in height and topped with no more than three strands of 
barbed wire, and pursuant to section 54-2-7.7(a). No part of any such fence may extend beyond 
the boundaries of the property of which it is installed. 
(g) ?Appeals. Any actions of the community development director as allowed by section 54-2-7.7 may be 
appealed pursuant to section 54-1-2.2(d). Such appeal shall be filed with the community 
development department within ten working days after action of the community development 
director. The request for the appeal shall include information concerning the disputed issues in the 
community development director's actions. 
(Ord. No. O-18-10, § 1, 1-23-2019) 


Sec. 54-2-7.8. - Regulation of watercraft. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to regularly moored watercraft: 
a. ?Regularly moored watercraft shall not be permitted as business offices or other related 
commercial enterprises. This provision shall not preclude the regular mooring of watercraft 
for fishing operations, charters, pleasure and other water-dependent uses, provided said 
mooring is located at an approved private dock, commercial marina, or approved 
anchorage identified by the United States Coast Guard and depicted on nautical charts. 
b. ?Only minor repairs and/or maintenance of watercraft in residential areas is permitted and 
only when such repairs or maintenance is performed by the person who is both the owner 
(or tenant) of the real property and owner of the watercraft, or at his direction. 
c. ?Permanent live-aboards are not permitted in waterways within the jurisdiction of the City of 
Sebastian. 
d. ?Transient live-aboards are permitted within the City of Sebastian within any commercial 
marina within the city limits that maintains moorings and/or slips at docks for transient live-
aboards, to encourage the use of the waterways of the city and to promote an increase in 
the economic base of the community provided the following conditions are met: 
i. ?All such facilities shall provide litter receptacles and marine sanitation pump-out 
facilities as required by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and the Florida 
Department of Environmental Protection. 
ii. ?Such facilities may make available to users of offshore moorings a dock expressly for 
the purpose of accessing said moorings by dinghy or other small vessel; and may 
charge a reasonable price for the use of said dock. 
iii. ?Such facilities shall maintain records of all such moorings of transient live-aboards. 
(Ord. No. O-01-13, § 1, 7-11-2001) 
Note— Additional watercraft regulations are set out in the City's Code of Ordinances, § 110-35 
et seq. 


Sec. 54-2-7.9. - Street access and setbacks. 
(a) ?Structures to have access. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a 
public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on 
lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street 
parking. 
(b) ?Setbacks established from approved streets. In the event that streets or rights-of-way are approved 
by the city and filed with the clerk of the county court, or in the event of the designation or 
establishment by the city council of any proposed public street or road, to the extent lawful the same 
shall thereupon immediately be used as the reference point for the purpose of determining setbacks 
for new construction under the terms of this ordinance. This provision shall not prevent the 
reconstruction of a fully or partially damaged or destroyed legally nonconforming structure so long as 
the rebuilt structure is consistent with the city's land development code and building codes. 


Sec. 54-2-7.10. - Regulation of obstructions to visibility. 
(a) ?Obstruction to traffic and traffic visibility. There shall be no structures or planting, which materially 
obstructs traffic, and traffic visibility. 
(b) ?Visibility triangles. Visibility triangles, within which nothing shall be erected, placed, parked, planted 
or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of two feet and eight feet 
above the center lines of intersecting traffic ways, shall be provided as follows: 
(1) ?Vision clearance at street, alley and driveway intersections. A visibility triangle shall be required 
at all traffic intersections. No wall, fence, hedge, or structure within the visibility triangle shall 
exceed a height of two feet above the elevation of the abutting street measured at the 
centerline. 
Dimensions of visibility triangle. The sides of the visibility triangle shall be 30 feet at street-to-
street intersections and 15 feet at all other intersections. These distances shall be measured 
along the well-defined edge of pavement from their point of intersection. Where no well-defined 
edge of pavement exists, a probable edge of pavement shall be established from the existing 
centerline of the travelways, using 12-foot travel lane(s) for dedicated streets, eight-foot half 
width for all dedicated alleys and utility easements, and five-foot half width for single driveways. 
Visibility triangles shall be required at all traffic intersections, including driveways and alleys. 


Sec. 54-2-7.11. - Moving of structures. 
    No structure larger than 500 square feet, excluding structures registered as a vehicle by the State of 
Florida, shall be moved into the city or from one place to another within the city unless such building or 
structure is made to conform to all of the requirements of the city's adopted building code in effect in this 
city at the time of the moving and the requirements of the zoning in which the building or structure is to be 
place. 
    The building director is authorized to require any person applying for a permit to move a building or 
structure to show proof of a property damage insurance policy in the amount of $500,000.00 as well as a 
liability insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000.00 and may be required to post a bond or other 
security acceptable to the city in an amount up to but not exceeding $10,000.00 to be deposited with the 
city clerk, payable to the order of the City of Sebastian. The purpose of the bond or other security is to 
guarantee compliance in full within one year with the applicable requirement of the city's adopted building 
code and of this land development code and to restore any public or private property damaged while the 
building or structure is being moved. Failure to fully comply within one year as above stated will result in 
forfeiture of the bond to the building director of the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
    All applicants for a permit to move an existing structure, as above stated, are required to furnish the 
building director with a proposed route for moving the building through the city as well as five sets of 
drawings. Said drawings shall be prepared and sealed by an architect or engineer registered in the State 
of Florida certifying that the structure meets all requirements as above outlined, or five sets of drawings to 
be prepared and sealed by an architect or engineer registered in the State of Florida showing the 
proposed changes to the building or structure after it has been moved, that will bring it within all 
applicable requirements of the city's adopted building code as well as the city's land development code. 
    If drawings of the structure or building to be moved showing compliance as above stated are on 
record with the city already, the above requirement for drawings of the structure is waived. The building 
director shall distribute the application and supporting information to the appropriate staff for review and 
comment. The staff can include outside agencies. Upon approval of the city engineer, planning and 
growth management director, and police chief, the building director shall issue a permit. 


Sec. 54-2-7.12. - Airport height limitations. 
    No structure shall be erected within the approach zones of an active runway on the City of Sebastian 
Municipal Airport with a height in excess of those permitted by the Federal Aviation Authority or by city 
council. All structures shall comply with the City of Sebastian Airport Master Plan and provisions below 
cited: 
(a) ?Airport zones and airport height limitations. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, 
the following height restriction zones are hereby created and established. An area located in 
more than one zone of the described zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more 
restrictive height limitation: 
(1) ?Primary zone. The area longitudinally centered on a runway, extending to the end of that 
runway with the width so specified for each runway for the most precise approach existing 
or planned for either end of the runway. No structure will be permitted within the primary 
zone that is not a part of the landing and take-off area or facilities and that has a greater 
height than the nearest point on the runway center line. The width of the primary zones 
shall be as follows: 
a. ?250 feet for utility runways having visual approaches only. 
b. ?50 feet for utility runways having nonprecision instrument approaches. 
c. ?For other than utility runways the width is: 
500 feet for visual runways having only visual approaches. 
500 feet for nonprecision instrument runways with visibility minimums greater than 
three-fourths statute mile. 
1,000 feet for a nonprecision instrument approach with visibility minimums as low as 
three-fourths statute mile, and for precision instrument runways. 
(2) ?Horizontal zone. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, 
encompassing the runway's primary zones and transitional zones, the perimeter of which is 
constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary 
surface of each runway of the airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to 
those arcs. The radius of each arc is: 
a. ?5,000 feet for all runways designated as utility or visual approaches only. 
b. ?10,000 feet for all other runways. 
The radius of the arc specified for each end of the runway shall have the same arithmetical 
value. That value will be the highest determined for either end of the runway. When a 
5,000 foot arc is encompassed by tangents connecting two adjacent 10,000 foot arcs, the 
5,000 foot arc shall be disregarded. No structure will be permitted in the horizontal zone 
that is higher than 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
(3) ?Conical zone. The area extending outward and upward from the periphery of the 
horizontal zone for a distance of 4,000 feet on slope of 20 to one. Height limitations for 
structures in the conical zone are 150 feet above airport elevation at the inner boundary of 
the zone with permitted height increasing one foot vertically for every 20 feet of horizontal 
distance outward from the inner boundary of the zone to a height of 350 feet above airport 
elevation at the outer boundary of the zone. 
(4) ?Approach zone. The area longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line and 
proceeding outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. The width of the 
approach zone is the same as the inner boundary of the primary surface it adjoins and 
expands uniformly to a width of: 
a. ?1,250 feet for that end of a utility runway with only visual approaches. 
b. ?1,500 feet for that end of a runway other than a utility runway with only visual 
approaches. 
c. ?2,000 feet for that end of a utility runway with a nonprecision instrument approach. 
d. ?3,500 feet for that end of a nonprecision instrument runway other than utility, having 
visibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile. 
e. ?4,000 feet for that end of a nonprecision instrument runway, other than utility, having a 
nonprecision instrument approach with visibility minimums as low a three-fourths 
statute mile. 
f. ?16,000 feet for precision instrument approach runways. 
(5) ?Approach surface. The approach surface is the same width and height at the inner 
boundary of the primary surface it adjoins and extends outward for a horizontal distance of: 
a. ?5,000 feet at a slope of 20 to one for all utility and visual approach runways. 
b. ?10,000 feet at a slope of 34 to one for all nonprecision instrument runways other than 
utility. 
c. ?10,000 feet at a slope of 50 to one with an additional 40,000 feet at a slope of 40 to 
one for all precision instrument runways. 
Height limitations within the approach surface are the same as the height of the runway 
end at the inner boundary and increase at the rates as shown above and will control all 
future construction or natural growth. On existing runways where the thresholds have been 
displaced and the threshold lights moved along the runway from the runway end, if any of 
the area between the threshold lights and the red end lights is being used for either the 
landing or take-off of aircraft, then the approach surface would start at the end of the 
runway for control of future obstructions. At those airports having defined runways with 
specially prepared hard surfaces, the primary surface for such runway extends 200 feet 
beyond each end of the runway hard surface, and the approach surface begins at that 
point. 
(6) ?Transitional zone. An area extending outward from the sides of each primary zone and 
approach zone connecting them to the horizontal zone and an area outward 5,000 feet 
horizontally or until intersection with the conical zone from the side of that portion of the 
approach zone of a precision instrument runway extending through and beyond the conical 
zone. No structure or object will be permitted within the transitional zone greater in height 
than the primary or approach zone at their adjoining boundary lines increasing at a rate of 
one foot vertically for every seven feet horizontally, with the horizontal distance measured 
at right angles to the runway centerline and extended centerline, until the height matches 
the horizontal zone height, or the conical zone height for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet 
from each side of that part of the approach zone for a precision instrument runway 
extending beyond the conical zone. 
(7) ?Other areas. In addition to the height limitations imposed within this section, no structure 
or obstruction shall be permitted within the City of Sebastian that would cause a minimum 
descent altitude, minimum obstruction clearance altitude, minimum vectoring altitude, or a 
decision height to be raised nor which would impose either the establishment of restricted 
minimum climb gradients or nonstandard take-off minimums for a runway at Sebastian 
Municipal Airport. 
(b) ?Airport land use restrictions. 
(1) ?General safety regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no use 
may be made of land or water within any zones established by this section in such manner 
as to interfere with the operation of an airborne aircraft. The following special requirements 
shall apply to each permitted use: 
a. ?All lights or illumination used in conjunction with street, parking, signs or use of land 
and structures shall be arranged and operated in such manner that it is not misleading 
or dangerous to aircraft operating from a public airport or in vicinity thereof. 
b. ?No operations of any type shall produce smoke, glare or other visual hazards within 
three statute miles of any usable runway of a public airport. Control burns as required 
by a habitat conservation plan approved by the fish and wildlife service during periods 
when the wind will blow the smoke away from the airport and not across any approach 
surfaces are permitted. 
c. ?No operations of any type shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals 
or radio communication between aircraft, the airport or other air traffic control facility. 
d. ?Within any airport primary zone or within any runway approach zone area where the 
zone height is 50 feet or less above the end of the runway, no operations of any type 
shall involve the storage, distribution or manufacture of flammable, explosive, toxic or 
other hazardous materials. This restriction shall apply to those materials in a quantity 
or of a type which, if exposed to an aircraft accident, would further jeopardize the 
safety or health of the aircraft, occupants, occupants of facilities in the vicinity, by-
standers and emergency personnel, or would prevent, delay, limit or otherwise curtail 
appropriate response actions by emergency personnel. 
e. ?Within any airport primary zone or within any runway approach zone area where the 
zone height is 50 feet or less above the end of the runway, no operations of any type 
shall involve the congregation of people for either short or long-term purposes. This 
restriction shall apply to any use involving individuals who by their numbers, condition, 
age or other factor, should they be exposed to an aircraft accident, might escalate the 
resultant effect to disaster of major proportions. 
(2) ?Restrictions on potential solid waste disposal. Solid waste disposal sites shall be 
considered as a nonconforming use if located within areas established for the airport and 
meeting the following criteria: 
a. ?Sites located within 10,000 feet of any runway used or planned to be used by turbojet 
or turbo prop aircraft. 
b. ?Sites located within 5,000 feet of any runway used only by piston type aircraft. 
c. ?Any site located so that it places the runways and/or approach and departure patterns 
of an airport between bird feeding, water or roosting areas. 
d. ?Sites outside the above perimeters but still within the lateral limits of the airport zones 
will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the board of adjustment. 
(3) ?Residential construction shall not be permitted within an area contiguous to any airport 
measuring one-half the length of the longest runway on either side of and at the end of 
each runway centerline of such airport. Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations, if the 
property owner provides the city with a perpetual avigation easement for the airspace 
above the ground level of the entire parcel of real property owned by the property owner 
upon which residential construction will be situate, in a form which reasonably precludes 
the property owner and his/her/their/its successors and assigns from commencing or 
maintaining a successful action for condemnation (inverse or otherwise) resulting from the 
aviation activities arising from the airport, as determined by the city council on the advice of 
the city attorney, then the area where residential construction would otherwise be 
precluded pursuant to this subsection (3) may be reduced to the extent that restrictions 
contained in this section and elsewhere in the land development code and the Code of 
Ordinances are not violated. 
(c) ?Variances to airport height limitations. 
(1) ?Any person desiring to erect any structure, increase the height of any structure, permit the 
growth of any tree, or otherwise use his property in violation of the airport zoning 
regulations prescribed in this section, or any land development regulation adopted 
pursuant to the provisions of chapter 163, Florida Statutes, pertaining to airport land use 
compatibility, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from the zoning 
regulations in question. At the time of filing, the applicant shall forward a copy of his 
application for variance by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Florida 
Department of Transportation (the "department"), Aviation Office, M.S. 46, 605 Suwannee 
Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-450. The department shall have 45 days from receipt of 
the application, its right to comment is waived. The board of adjustment may proceed with 
its consideration of the application only upon the receipt of the department's comments or 
waiver of that right as demonstrated by the filing of a copy of the return receipt with the 
board showing that the 45 days have elapsed. Additionally, no application for a variance 
may be considered unless the applicant shows evidence that the requirement for notice of 
construction or alteration under Title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 77, has been 
complied with. 
(2) ?A variance may only be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the 
regulations provided in this section would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary 
hardship and where the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but would 
do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the regulations provided 
herein. Provided, however, a variance may be allowed subject to any reasonable 
conditions that the board of adjustment may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of 
this section. 
(3) ?In granting a variance under this section, the board of adjustment shall, as a specific 
condition, require the owner to mark and light the structure or growth to indicate to aircraft 
pilots the presence of an obstruction. Such marking and lighting shall conform to the 
specific standards established by chapter 14-60, Rules of the Department of 
Transportation and Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70-7460-1H, as 
amended. 


Sec. 54-2-7.13. - Mobile homes, travel trailers, campers, boats, trailers, and recreational vehicles. 
(a) ?Mobile homes prohibited. No mobile homes shall be permitted in any zoning district except the R-
MH or PUD-MH Districts. 
(b) ?Parking and storage of recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles as described herein may be 
parked, stored or placed on any improved lot in any residential district, provided that: 
(1) ?The recreational vehicle is owned, rented or leased by the person residing on the same 
improved lot on which the recreational vehicle is located. 
(2) ?Except as provided in section 54-2-7.13(d), the recreational vehicle is not used for residential, 
office or commercial purposes. 
(3) ?The recreational vehicle is not used for sleeping, housekeeping, or living quarters while parked 
on any improved lot. 
(4) ?The recreational vehicle is located to the rear of the front building line, and in no event less 
than 25 feet from the front lot line, or is located wholly within a carport or garage. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, with respect to locating recreational vehicles on an 
improved corner lot, the recreational vehicle need only be located behind the front yard setback 
for such improved corner lot and need not be located to the rear of the front building line for the 
secondary front yard. 
(5) ?The recreational vehicle is not located within any road, drainage or utility right-of-way. 
(6) ?In the event that the recreational vehicle is a collapsible camping trailer, the trailer must be 
stored in the collapsed state. 
(7) ?The recreational vehicle must bear a current and proper registration. 
(8) ?The recreational vehicle, other than a utility trailer or a cargo trailer, shall not exceed 40 feet in 
length. The recreational vehicle that is a utility trailer or a cargo trailer shall not exceed 24 feet in 
length. 
(9) ?No more than two recreational vehicles at the same time shall be permitted on any lot outside 
of an enclosed garage. 
(c) ?Commercial trailers and boats. Notwithstanding any prohibition inferred in any previous paragraphs 
of section 54-2-7.13(b), trailers and boats utilized for commercial purposes may be kept on real 
property located in a residentially zoned district owned by the person who also owns the trailer or 
boat if the following provisions are complied with: 
(1) ?One, but not more than one, commercial utility or cargo trailer, that does not exceed 24 feet in 
length and eight feet in height, may be parked on any lot located in any residential district if it is 
parked in accordance with the other provisions of section 54-2-7.13(b)(4) and it is substantially 
screened by either vegetation or a six-foot stockade type fence from the view of the adjacent 
property. 
(2) ?One, but not more than one, boat used for commercial purposes, not exceeding 40 feet in 
length, may be parked or stored on any lot located in any residential district, if there is no 
unloading or loading of any material, fish or shellfish when located in the residential district and 
the boat is substantially screened by either vegetation or a six-foot stockade type fence from the 
view of the adjacent property. 
For the purposes of the restrictions set forth in section 54-2-7.13(b)(9), a commercial trailer or a 
commercial boat shall be counted as one recreational vehicle. 
(d) ?Temporary trailers. Trailers used temporarily in connection with construction as a dwelling, office, 
salesroom, or security headquarters may be located temporarily in all zoning districts only after a 
building permit has been issued and during the periods of construction activity, under a temporary 
zoning permit; provided that: All setbacks are complied with and all utilities, including water and 
sewer are provided; and Any such trailer must be removed within ten days after completion of 
construction or after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever first occurs. 


Sec. 54-2-7.14. - Large trucks and heavy equipment. 
(a) ?Zoning districts where prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, 
occupant, lessee, tenant, landlord, or otherwise, to park, store, deposit, or to cause or allow any 
parking, storage, or deposit on any real property zoned as RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, R-MH, 
PUD-R, or PUD-MH or any property then being used for residential use however zoned, any road 
tractor, semi-trailer, heavy equipment, or heavy truck. 
(b) ?Exceptions. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1) ?All other zoning districts not actually being used as single-family use. 
(2) ?Real property where construction is underway pursuant to a valid building permit and the items 
otherwise prohibited are being utilized for such ongoing construction. 
(3) ?The item otherwise prohibited is being loaded or unloaded. 
(4) ?Vehicles such as a van, pickup truck or paneled truck, provided each such vehicle not exceed 
23 feet in length and/or nine feet in height. 
(5) ?Emergency parking of such prohibited vehicles or items provided such they are removed within 
24 hours of the start of the emergency. 
(6) ?Such items being utilized by any governmental entity for a legitimate purpose. 
(7) ?Vehicles exceeding 23 feet in length and/or nine feet in height which are parked within an 
enclosed garage. 


Sec. 54-2-7.15. - Land excavation or fill. 
(a) ?Purpose and intent. The city finds that it is necessary to regulate excavation activities in order to 
prevent public nuisances, safety hazards, and damage to private and public property. Further, such 
regulations are necessary in order to protect the environment, including the quality and quantity of 
ground and surface waters. The plans for land excavation or fill shall demonstrate that the proposed 
site alterations include mitigation techniques designed to comply with performance criteria 
addressing the following: 
(1) ?Environmental protection (article XI); 
(2) ?Site reclamation, including restoration of vegetative cover within disturbed upland open space; 
planting and stabilizing banks of drainageways with vegetation which is tolerant to anticipated 
changes in water levels, including hydric conditions (article XI); 
(3) ?Sedimentation and soil erosion control (article XI); 
(4) ?Protection of groundwater aquifer recharge (article XI); 
(5) ?Flood damage prevention (article XIII); and 
(6) ?Tree and native vegetation protection (article XIV). 
(b) ?Prohibited activity. It shall be illegal for any person, association, corporation or other entity to fill or 
excavate any real property in the city, without first obtaining a permit for such activity, except as 
exempted in section 54-2-7.15(c). It shall be illegal for any person, association, corporation or other 
entity to engage in permitted activity in a manner contrary to the conditions set forth in such permit. 
Mining is prohibited. 
(c) ?Exceptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the fill and excavation permitting 
requirements of this land development code: 
(1) ?Earthmoving in conjunction with the installation of a utility, wherein the excavation is to be 
backfilled. 
(2) ?Construction of state, federal, or local public roads and public works within the limits of public 
property. 
(3) ?Any activity regulated by the Florida Electrical Power Plant Siting Act, codified as sections 
403.501 through 403.517, Florida Statutes (1987), and the Transmission Line Siting Act, 
codified as sections 403.52 through 403.536 Florida Statutes (1987), to the extent that the 
provisions of this code are preempted by said acts. 
(4) ?Maintenance activities undertaken by a public utility, as defined in section 366.02, Florida 
Statutes (1987), with regard to existing electrical power plants, reservoirs and other related 
activities. 
(5) ?Any excavation incidental to any authorized city development order or permit, including 
approved site plans, subdivision plats, preliminary development plans and/or building permits. 
(6) ?Maintenance dredging of lakes or canals. 
(7) ?Incidental filling activity on developed single-family residential property such as the placement 
of topsoil for a garden, and marl, gravel, shell, or other similar material for a driveway, that will 
not include more than 50 cubic yards in any one calendar year. 
(8) ?A pond on a single-family or duplex residential lot. 
(d) ?Fill on single-family and duplex lots. 
(1) ?Prior city approval required. No filling of a lot shall be undertaken without the prior written 
approval of the city engineer pursuant to article XII. 
(2) ?Criteria for land fill and drainage. During the filling of lots where there is either one or more side 
drainage ditches or swales, or rear drainage ditch or swale, or any combination thereof on such 
lot, the fill on the lot shall be sloped and contoured to properly direct the surface water to the 
drainage ditches or swales. Swales in the front of the lot shall also be shaped to prevent 
standing of water therein. Where any culvert pipe is laid under a driveway or similar installation, 
the pipe shall be approved by the city engineer pursuant to section 54-3-10.5(f). When sod is 
used in the bottom of the swale, it shall be placed below the invert of the culvert pipe. 
(3) ?Maintenance of surface water management improvements. It shall be the continuous 
responsibility of any owner of a lot to maintain such swales, ditches, and pipes on the site to 
maintain the proper flow of surface water. 
(e) ?Excavation and fill on all lots other than single-family or duplex lots. 
(1) ?Prior city approval required. No excavation shall be undertaken without an approved city 
development order or permit. 
(2) ?Excavation Permits. 
a. ?Regulations. Any excavation not incidental to any authorized city development order or 
permit, including approved site plans, subdivision plats, preliminary development plans 
and/or building permits shall adhere to the following regulations: 
b. ?Application procedures. Excavation permit applications shall be made on forms provided by 
the city engineer. The application must demonstrate conformance with all city codes and 
include the following specific submittal requirements: 
1. ?Plan view and cross sections of the excavation areas and excavated materials 
stockpile areas. 
2. ?Amount of fill to be removed, expressed in cubic yards. 
3. ?Method of excavation and stockpiling of excavated materials. 
4. ?Safety and security plan. 
5. ?Copy of approved site plan, preliminary plat or preliminary development plan. 
6. ?Topographic and soil maps of the site. 
(3) ?Conditions of the excavation permit. 
a. ?Consistency. The excavation shall be consistent with the approved site plan, preliminary 
plat, or preliminary development plan for the site. 
b. ?Location of operations restricted. No stockpiling of excavated materials shall occur within 
100 feet of a residence. 
c. ?Screening. If the project site is adjacent to a residentially zoned area, the perimeter of the 
site abutting such an area shall include a 50-foot wide buffer and Type "A" screening along 
said site boundary. 
d. ?Special safety measures. Any excavation activity that results in the creation or expansion 
of a water body (except those not incidental to any authorized city development order or 
permit, including approved site plans, subdivision plats, preliminary development plans 
and/or building permits) shall be subject to the provisions of section 54-2-7.15(g). Such 
projects creating water bodies must also provide a safety and security plan, which may 
include, but not limited to, fences, access control, and other security provisions. 
e. ?Aquifer recharge area. If the project site is located (in whole or part) on an aquifer recharge 
area, no excavation governed by an excavation permit shall result in an average elevation 
of less than 25 feet mean sea level (MSL) for that portion of the project site located on the 
aquifer recharge area. No excavation below the seasonal high water table is permitted. 
f. ?Prohibited activities. No processing of the excavated material shall occur on the site. 
g. ?Dust and erosion control. All excavation activities, including the stockpiling of excavated 
materials, shall ensure that erosion does not occur and must control dust or the blowing of 
excavated materials. 
h. ?Time limitations. Excavation shall be completed within one year and all stockpiled fill 
removed within six months of the completion of the excavation, except when otherwise 
authorized by a phasing schedule of an approved site plan, preliminary plat, or preliminary 
development plan. A permit may be renewed by paying a renewal fee and filing a report 
demonstrating that the permit criteria have been met. 
i. ?Operating conditions of excavation. 
1. ?Hours of operations. Excavation shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays; operation on Saturday and Sunday, and/or 
operations other than between 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. may be permitted by the city 
engineer if the impact of the excavation operation on surrounding properties will not 
constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood. 
2. ?Permanent boundary markers. Permanent project boundary corners, with intermediate 
stakes at a minimum interval of 300 feet, and all limits of excavation shall be staked, 
marked and maintained with visible flags in the field, in accordance with approved 
plans for the permits. 
j. ?Completion report. Within 60 days of the removal of all excavated materials from the site, a 
record drawing by a surveyor or engineer registered in the State of Florida shall be 
provided to the city engineer at the completion of the permitted project. The record drawing 
shall contain sufficient information to indicate that all of the requirements of this code have 
been met, shall include cross-sections of the excavation and a plan drawing which locates 
the extent of the excavation with dimensions to all property lines, and shall certify that the 
excavation has been completed as permitted and is consistent with the approved plan. 
k. ?Requirement of bonds and forfeiture. 
1. ?Intent. Compliance and restoration bonds shall be posted to ensure that the site is 
developed, operated, and restored in conformance with the approved mining site plan. 
The compliance bond can be assessed as a penalty only to violations of site plan 
approval that are chargeable to the mining permit holder, and those under his 
supervision, direction, or control. The restoration bond is to provide funds to restore 
the site. 
2. ?Amount. The compliance bond shall be posted in the amount of $1,000.00 per acre of 
project site with a minimum of $5,000.00. The restoration bond shall be posted in the 
amount of $1,000.00 per acre of excavation with a minimum of $5,000.00. 
3. ?Phasing. When one phase of 20 acres or less is completed and in conformance with 
the submitted site plan for reclamation and rehabilitation, and in conformance with this 
code, the compliance and restoration bonds may be transferred to the next phase 
under the approved site plan. More than one phase at a time may be mined 
concurrently; however, each phase shall be fully bonded, as required by this code. 
4. ?Renewal. Within 30 days preceding bond expiration, a bond renewal or new bond, in 
form and amount approved by the city manager and city attorney, shall be filed in the 
city clerk's office. This process shall be continued through the completion of each 
mining operation. 
5. ?Forfeiture. Upon finding of noncompliance with the provisions of this code or the 
approved mining site plan or reclamation site plan, or failure to renew bonds within 30 
days of expiration, the building official shall notify the permit holder in writing of the 
noncompliance and the pending forfeiture of the compliance and/or restoration bond. 
This notice shall also include notice of the appeal process as set forth in section 54-1-
2.2(d). 
(a) ?The compliance bond shall be forfeited for violating the conditions of site plan 
approval including, but not limited to, unapproved off-site discharge of water, 
failure to confine hauling to approved hauling routes, operating in violation of the 
safety, and/or security plan, excavating within required setbacks, mining of 
additional phases prior to restoration of the previous phase, and activity not 
consistent with permits issued by the city and other jurisdictional agencies. Upon 
appeal by the applicant, the city council may, upon determining findings of fact, 
conclude that the violation did not occur or was insignificant and may return all or 
part of the compliance bond. 
(b) ?The restoration bond shall be forfeited for violating the conditions of the 
restoration plan including, but not limited to, mine abandonment prior to 
restoration, restoration not completed with the approved timeframe, restoration 
not consistent with water management standards, and restoration activities not 
consistent with permits issued by the city and other jurisdictional agencies. After 
a hearing by the city council, and the determination of findings of fact, the city 
may use the funds to restore the site in accordance with the approved site plan. 
Any funds remaining after the completion of the work shall be returned to the 
bond holder. 
(f) ?Water management standards. 
(1) ?Creation or expansion of a water body. Any excavation activity that results in the creation or 
expansion of a water body shall be subject to the following standards, except as specifically 
exempted in section 54-2-7.15(c). 
a. ?Slope of littoral zone. The slopes of the water body areas from the top of bank to the littoral 
zone area shall not exceed one foot vertical to three feet horizontal. The littoral zone slope 
shall not be steeper than an average slope of one foot vertical to six feet horizontal. 
Although no minimum slope below the littoral zone is required, the slope below the littoral 
zone shall be constructed so that natural soil movement will not reduce the littoral zone 
area. 
b. ?Regulation of environmental impacts. There will be no significant adverse off-site impact on 
ground water quality or ground water levels. In the event of temporary dewatering during 
excavation, the applicant shall present evidence that no saltwater intrusion and/or 
reduction in quality of well water available to properties within one-quarter mile of the 
permitted activity will occur. 
c. ?Design of water management system. The water management system, including swales, 
interconnected wetlands, and lakes, must be specifically designed to inhibit siltation and 
the eutrophication processes. To ensure this, the applicant must submit an environmental 
management and lake monitoring plan, which meets with the approval of the city engineer, 
specifying the method for monitoring the system and corrective action should 
eutrophication and/or siltation occur. 
d. ?Maintenance easement. A 20-foot wide access maintenance easement shall be provided 
for every 1,000 feet of shoreline. This easement shall extend from below control elevation 
of the lake to a public or private road right-of-way. There shall be a minimum 15-foot wide 
access around the water body. The city engineer may require that such access be located 
in a maintenance easement. 
(g) ?Use of public and private roads. Any excavation permit issued pursuant to this code shall be subject 
to the following provisions: 
(1) ?Hauling activities regulated. The applicant shall ensure that neither public nor private properties 
will be damaged by the hauling of excavated materials and that hazardous traffic conditions will 
not be created. All such applications shall identify and authorize the fill hauling route. If private 
roads or easements are intended to be used, written permission shall be submitted from the 
person or persons owning said road or easement as part of the application materials. No load 
limit shall be exceeded along the hauling route. 
(2) ?Protection of improvements. Where deemed necessary by the city engineer, mats, culverts, 
ramps, or paved drives shall be placed at entrances and/or exits of haul sites in such positions 
that pavement edges, shoulders, curbs, and sidewalks will be protected from damage. 
(3) ?Responsibility for damage. Where damage occurs at the access point to a city, county, or state 
road from a permitted project, the permittee shall be responsible for repairs, and no future 
development permits shall be issued for the site until the damage has been repaired to the 
satisfaction of the applicable governing body. To ensure compliance, security may be required 
by the city in an amount and form to be approved by the city engineer and the city attorney. 
(4) ?Cover required on hauling vehicles. Vehicles hauling materials via public roads shall be 
covered in a manner to prevent spillage, to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(5) ?Identification required on hauling vehicles. All hauling vehicles shall have the trucking company 
name, mailing address, and telephone number prominently displayed on both sides of the 
vehicle in letters at least three inches in height and in a color contrasting that of the truck. 
(h) ?Inspection and revocation of permits. 
(1) ?Right of entry. The city shall not be denied the right to enter the project site for inspection at 
any time during the permit period. 
(2) ?Finding and notice of noncompliance. Upon the finding of noncompliance with any provision of 
this land development code, the city engineer shall notify the permit holder in writing of the 
noncompliance. Unless an immediate safety hazard exists, the permittee shall be given five 
working days to correct the violation, after which time the permit shall be suspended if the 
violation is not corrected. 
(3) ?Action to prevent or minimize threat to life and property. In cases where a violation of a section 
of this land development code poses an immediate threat to life and property, as determined by 
the city engineer, the permit shall be suspended by the city engineer and the permittee shall be 
immediately notified of the suspension and of his duty to begin immediate mitigation and 
correction of the hazard. If such mitigation and correction does not progress to the satisfaction 
of the city engineer, the city shall have the right to make all necessary corrections at the 
applicant's expense. 
(4) ?Procedure for filing appeal. Any person receiving written notice of suspension of a permit may, 
within 15 days following the date of such notice, enter an appeal in writing to the city council. 
Such written appeal shall be deposited with the city clerk who shall stamp thereon the date and 
time received. Such written appeal must include a description of the property, the date of the 
notice of violations, and the number of such notice. The city council shall, within 14 days, hold a 
hearing on this appeal. At the conclusion of such hearing, the city council may continue the 
suspension, modify the suspension, revoke the excavation permit, or reverse the decision of the 
city engineer. The city council shall not act upon any appeal, which is filed later than the 15 
days' notice set forth above. 


Sec. 54-2-7.16. - Swimming pools. 
    Prior to commencing construction of swimming pools, a building permit must be obtained. The 
following provisions shall be enforced in regulating construction of swimming pools. 
(a) ?Application. The building department will receive and act on applications for a building permit. 
The application shall be accompanied by detailed pool plans, illustrating the location of 
mechanical equipment and also safety barriers, fences, screening, or other improvements to be 
constructed. The plans shall comply with the Standard Swimming Pool Code. 
(b) ?Required fencing. All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed with a fence or wall at least 
four feet high and so constructed as to not be readily accessible by small children. 
(c) ?Regulation of gates and doors to swimming pools. All gates or doors providing access to the 
pool area shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device installed on the pool side 
at a minimum height of three and one-half feet, except that the door of any dwelling which forms 
a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(d) ?Regulation of lighting for swimming pools. Lighting for swimming pools shall be shielded in a 
manner that will confine illumination to the area of the pool. 
(e) ?Regulation of wastewater from swimming pools. Discharge of wastewater from such swimming 
pools shall be arranged in a manner, which will avoid septic tanks and/or drain fields, 
contamination or flooding of adjacent bodies of water or the flooding of adjacent properties. 


Sec. 54-2-7.17. - Manufactured housing. 
    Manufactured housing may be permitted if the units comply with the following standards: 
• ?City's adopted building codes; 
• ?State of Florida building standards of chapters 320 and 553, F.S.; 
• ?U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and 
Safety Standards of 1974 (i.e., section 320.823, F.S.); 
• ?All applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan and land development code; 
• ?Adopted city fire codes; and 
• ?All manufactured housing shall be designed in a manner compatible with conventional housing 
including roof line, fenestration, foundation and similar features impacting compatibility. The 
finished floor elevation for manufactured housing shall be designed with site improvements 
necessary to preserve compatibility with surrounding structures. 


Sec. 54-2-7.18. - Historic and/or archaeological sites. 
(a) ?Necessary precautions. Development activities shall include precautions necessary to prevent the 
following adverse impacts to historic or archaeological sites of significance: 
(1) ?Destruction or alteration of all or part of such site; 
(2) ?Isolation from or significant alteration to its surrounding environment; 
(3) ?Introduction of visible, audible, or atmospheric elements that are out of character with the 
property or significantly alter its setting; 
(4) ?Transfer or sale of a site of significance without adequate conditions or restrictions regarding 
preservation, maintenance, or use; and 
(5) ?Other forms of neglect resulting in its deterioration. 
(b) ?Required mitigation measures. Development that impacts a historic or archaeological site or 
structure identified in the adopted comprehensive plan shall include a site plan that mitigates any 
potential adverse impacts. This site plan shall address the following impacts: 
(1) ?Destruction or alteration of all or part of such site; 
(2) ?Isolation from, or alteration of the surrounding environment; 
(3) ?Introduction of visual, audible, or atmospheric elements out of character with a property or 
change its setting; 
(4) ?Transfer or sale of the site of significance without adequate conditions or restrictions regarding 
preservation, maintenance, use or re-use; 
(5) ?Vegetation removal shall not be permitted on a historic or archaeological site unless the 
vegetation to be removed is a part of a duly authorized scientific excavation, or is a part of an 
approved development plan; and 
(6) ?Other forms of neglect resulting in resource deterioration. 


Sec. 54-2-7.19. - Affordable housing. 
    The City of Sebastian is committed to fair, open, and affordable housing and shall approve sites for 
affordable housing which are consistent with the comprehensive plan and land development plan. The 
city shall not approve affordable housing development proposals unless such proposed sites are: 
(1) ?Serviced by potable water and central wastewater systems; 
(2) ?Accessible to employment centers, including shopping centers which accommodate stores 
offering household goods and services needed on a frequent and recurring basis; 
(3) ?Located on a paved street accessible to a major street identified on the city's major 
thoroughfare plan map; 
(4) ?Accessible to public parks, recreation areas, and/or open space systems; and 
(5) ?Located on sites having adequate surface water management and solid waste collection and 
disposal. 


Sec. 54-2-7.20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-03, § 1, adopted September 10, 2003, removed the provisions of 
former § 54-2-7.20, which pertained to display of building numbers, and redesignated them as a 
new § 26-7 in the Sebastian Code of Ordinances. 


Sec. 54-2-7.21. - Home occupational licenses. 
(a) ?Authorizations. Home occupations are permitted in any dwelling unit subject to the following 
provisions. 
(b) ?Provisional criteria. Home occupations shall be permitted uses, subject to the requirements of this 
section and the respective zoning district are continuously met commencing with the date the 
application for approval of same is approved: 
(1) ?All activities pertaining to the home occupation that are to be performed at the dwelling (the 
"premises") shall be carried on entirely within the dwelling located on the premises and only by 
members of the family permanently residing therein. No person, other than the members of the 
family permanently residing in the dwelling on the premises, shall engage in any activities in 
furtherance of the home occupation at the premises. No persons shall be employed by the 
owner of the business seeking approval of the home occupation (other than as an address of 
convenience) except individuals who are members of the family permanently residing in the 
dwelling located on the premises where the home occupation is to be situate. No more than one 
commercial vehicle shall be kept or parked at the premises in connection with such home 
occupation, and any such vehicle shall not exceed 23 feet in length and nine feet in height. The 
parking or storage of commercial trailers and the storage of commercial boats shall be done in 
compliance with the provisions of section 54-2-7(c) of the land development code. Materials or 
equipment associated with the home occupation may be stored within an enclosed 
compartment of the commercial vehicle or trailer. 
(2) ?The use of the premises, including the dwelling, for the home occupation shall be clearly 
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes. The use of the premises for the 
home occupation shall not change the residential use thereof. 
(3) ?There shall be no change in the outside appearance of any structure located on the premises. 
There shall be no evidence of the conduct of the home occupation visible from the exterior of 
the dwelling or other structures located on the premises. Furthermore, there shall be no display 
that will indicate, from the exterior of the dwelling or any other structure, that the premises are 
being utilized for any purpose other than as a residence. Provided, however, that this provision 
shall not preclude the utilization of any sign or signs required to be placed on the premises 
under a provision of Florida Statutes then in effect, but any such sign shall be non-illuminated 
and shall be mounted flat against the door or wall of the principal dwelling at a position not more 
than two feet from the main entrance of the dwelling. 
(4) ?No activities pertaining to the home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building or 
garage or anywhere outside of the principal dwelling. Such prohibited activity shall include, but 
are not limited to, the storage of any materials, inventory, equipment or supplies. 
(5) ?No home occupation shall occupy more than 20% of the first floor area of the dwelling 
constituting the principal residence exclusive of the area of any open porch or attached garage 
or any other space not suited or intended for occupancy as living quarters. All storage of 
materials, supplies and inventory at the premises related to the home occupation shall be 
located within the area of such 20%, and such storage shall not comprise an area exceeding 
100 square feet. No vehicles or equipment shall be stored at the premises other than with 
respect to the one commercial vehicle described in clause (1), above. Therefore, all such 
equipment and vehicles shall be stored on real property zoned for such storage if stored within 
the city limits of the city. 
(6) ?No commodity or product of any home occupation shall be delivered from the premises to any 
person or carrier. Any commodity or product shall be removed from the premises only by a 
member of the family permanently residing in the dwelling on the premises. Only one delivery of 
materials or supplies shall be delivered to the premises by carrier during a week. 
(7) ?No traffic shall be generated by any occupation in a greater volume than would normally be 
expected to a residence in the immediate neighborhood. 
(8) ?No mechanical equipment or electrical equipment shall be employed or stored on the premises 
other than equipment usually found in a residence which is associated with a hobby or vocation 
conducted for no monetary gain or profit. All such equipment must be located within the 20% 
area described in clause (5), above. 
(9) ?No equipment or process shall be used in connection with a home occupation which creates 
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor or electrical interference detectable by the normal senses 
from any location other than on the premises. No equipment or process shall be used in 
connection with the home occupation which causes visible or audio interference in any radio or 
television receiver, telephone, organ or other similar items that are located other than on the 
premises. 
(10) ?Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this section, no home occupation, other than an 
address of convenience, shall be allowed. A home occupation shall be considered as an 
"address of convenience" if the activities thereof consist solely of receiving phone calls, making 
phone calls, receiving mail or keeping business records of the home occupation. 
(11) ?A home occupation is subject to all applicable city occupational licenses and other business 
taxes, except as specifically preempted by state or federal law. Each applicant for a home 
occupation shall submit a sworn application, on the application form provided by the city, to the 
finance director along with the application fee established, from time to time, by the resolution of 
the city council. The applicant shall submit a recent photograph of the premises which shows 
the entire front yard and all driveways and carports, with the application. 
(12) ?No home occupation shall be construed to include personal services, including, but not limited 
to, massage, cosmetology, barbering, beauty parlor or shop, tea room, food processing for sale, 
kennel, animal grooming, radio or television repair, furniture building, repair or refinishing, 
cabinet making, boat repair or building, automobile or other vehicle servicing or repair, 
rebuilding or repair for others, metal fabrication or cutting employing welding or cutting torches, 
child care facilities accommodating five or more children, a gift shop, a funeral home, a medical 
or dental laboratory, showroom or display area, or any activity similar or reasonably similar to 
any of the activities hereinbefore listed. 
(13) ?If any home occupation requires a license or permit from the State of Florida, the federal 
government, or any agency, department or bureau thereof, the applicant for a home occupation 
permit shall provide the growth management director or his designee with a current, valid copy 
of any such license or permit before the home occupation shall be conducted. Any failure of the 
applicant to maintain any such license or permit in an active and current status shall cause the 
automatic and immediate suspension of the home occupation permit granted hereunder. 
(c) ?Application and fees. Any person desiring to establish a home occupation, as authorized herein, 
shall submit an application for a home occupation permit to the growth management department. 
The application shall be on a form provided by the growth management department and shall include 
all information required for a complete application. All such applications shall also be accompanied 
by a fee, as established by the city council. Applications shall be approved, approved with conditions, 
or denied by the growth management director. 
(1) ?No home occupation shall be approved when the applicant desiring approval has been 
determined to be in violation of a provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian, 
including any provision contained in the land development code, unless approval of the home 
occupational license will result in the applicant becoming in compliance and no longer in 
violation of any provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sebastian, including the land 
development code, with respect to the premises. 
(2) ?Any home occupation permit granted pursuant to this section may be revoked by the growth 
management director upon the failure of the applicant to continuously comply with all provisions 
of this subsection and all of the provisions of the land development code applicable to 
conditional uses, generally, or to continuously comply with all conditions of any license or permit 
issued by the State of Florida or the federal government, including any agency, department or 
bureau thereof. 
(d) ?Appeal of growth management director decisions. Any applicant for the home occupation permit 
may file an appeal to the planning and zoning commission to review the action of the growth 
management director in failing to approve such application or in revoking any home occupational 
permit, which appeal shall be in writing and filed with the growth management department within ten 
days from the date of final actions of the growth management director. The growth management 
director shall place the matter of appeal on the planning and zoning commission agenda as 
expeditiously as possible. The planning and zoning commission shall thereupon set a date for a 
public hearing with regard to such appeal. After giving public notice thereof in such a manner as the 
planning and zoning commission shall prescribe, at which time all interested parties shall have the 
right to appear before the planning and zoning commission in regard thereto, the planning and 
zoning commission shall render its decision therein. The decision of the planning and zoning 
commission shall be final unless otherwise appealed by the aggrieved party to the city council, within 
30 days of the final decision of the planning and zoning commission. 
(e) ?Termination. Whenever a home occupational permit shall have been granted, it shall not be 
considered to run with the land. In the event the applicant receiving the grant of a home occupation 
permit no longer maintains his or her principal residence at the principal dwelling located on the 
premises, the home occupational permit shall automatically terminate. The applicant shall notify the 
community development department, in writing, in the event the applicant no longer maintains his or 
her residence at the principal dwelling located on the premises. 


Sec. 54-2-7.22. - Vacation rentals and registration forms. 
(1) ?Definitions: 
(a) ?Vacation rental definition: Any residential dwelling which is rented or leased more than three 
times in a calendar year to a tenant, individual, group of individuals, or party for a period of less 
than 30 days, or which is advertised or held out to the public as a dwelling which may be 
regularly rented or leased for a period of less than 30 days (F.S. § 509.013). 
(b) ?Peer-to-peer or platform entity definition: Any person, service, business, company, 
marketplace, or other entity that provides property owners, tenants and agents a platform or 
means to offer vacation rentals to occupants, whether through the internet or other means. 
(2) ?Vacation rental registration: 
(a) ?For purposes of vacation rental regulations, "bedroom" is defined as follows: any room used 
principally for sleeping purposes and meeting applicable building code requirements for a 
bedroom. 
(b) ?The owner of a vacation rental unit or the rental unit manager shall obtain a separate 
registration form required for each vacation rental unit. A registration may be transferred to a 
new owner upon submission of updated registration information and execution of, and 
assumption of, registration obligations and conditions on a form provided by the community 
development department. 
1. ?Registration shall be managed by the community development department in coordination 
with other city departments, local agencies, and state agencies. 
2. ?A vacation rental registration form, supplemental to the local business tax application, shall 
be submitted to the building department provided by the community development 
department. 
3. ?Prior to issuance of a business tax receipt, a life safety inspection of the vacation rental unit 
shall be conducted by a city building inspector for compliance with the requirements of this 
section. 
(c) ?Registration form submittal requirements are as follows: 
1. ?Rental unit owner and manager contact information (cell phone number, email address, 
mailing address). 
2. ?Documentation that the applicant has obtained the following: 
a. ?State DBPR license for vacation rental unit. 
b. ?Local business tax receipt from the City of Sebastian. 
c. ?Local tourist tax account from the clerk of the circuit court. 
3. ?Parking compliance information: number of garage and/or carport spaces, maximum 
number of bedrooms, maximum number of automobiles allowed and location of spaces on 
improved or stabilized driveway. 
4. ?Verification that carbon monoxide alarms, if required by code, and state license fire 
protection items have been provided in the vacation rental unit: smoke alarms, emergency 
lighting, and fire extinguisher. 
5. ?Unit interior under air information: square footage and number of bedrooms. 
6. ?Acknowledgment form executed and dated by the rental unit owner and/or manager. The 
acknowledgment form shall provide information regarding the following city requirements 
for vacation rentals. 
a. ?Special parking regulations. 
b. ?Noise regulations: No excessive noise that would cause annoyance to any reasonable 
person of normal sensitivity from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
c. ?Fire safety requirements and maximum sleeping occupancy limitations. 
d. ?Fines and citation penalties for violations. 
7. ?Acknowledgment that the following information will be posted or displayed inside the 
vacation rental unit prior to inspection of the unit by the city staff and shall thereafter be 
continuously posted or displayed inside the vacation rental unit: 
a. ?Property address. 
b. ?Manager contact information. 
c. ?Maximum number of parked automobiles and boats, and approved parking locations. 
d. ?Trash and recycling pick-up days and protocol for placing and retrieving waste 
management containers. 
e. ?Noise regulations: No excessive noise that would cause annoyance to any reasonable 
person of normal sensitivity from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
f. ?Location of smoke alarms, emergency lighting, and fire extinguisher. 
g. ?Emergency information. 
h. ?Maximum sleeping occupancy (number of persons). 
8. ?Acknowledgement that the applicant has contacted any applicable property owners 
association or homeowners/condo association and is aware of private restrictions, if any, 
that may affect operation of a vacation rental at the subject residence. 
(3) ?Vacation rental local regulations: 
(a) ?To the extent that there is no conflict with these vacation rental regulations, all city regulations 
applicable to a residential unit that is not operated or used as a vacation rental unit shall also 
apply to a vacation rental unit. 
(b) ?Parking and storage of boats and recreational vehicles shall conform to the requirements of 
zoning code section 54-2-7.13. 
(c) ?Vacation rental special parking regulations: 
1. ?For a vacation rental the number of automobiles that may be parked outside of a carport or 
garage shall be limited to one automobile per bedroom, plus one, not to exceed a total of 
five automobiles parked outside the carport or garage. Automobiles parked outside of a 
carport or garage shall be parked within a designated and improved or stabilized driveway 
that has been permitted and not within any required yard area. 
2. ?For all vacation rentals, all automobiles except for service and delivery vehicles shall be 
parked on-site and shall not be parked within a road right-of-way except within a 
designated and improved or stabilized driveway that has been permitted. 
3. ?Automobiles parked with a designated and improved or stabilized driveway shall not 
obstruct any sidewalks or pedestrian walkways. 
(d) ?The overnight maximum sleeping occupancy of a vacation rental unit shall not exceed two 
persons per bedroom plus two additional persons. Notwithstanding the above, a maximum (cap) 
of ten persons shall apply to each unit whether the unit is served by public sewer service or by 
an on-site sewage treatment and disposal system (septic/drain field system). The unit 
occupancy limit shall be stated on the local license. 
(e) ?Fire protection items required for the state vacation rental license shall be provided in the 
vacation rental unit. In addition, a carbon monoxide (CO) alarm, when required under Section 
R315, Carbon Monoxide Alarms of the Florida Building Code-Residential, shall be provided. 
(f) ?Changes in the vacation rental manager and/or changes in the manager contact information 
shall be provided to the building department within ten days of the change. 
(g) ?The local business tax receipt number, the occupancy limit, the maximum number of vehicles 
allowed to be parked on site outside any garage or carport, and the noise regulations statement 
contained in section (c)6.b. of these regulations, shall appear or be stated in any vacation rental 
unit advertisement or any rental offering associated with a vacation rental unit. 
(h) ?Each year, the applicant shall submit a copy of a valid current state license to the building 
department upon renewal of their business tax receipt. 
(4) ?Interim operation of vacation rental unit: Because of the length of time it may take to comply with all 
of the new requirements on this section, all short term vacation rental owners may lawfully operate 
up to three months from notification (i.e. local news ad/article and city website) but shall have until 
December 31, 2018 to obtain a local business tax receipt from the city and come into full compliance 
with the new standards and requirements imposed by this section. All short term vacation rental 
owners who do not comply with this ordinance within the aforementioned three months will receive a 
citation in accordance with section 54-1-2.2 of the City of Sebastian Code. Once cited, short term 
vacation rental property owners will have 30 days to come into compliance with the regulations or 
incur a fine set by the special magistrate. 
(5) ?Claim of contract impairment: It is not the intent of this ordinance to impair any existing contracts, 
leases, or reservations that are evidenced by writing. An owner who asserts the enacted ordinance 
amendment impairs a short term vacation rental contract in effect on or before September 12, 2018 
shall submit the contract, lease or reservation, evidenced in writing, to the community development 
director for review and consideration. An owner shall have until December 31, 2018 to submit the 
claim of impairment to the community development director for determination. Appeal of the decision 
of the community development director shall follow the appeal procedure set forth in Land 
Development Code section 54-1-2.5(d). 
(Ord. No. O-18-08, § 1, 9-12-2018) 


ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMITIES AND NONCOMPLIANCES 


Sec. 54-2-8.1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this code the terms "nonconforming use" and "noncomplying building or structure" 
are defined as follows: 
(a) ?Nonconforming use. A use of a building or structure or a tract of land which does not, on the 
effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto, conform to any one of the current 
permitted uses of the zoning district in which it is located, but which was legally established in 
accordance with the zoning in effect at the time of its inception, or which use pre-dates all 
zoning codes and which use has not changed or been abandoned during its existence. Herein 
such nonconforming use may be referred to as a nonconformity. 
(b) ?Noncomplying building or structure. Any building or other structure, for which the use is lawful 
(permitted or nonconforming), but the building or other structure does not comply with all 
applicable provisions of this code, including, but not limited to size and dimension regulations, 
off-street parking requirements, landscape requirements, performance standards, or height 
requirements, either on the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of any subsequent 
amendment. Herein such noncomplying building or structure may be referred to as a 
noncompliance. 


Sec. 54-2-8.2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a) ?Purpose. The purpose of this article is to allow for, while not encouraging, the continuation of those 
lots, structures, uses, characteristics of use, or combinations thereof, which were lawful before the 
passage of this code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this 
code or future amendments thereto. 
    This article is designed to provide reasonable and equitable standards and guidelines for the control 
and management of nonconforming uses and noncomplying buildings and structures. The regulations are 
especially important in regulating changes in the use, building or structure. Characteristics regulated 
include: kind of quality, volume or intensity, location, ownership or tenancy, accessory or incidental uses 
thereto, extension, enlargement, replacement, or any other change in characteristics of uses, buildings, or 
structures. 
(b) ?Intent. It is the intent of this article to allow these nonconformities and noncompliances to continue 
until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. Such nonconformities and 
noncompliances are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts 
involved. It is further the intent of this article that nonconformities and noncompliances shall not be 
enlarged upon, expanded or extended nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses 
prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 


Sec. 54-2-8.3. - Continuance of lawful nonconformities or noncompliances. 
(a) ?Continuance of nonconformities. A nonconforming use lawfully existing at the time of the enactment 
of this ordinance may be continued subject to the provisions of this code. 
(b) ?Continuance of noncompliances. The lawful use of a noncomplying building or structure may be 
continued subject to provisions of this code. 
(c) ?Rules for interpretation. Nothing in this code shall be interpreted as authorization for, or approval of, 
continuation of any illegal use of a building, structure, premises or land, in violation of any ordinance. 
The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land, building or structure shall not be sufficient 
to establish the existence of a nonconforming use. Any building or structure for which a lawful 
building permit was issued prior to the enactment of this code, and construction of which is in 
conformity with approved site plans, if applicable, and building plans, shall not be affected by this 
code if the planned building or structure is built in full compliance with this code as it existed at the 
time of the issuance of the building permit. However, if such building or structure does not conform to 
the provisions of this code which cause such planned building, structure or use to be nonconforming 
or noncomplying, then it shall be nonconforming or noncomplying, or both, as the case may be, by 
applying this code to the building, structure or use. 


Sec. 54-2-8.4. - Noncomplying lots of record. 
    Where a lot has an area and/or frontage less than the required minimum for the district in which it is 
located and was a lawful lot of record on the date such lot was zoned and rezoned to its current district 
classification, said lot may be used for any use permitted in the district in which it is located so long as the 
remaining provisions are complied with; provided, however, that in any residential district, the only use 
permitted on such nonconforming lot shall be one single-family dwelling. In all cases, any other zoning 
variances needed must be obtained from the board of adjustment, which may grant only the minimum 
variance necessary to the reasonable utilization of such lot. Such nonconforming lot must be in separate 
ownership and shall not share continuous frontage with other building sites in the same ownership. 
    If two or more contiguous lots under common ownership have continuous frontage and are legal lots 
of record at the time of passage or amendment of this article and if one or more of the lots do not meet 
the requirements for lot width and area as established by this article, no portion of said parcel shall be 
used which does not meet building site width and area requirements established by the land development 
code without bringing the lot(s) into compliance with the requirements of the land development code. No 
division of any lot or parcel shall be made which leaves any lot, parcel, or remnant with width or area 
below the requirements stated in the land development regulations. 


Sec. 54-2-8.5. - Increase in nonconformities prohibited. 
    A nonconformity shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased in intensity, and such 
extension, expansion, enlargement, or increase shall include without being limited to: 
(a) ?Extension of a nonconforming use to any other building or other structure or the extension of a 
nonconforming use to any land area other than the specific land area that was actually and 
directly occupied by such use on the effective date of this code (or on the effective date of a 
subsequent amendment thereto that causes such use to become nonconforming). 
(b) ?Extension of a nonconforming use within a building or other structure to any portion of floor 
area on the same or another floor that was not actually and directly occupied by such use on 
the effective date of this code (or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment thereto that 
causes such use to become nonconforming). Notwithstanding, an existing nonconforming use 
may be extended within its existing structure if the extension does not require additional new 
floor area and such extension does not require additional parking spaces and the existing 
nonconforming use and the proposed extension comply with size and dimension regulations 
and other provisions of this code. Landscaping requirements shall be satisfied to the extent that 
sufficient area is available on-site. 
(c) ?Operation of a nonconforming use in such manner as to conflict with any performance 
standards established for the district in which the use is located. 
(d) ?Nothing contained in this article shall in any way prohibit a nonconforming use from acquiring 
additional off-street parking area, subject to applicable landscape requirements. 
(e) ?No additions which increase the area of a building or structure shall be made if the building or 
structure is occupied, in whole or in part, by a nonconforming use. 
(f) ?No structural alterations shall be made to any building or structure occupied by a 
nonconforming use except as permitted by this section. 


Sec. 54-2-8.6. - Change in nonconforming uses without structural alteration. 
    If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed 
to another nonconforming use of a similar or higher (more restrictive) classification under the following 
conditions: 
    The burden of proof shall be the responsibility of the applicant in demonstrating the following: 
(a) ?The change in use shall not intensify or enlarge the basic use of the building or premises by 
increasing the need for parking facilities; by increasing vehicular or pedestrian traffic; by 
creating more noise, vibration, fire hazard, smoke, dust or fumes, by increasing hours of 
operation or number of employees; by increasing ground coverage or adversely impacting 
drainage; or otherwise result in a more intensive use of the building or premises; or change the 
basic character of the building or premises to more nearly conform to the character of the 
zoning of the district in which the building or structure is located. 
(b) ?When a nonconforming use of all or any part of a building, structure or premises is changed to 
another nonconforming use of a more restricted character, the new use may not thereafter be 
changed to any less restricted use. 
(c) ?When a nonconforming use of all or any part of a building, structure or premises has been 
changed to a conforming use, the new conforming use shall not thereafter be changed to any 
nonconforming use. 
(d) ?No structural alterations shall be made to any building or structure occupied by a 
nonconforming use except as permitted in this code. 
(e) ?The parking and landscape provisions of subsection 54-2-8.7(f) shall be met. 


Sec. 54-2-8.7. - Structural alterations to nonconformities or noncompliances. 
    Where a lawful structure or use exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code, 
and it could not be built or used under the terms of this code by reason of restrictions on area, lot 
coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or other site development standards or requirements 
concerning the structure or use, it may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the 
following provisions: 
(a) ?Alteration, extension, enlargement or expansion of nonconforming use or noncomplying 
building or structure. No such alteration, extension, enlargement or expansion of a 
nonconforming use or noncomplying building or structure shall be permitted in a way which 
increases its nonconformance or noncompliance with present site development and use 
standards of the zoning district in which it is located, but any such structure or use or portion 
thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformance or noncompliance with present site 
development and use standards of the zoning district in which it is located. Nothing in this 
subsection shall prohibit the building official from ordering the compliance with all other 
provisions of this code and applicable building construction and safety related codes. 
(b) ?Replacement, restoration and reconstruction of nonconforming use or noncomplying building or 
structure. In the event that any existing nonconforming structure or use, as provided for in this 
section, is destroyed by any means, including fire, flood, wind, explosion, act of God or act of a 
public enemy, such structure or use shall be permitted to be replaced, restored, or 
reconstructed according to the site development in effect at the time of its original construction 
except that replacement, restoration and reconstruction can only occur in compliance with those 
building, plumbing, electrical, gas, fire and other construction and safety related regulations of 
the city in effect at the time of application for a permit to allow replacement, restoration or 
reconstruction. Reasonable effort shall be undertaken to remedy any prior nonconformity or 
noncompliance. However, in no event shall the destroyed nonconforming structure or use be 
replaced to a degree or level which increases the prior existing nonconformity or 
noncompliance. 
(c) ?Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming use or noncomplying building or structure. Routine 
repairs and maintenance of nonconforming structures or uses on fixtures, wiring or plumbing or 
on the repair or replacement of walls shall be permitted. 
(d) ?Change in location of nonconforming use or noncomplying building or structure. Should any 
nonconforming structure or use be moved for any reason to any distance whatever from its 
original permitted location, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in 
which it is located after it is moved. 
(e) ?Accessory or incidental structures or uses. Structures or uses normally accessory to or 
incidental to a permitted structure or permitted use in the zoning district in which the 
nonconforming use or noncomplying building or structure is located may be permitted as 
accessory structures to the nonconforming or noncomplying building or structure so long as a 
nonconformance or noncomplying building or structure is not intensified. 
(f) ?Treatment of drainage, off-street parking and landscape requirements. All changes in 
nonconformities or noncompliances shall satisfy the appropriate drainage, parking and 
landscape provisions cited below and shall also comply with the drainage, off-street parking and 
landscape regulations of this code: 
(1) ?If drainage, parking and landscaping, or any combination thereof are deficient at the time 
of the proposed change under the provisions of this code and the change does not require 
any additional drainage, parking or landscaping which would increase the existing 
deficiency, the change is permitted only if the deficiencies are: 
a. ?Corrected to the extent sufficient land is available on the site. If sufficient land was not 
available on the site on the effective date of this code to allow correction of all of the 
drainage, parking and/or landscaping deficiencies and sufficient land is not then (at 
the time of the proposed change) available, priority for correcting the landscaping and 
parking deficiencies shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the planning and 
growth management department. 
(2) ?If the drainage facilities and/or landscaping and/or parking are deficient at the time of the 
proposed change under the provisions of this code and the proposed change requires 
drainage facilities or parking spaces in addition to the existing deficiency, the change is 
prohibited unless the net additional drainage facilities and/or parking area and its attendant 
landscaping are provided and any deficiencies are corrected pursuant to the criteria of 54-
2-8.7(f)(1) above. 


Sec. 54-2-8.8. - Abandonment of a nonconformity or noncompliance. 
    If a nonconformity is removed, abandoned, or ceases, for a continuous period of not less than 180 
days, every future use of the structure and/or premises shall be in conformity with the use provisions of 
the land development regulations. All material and equipment associated with the abandoned 
nonconformity shall be completely removed from the premises by its owner within one-year after the 
expiration of the 180-day period. If a noncomplying building or structure ceases to be used in a lawful 
manner (permitted or nonconforming) for a continuoius period of 180 days, further use will not be 
permitted until deficiencies regarding drainage, off-street parking ad landscaping requirements are 
corrected pursuant to section 54-2-8.7(f). 
    Where the cessation of the use is involuntary, the nonconforming use shall not be declared 
abandoned after the 180-day period. However, if the use is discontinued voluntarily or involuntarily for a 
period of one year or more, every future use of the premises shall be in conformance with the use 
provisions of this chapter and all material and equipment associated with the discontinued nonconforming 
use shall be completely removed from the premises by the owner within 60 days. 
    Voluntary abandonment shall be indicated by one or more of the following: 
(1) ?Allowing licenses to lapse; 
(2) ?Removing utility meters; 
(3) ?Not maintaining structure in a habitable condition; 
(4) ?Not making unit available for occupation (i.e., advertising or marketing through a realtor or 
other agent); and/or 
(5) ?Failure to perform actions pursuant to the terms of an active building permit. 


Chapter III - PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 


ARTICLE IX. - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT 


Sec. 54-3-9.1. - Purpose and intent. 
    Concurrency is a finding that public facilities and services necessary to support a proposed 
development are available, or will be made available, concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
This article is intended to provide a systematic process for the review and evaluation of all proposed 
development for its impact on concurrency facilities and services, as required by the Local Government 
Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulations Act, Chapter 163, Part II, F.S., and Rule 
9J-5.0055, Florida Administrative Code. 
    Facilities in Sebastian that are subject to these regulations include: 
Potable Water 
Sanitary Sewer 
Roads 
Recreation 
Solid Waste 
Drainage 
 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure that development orders and permits are conditioned on the 
availability of concurrency facilities and services which meet adopted level of service requirements 
identified in this article. This article is also intended to describe the requirements and procedures for 
determining consistency of proposed development with the City of Sebastian's Comprehensive Plan. 


Sec. 54-3-9.2. - Consistency with city's comprehensive plan. 
    All development applications shall demonstrate compliance with the City of Sebastian 
Comprehensive Plan as well as with all applicable provisions of the city land development regulations. 
Further, development applications shall demonstrate that specified concurrency facilities shall be 
available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impact of the development of those facilities. 


Sec. 54-3-9.3. - Applicability and exemptions. 
    All applications for final development orders shall be subject to concurrency review unless 
specifically exempted below. However, in no case shall a development order be issued for a minimum 
threshold project which would impact a concurrency facility for which a moratorium or deferral on 
development has been placed. 
(a) ?Projects below the minimum threshold. The following development shall be exempt from 
concurrency review: 
(1) ?Residential projects that entail structural alterations, including room additions to single-
family structures—which do not change the land use; 
(2) ?Construction of residential or nonresidential accessory buildings and structures which do 
not create additional public facility demand. 
(3) ?Actions administered through development orders and other developments which do not 
increase demand on concurrency facilities, such as grading or land excavation or structural 
alterations which do not include a change of use and satisfy provisions of (1) and (2) 
above. 
(b) ?Vested projects. Projects that have valid final development orders or building permits prior to 
the effective date of this code, shall be considered to be vested and therefore exempt from 
concurrency management. This shall include the following: 
(1) ?Any project for which a valid building permit has been issued and has not expired; and 
(2) ?All vacant lots in single-family detached, single-family attached and two-family 
subdivisions which were lawfully platted in accordance with the city land development 
regulations and recorded prior to the effective date of this article; and 
(3) ?Approved developments of regional impact with a development order that has not expired; 
and 
(4) ?Any project that has obtained a determination of vested rights upon appeal to city council. 
(c) ?Redevelopment projects. Proposed redevelopment shall be credited for the existing demand on 
available capacity. If a redevelopment project generates demand in excess of the existing 
demand that it is replacing, a concurrency review shall be required; however, the concurrency 
review shall only address the amount by which the proposed demand generated exceeds the 
demand of existing development. The development plan for redevelopment must be submitted 
no more than one year after the prior use is discontinued in order to qualify for a concurrency 
credit. If the proposed redevelopment generates equal or less demand than the existing project, 
the applicant shall be given a concurrency credit enabling the applicant to reserve the unused 
capacity. Credit may only be used on development containing the parcel from which it originated 
or on a parcel contiguous to and under common ownership with the original parcel. The 
concurrency credit will expire within five years of the change or discontinuance of the use. The 
applicant's submission of an application for a demolition permit shall also initiate a concurrency 
review for the express purpose of issuing credits for redevelopment. 
(d) ?Public facilities. Public facilities necessary to ensure the protection of the health, safety and 
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Sebastian, including public schools (pre-
kindergarten through 12th grade), shall be exempt from concurrency review. This shall include 
all public facility construction projects included in the city's capital improvements program 
required to meet any adopted level of service standard. 


Sec. 54-3-9.4. - Criteria for concurrency and final development orders. 
    A final development order shall not be granted for a proposed development unless the city finds that 
adequate capacity for concurrency facilities exists at or above adopted level of service in order to 
accommodate the impacts of the proposed development, or that improvements necessary to bring 
concurrency facilities up to their adopted level of service will be in place concurrent with the impacts of 
the development. 
(a) ?Sanitary sewer, potable water, solid waste, and drainage. For sanitary sewer, potable water, 
solid waste, and drainage facilities, the city shall find that the following criteria have been met in 
order for a proposed development to be found in compliance with concurrency management 
requirements: 
(1) ?A final development order is issued subject to the condition that, at the time of the 
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent, the necessary facilities 
and services are in place and available to serve the new development; or 
(2) ?At the time the final development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are 
guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement, pursuant to section 163.3220, F.S., 
or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to chapter 380, F.S., to be in place 
and available to serve new development at the time of the issuance of a certificate of 
occupancy. 
(b) ?Parks and recreations. For parks and recreation facilities, at a minimum, the city shall find that 
the following criteria have been met in order for a proposed development to be found in 
compliance with concurrency management requirements: 
(1) ?At the time the final development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are 
in place or under actual construction; or 
(2) ?A final development order is issued subject to the condition that, at the time of the 
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the acreage for the necessary facilities and services 
to serve the new development is dedicated or acquired by the city, or funds in the amount 
of the developer's fair share are committed; and 
a. ?A final development order is issued subject to the conditions that the necessary 
facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in 
place or under actual construction not more than one year after issuance of a 
certificate of occupancy as provided in the city's adopted five-year capital 
improvements program; or 
b. ?At the time the final development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services 
are the subject of a binding executed agreement which requires the necessary 
facilities and services to serve the new development to be in place or under actual 
construction not more than one year after issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
c. ?At the time the final development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services 
are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement, pursuant to section 
163.3220, F.S., or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to chapter 
380, F.S., to be in place or under actual construction not more than one year after 
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c) ?Transportation facilities. For transportation facilities, the city shall find that the following criteria 
have been met in order for a proposed development to be found in compliance with concurrency 
management requirements: 
(1) ?At the time the final development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are 
in place or under actual construction; or 
(2) ?A final development order is issued subject to the conditions that the necessary facilities 
and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under 
actual construction not more than three years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy 
as provided in the city's adopted five year capital improvements program. The capital 
improvement program may recognize and include transportation projects included in the 
first three years of the adopted Florida Department of Transportation Five-Year Work 
Program. The capital improvements element must include the following policies: 
a. ?The estimated date of commencement of actual construction and the estimated date 
of project completion. 
b. ?A provision that a plan amendment is required to eliminate, defer, or delay 
construction of any road or mass transit facility or service which is needed to maintain 
the adopted level of service standard and which is listed in the five year capital 
improvements program; 
(3) ?At the time the final development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are 
the subject of a binding executed agreement which requires the necessary facilities and 
services to serve the new development to be in place or under actual construction not 
more than three years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy; or 
(4) ?At the time the final development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services are 
guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement, pursuant to section 163.3220 F.S., 
or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to chapter 380, F.S., to be in place 
or under actual construction not more than three years after issuance of a certificate of 
occupancy. 


Sec. 54-3-9.5. - Concurrency administration. 
    The planning and growth management director shall be responsible for concurrency reviews as 
required by this article. The planning and growth management director in conjunction with other city staff 
shall determine whether adequate capacities for concurrency facilities are available to satisfy the 
demands of each proposed development. 
(a) ?Application for concurrency review. Concurrency review shall be initiated upon submission and 
acceptance of an application for a site plan approval, preliminary subdivision plat, or a building 
permit, whichever first occurs. At the request of the applicant and pursuant to payment of a 
concurrency review fee as may be established by resolution of the city council, the planning and 
growth management director in concert with the staff shall render concurrency findings. 
(b) ?Project impact assessment. The planning and growth management department shall use the 
best available information to establish and evaluate existing capacities for concurrency facilities. 
The applicant shall be responsible for supplying the anticipated land uses, densities and/or 
intensities, of a proposed development and the anticipated date of completion of proposed 
development. The planning and growth management department shall assess the anticipated 
impacts of the proposed development on concurrency facilities. 
(c) ?Project phasing/timing of improvements. Concurrency facilities associated with a phased 
development may also be phased. However, all concurrency facilities necessary to 
accommodate the impacts of each phase must be available or a schedule for the acquired 
improvements must be approved prior to the issuance of a final development order. The 
schedule of facility improvements shall ensure that all facility improvements necessary to 
accommodate the impacts of the development (or portion thereof) for which a certificate of 
occupancy has been applied, shall be in place prior to the issuance of the certificate. Under no 
circumstances shall the final certificate of occupancy be issued for a project unless all required 
facility improvements required by the development order or development agreement have been 
completed. 
(d) ?Development agreements. If the minimum requirements for concurrency cannot be met, 
concurrency may be achieved by guaranteeing necessary facility improvements in an 
enforceable development agreement. Said development agreement may include guarantees to 
construct required facility improvements or to provide funds equivalent to the cost of providing 
such facility improvements. 
(e) ?Concurrency review determination. Upon the conclusion of the concurrency review, the 
planning and growth management director shall prepare a written determination concerning the 
proposed development. This determination shall address, but is not limited to: 
(1) ?The anticipated public facility impacts of the proposed development; 
(2) ?The ability of existing facilities to accommodate the proposed development at the adopted 
level of service standards; 
(3) ?Any existing facility deficiencies that will need to be corrected prior to the completion of the 
proposed development; 
(4) ?The facility improvements or additions necessary to accommodate the impact of the 
proposed development at the adopted level of service standards and the entities 
responsible for the design and installation of all required facility improvements or additions; 
and 
(5) ?The date such facility improvements or additions will need to be completed to be 
concurrent with the impacts on such facilities created by the proposed development. 
(f) ?Concurrency compliance. In the event that the city's concurrency review determines that the 
application is supported by sufficient concurrency facility capacity, the planning and growth 
management department shall issue a concurrency certificate. The concurrency certificate shall 
identify the anticipated impacts of the proposed development, existing facility capacity, and 
certification from the facility providers that capacity exists. The duration of the concurrency 
certificate shall be based on the time frame of the site plan, preliminary subdivision plat, or 
building permit. 
(g) ?Concurrency denials. In the event that the city's concurrency review reveals that the proposed 
development would generate public facility impacts beyond that which can be absorbed by 
available capacity, the city shall determine whether there is a financial or other legally binding 
commitment to ensure that public facilities necessary to correct the anticipated deficiency will be 
in place concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development. If the city and/or a developer 
are unable to provide such assurances, the project shall be denied. 
(h) ?Concurrency resolution. If the planning and growth management department determines that 
an application for concurrency review cannot be supported by sufficient concurrency facility 
capacity, the applicant may file an application for concurrency resolution and pay the requisite 
filing fee as shall be established by resolution of the city council. The purpose for the 
concurrency resolution process shall be to enable an applicant to negotiate a development 
agreement that identifies terms for resolving the capacity deficiency. The development 
agreement shall be consistent with section 163.3220, F.S., and applicable city ordinances. 
If the applicant successfully resolves capacity deficiencies, the applicant may reserve capacity 
pursuant to the terms of the development agreement. If the issues cannot be resolved, the 
application shall be deemed to be denied and, at any time, the applicant may resubmit the 
concurrency review application to the planning and growth management department. 


Sec. 54-3-9.6. - Capacity reservation. 
(a) ?Reservation of capacity. Following receipt of an approved final development order, the capacity 
demand of the approved development shall be considered to be reserved. The time frame of the 
concurrency reservation shall be based on the time frame of the building permit or development 
agreement. If the time frame of the final development order and/or the development agreement 
lapses, the available capacity assigned to the development order shall be returned to the available 
capacity pool. 
(b) ?First-come-first-served. Capacity shall be reserved on a first-come-first-served basis. Such 
reservation shall be valid only for the specific final development order and for the specified land 
uses, densities, intensities, construction and improvement schedules contained in the approved final 
development order. Reservation of capacity runs with the land and is transferable to a successor in 
ownership. Reservation of capacity for concurrency shall expire if the underlying final development 
order or development agreement expires or is revoked. The final development order shall state the 
terms of the concurrency reservation, including the allocation of available capacity, the time frame for 
the allocation, and other appropriate legal assurances. 
(c) ?Project deferrals/development moratoriums. If at any time the city's inventory of the capacity of 
concurrency facilities indicates that concurrency facilities have dropped below its adopted level of 
service standard, the city shall cease to issue development orders for projects which would impact 
the deficient facilities or the area impacted by the deficient concurrency facilities, as defined within 
this ordinance. Such a suspension or moratorium on the issuance of development orders shall 
continue until such time as the adopted level of service standard is re-established, the 
comprehensive plan is amended to reflect an acceptable level of service standard for the facilities in 
question, or alternative arrangements are made to ensure capacity will be available, consistent with 
section 54-3-9.5(e)(1) through (5). 


Sec. 54-3-9.7. - Adopted level of service standards (LOS). 
    Level of service standards for those public facilities for which concurrency is required are set forth 
below: 
Concurrency 
Facility 
City of Sebastian Adopted Level of Service Standard 
Sanitary 
Sewer 
250 gallons per day per equivalent residential unit 
Potable Water 
250 gallons per day per equivalent residential unit 
Drainage 
Facilities 
Water Quality: Post development runoff shall not exceed the pre-development runoff 
rate for a 25-year, 24-hour storm event. 

Stormwater treatment and disposal facilities shall be designed to meet the design and 
performance standards established in chapter 17-25, FAC, with treatment of the runoff 
from the first one inch of rainfall on-site to meet the water quality standards required 
by chapter 17-302, FAC. 
 
    Recreation: 
Park  
Classification 
Acreage of Recreation  
Areas/Population 
Neighborhood Park 
2.5 per 1,000 
Community Park 
2.5 per 1,000 
 
    Solid Waste: 7.52 pounds per day per capita 
    Roads: 
ROADWAY FACILITY 
MINIMUM LOS  
STANDARD 
PEAK  
HOUR* 
State Arterials 
?U.S. Highway 1 
C 
County Arterials 
?CR 512 (Fellsmere Highway) 
D 
?CR 505 (Roseland Road) 
D 
County Collectors 
?Indian River Drive 
D 
?Schumman Drive 
D 
City Collectors 
?Barber Street (Wimbrow Drive to Schumann Drive) 
D 
?Fleming Street (Main Street to CR 512) 
D 
?Easy Street (Main Street to Schumann Drive) 
D 
?Vocelle Avenue (CR 505 to Fleming) 
D 
?Main Street (US 1 to Wimbrow Drive) 
D 
?Laconia Street (CR 512 to South City Limit) 
D 
Significant Local Streets Shown on the Major Thoroughfare Plan 
?Barber Street Extension (Schumann Dr to US 1)—City 
D 
?Englar Avenue (Barber St to Schumann Dr)—City 
D 
?Wimbrow Drive (Main Street to East CR 512)—City 
D 
Louisiana Avenue (Main Street to CR 512)—City 
D 
Local 
?All roads not classified as arterials, collectors, or significant local streets shown on the 
Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
D 
 
*The peak hours shall be the 30th highest hour established by FDOT. 
    Prior to issuing a development order the city shall review all proposed development to ensure 
consistency with adopted LOS standards. No development shall be approved that is projected to 
decrease the existing LOS below the adopted standard, unless those are mitigated by the developer. 


Sec. 54-3-9.8. - Methodology for determining demands on concurrency facilities. 
(a) ?Roads. In determining demand for available capacity for roads, the following criteria shall be used: 
(1) ?Residential development. For proposed residential development (except within planned 
developments), the following trip generation rates shall be used to calculate the impact of the 
proposed development: 
Land Use Type 
Trips Per Day Per Unit 
Single-family 
8 
Multiple-family 
10 
 
(2) ?Nonresidential development and mixed-use planned redevelopment and development (PRD). 
For all other development categories allowed within the future land use element, the impacts of 
development shall be measured by utilizing the average peak trip generation rate associated 
with the land use designation in which the proposed development shall occur, using the most 
recent published edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers' Trip Generation Manual. Internal 
capture rates may be considered in determining traffic volumes for mixed use developments; 
however, the applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating any internal capture rates of the 
total nonresidential trips. 
(3) ?Other methods and procedures. If the preliminary level of service information indicates a 
deficiency in capacity based on adopted level of service standards (reference section 54-3-9.7 
for adopted level of service standards for roads), the developer may at his option, prepare a 
more detailed alternative Highway Capacity Analysis as described in the Highway Capacity 
Manual (Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, 
1985); or conduct a travel time and delay study following professional standards and 
procedures contained in the Florida Department of Transportation, Traffic Engineering Office in 
its Manual for Uniform Traffic Studies. 
If the alternative methodology, after review and acceptance by the planning and growth 
management director, indicates no deficiency in the capacity based on the adopted level of 
service standard, notwithstanding that the comprehensive plan indicates a deficiency in capacity 
based on the adopted level of service standard, the results of the alternative methodology will 
be used. However, the city shall, at its discretion, reserve the option to have the methodology 
reviewed by a professional transportation engineer or transportation planner prior to accepting 
the methodology. The cost for such review shall be borne by the applicant. 
a. ?Required traffic analysis. For all new developments which are required to follow the site 
plan review process, the applicant/developer shall be required to submit a traffic analysis 
which identifies the development's impact on the city's transportation system. The planning 
and growth management director may also require the submission of a traffic analysis for 
developments if the site location, anticipated total trip generation, circulation patterns or 
other such factors warrant a more extensive review of traffic impacts. 
b. ?Traffic analysis methodology. The impact area for the traffic analysis shall include adjacent 
and connected roadway segments as determined by the planning and growth management 
director. The applicant may apply alternative trip allocations together with a statement of 
trip allocation methodology consistent with professional standards established in one or 
more of the following documents: 
• ?Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, Transportation Research Board, 
National Research Council, 1985. 
• ?Florida Highway System Plan, "Traffic Analysis Procedures," Florida Department of 
Transportation, Bureau of Multi-Modal Systems Planning, 1987. 
• ?Florida Highway System Plan, "Level of Service Standards and Guidelines Manual," 
Florida Department of Transportation. 
• ?Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers (latest edition). 
• ?Transportation and Land Development, Stover, Virgil G., Institute of Transportation 
Engineers, 1988. 
c. ?Traffic analysis requirements. The traffic analysis shall include the following: 
1. ?Total projected average weekday trips for the proposed development. 
• ?Pass-by capture rate (commercial land uses only); 
• ?Internal capture rate (planned development only); 
• ?Peak external trips based on ITE Trip Generation Manual, 5th (or most recent) 
Edition; and 
• ?Peak hour directional projected vehicle trips on all segments of the arterial and 
collector street system, which are adjacent to the development project or as 
determined necessary by the planner. 
2. ?Design capacity of the accessed road(s). 
3. ?Analysis of traffic distribution on the road network including all links impacted by more 
than ten percent of projected traffic. The trip distribution shall be consistent with the 
"presets" contained in the approved trip generation model. The planning and growth 
management director shall determine the approved trip generation model. 
4. ?Necessary operational improvements to the city, county, or state maintained 
transportation system in order to maintain the adopted level of service for the 
roadway. 
5. ?Other related information as required by the city. 
6. ?Justification, including appropriate references, for the use of any trip generation rates, 
adjustment factors or traffic assignment methods not previously approved by the city. 
7. ?The latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation 
manual shall be used to calculate these estimates. Adjustments to these estimates 
may be made, based on special trip generation information supplied by the applicant. 
(b) ?Other facilities. The level of service standards for all concurrency facilities are listed in section 54-3-
9.7. The applicant shall provide the planning and growth management director with the information 
required to apply the adopted level of service standard as cited below. The demand on concurrency 
facilities generated by the applicant's development shall be determined as cited below. 
(1) ?Solid waste. The demand for solid waste collection and disposal capacity shall be determined 
by multiplying the total number of persons served times 7.52 pounds. 
(2) ?Potable water. The demand for potable water capacity shall be determined by multiplying the 
total number of equivalent residential units served times 250 gallons. 
(3) ?Sanitary sewer. The demand for sanitary sewer capacity shall be determined by multiplying the 
total number of equivalent residential units served times 250 gallons. 
(4) ?Drainage. The applicant shall provide evidence demonstrating that the proposed project shall 
meet the LOS established in section 54-3-9.7 for drainage facilities. 
(5) ?Recreation area. The demand for recreation area shall be determined by multiplying the city's 
recreation area level of service standard (2.5 acres per 1,000 population or .0025 acre 
multiplied by each person served by the development). 


Sec. 54-3-9.9. - Determination of available capacity. 
    For purposes of these regulations, the available capacity of a facility shall be determined by adding 
the cumulative total supply for each public facility component as cited in Step 1 and subtracting 
cumulative total demand for each infrastructure component as cited in Step 2. 
(a) ?Step 1: Add the indicators of available facility capacity: 
(1) ?Capacity of existing facility. The total capacity of existing facilities operating at the required 
level of service; and 
(2) ?Capacity of committed potable water, sewer, solid waste and drainage. The total capacity 
of committed new facilities, if any, that will become available on or before the date a 
certificate of occupancy is issued for the development. The capacity of concurrency 
facilities may be counted and deemed concurrent only if the following standards are met: 
a. ?For potable water, sewer, solid waste and drainage: The standards identified in article 
XII shall be met. 
b. ?For parks and recreation facilities: The standards identified in section 54-3-9.7 shall be 
met: 
c. ?For roads: The standards identified in section 54-3-9.7 shall be met. 
(b) ?Step 2: Subtract the committed capacity: 
(1) ?Existing demand based on existing development. The demand for services or facilities 
created by existing development as provided by the city. 
(2) ?Demand to be generated by vested development, valid capacity reservation certificates, 
and valid certificates of concurrency. The demand for the service or facility created by the 
anticipated completion of other vested and/or approved developments. 


ARTICLE X. - APPEARANCE, DESIGN AND COMPATIBILITY 
    The City of Sebastian shall not approve a development order unless a finding is made that such 
development order conforms to all applicable appearance, design and compatibility regulations as 
established herein. 


Sec. 54-3-10.1. - Site location and character of use. 
    The comprehensive plan together with the land development regulations, including size and 
dimension regulations, general provisions, performance criteria, and the list of permitted and conditional 
uses, off-street parking, landscaping, required open spaces, yards and building setbacks shall collectively 
be the principal guides in determining the location and character of the proposed use. 


Sec. 54-3-10.2. - Appearance of site and structures. 
    Within all zoning districts within the City of Sebastian, the appearance of site and structures shall be 
coordinated for the purpose of creating a pleasing and harmonious overall environment. The choice of 
building materials, plant materials, lighting and other building and site improvements shall be 
commensurate with the objectives of the subject use and consider the impact on surrounding properties 
or transportation corridors. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall also consider the following: 
(a) ?Location and screening of mechanical equipment, utility hardware and waste storage areas. 
Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware other than antennas and stacks on roofs shall 
be harmonious with the building or they shall be located and/or screened so as not to be visible 
from any public ways within the impacted area, except within the industrial district(s). Similarly, 
refuse and waste storage areas shall be screened from adjacent properties and public ways by 
appropriate fences, walls or hedges. 
(b) ?Location and screening of solid waste container. In cases where dumpsters must be located in 
areas highly visible from any public right-of-way, the planning and zoning commission shall be 
authorized to require additional vegetative or structure screening to shield an unsightly 
condition. 
(1) ?Refuse container location requirements. No front end loaded refuse container shall be 
located in any required parking space or vehicular use area, or in any required bufferyard 
or landscaping area. 
a. ?Service access. Refuse container sites shall be provided which allow refuse vehicle 
service access without manually moving the container(s) of service. Fifty feet of clear 
backup as measured perpendicular from the screen areas shall be provided from the 
face of the refuse containers' screening unless otherwise approved by the growth 
management director, who shall find that the reduction is necessary to provide 
property rights enjoyed by others in the same zoning district, and will not be 
detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare. No encroachment into this area by 
parking spaces, sidewalks or landscape areas shall be allowed. 
b. ?Siting obstructions. No refuse container shall be sited below obstructing wires or 
obstruct any electrical service equipment, fire protection equipment, any roof 
overhangs, or sited adjacent to any other obstruction to the container dumping 
process. 
c. ?Refuse container screening requirements. Refuse containers shall be opaquely 
screened from view from public streets and adjacent properties, to a height of at least 
six feet, or six inches higher than the height of the container (whichever is higher). 
This screening may be achieved by walls, landscaping or buffer yards, or by virtue of 
the location of the container on the building site. 
(c) ?Utility lines. In new construction, all utility lines shall be placed underground. All telephone lines 
shall be placed underground. Service lateral electrical distribution lines serving individual 
installations shall be placed underground. Other high voltage electrical lines may be placed 
underground or on poles provided that the poles are within the street right-of-way and have 
provisions for street lighting. Large transformers shall be placed on the ground and be mounted 
on pads and contained within enclosures or vaults. Where enclosures or vaults are used, the 
construction and design shall be compatible with primary building design. Landscaping with 
shrubs and plants shall be provided to screen pad mounted transformers. 
(d) ?Commercial and manufacturing activities conducted in enclosed buildings. All businesses, 
services or manufacturing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed 
buildings. Outside storage and display areas are permitted subject to the following: 
(1) ?The outside storage and display area is shown on the site plan. 
(2) ?The outside storage and display area is not located on required parking areas. Temporary, 
short-term storage and display is permitted in parking areas when permitted by a special 
events temporary use permit. 
(3) ?No outdoor storage and display area shall be located except on the parcel where the 
principal use is located. In no event shall items be stored or displayed on the adjoining 
public sidewalk and/or public right-of-way. 
(4) ?The outdoor storage and display area shall not be located in a required visibility triangle as 
required by section 54-2-7.10. 
(5) ?The outside storage and display area shall be kept clean and free of debris to prevent the 
blowing of trash and litter. 
(e) ?Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided and shall be so arranged as to shield or 
deflect the light from adjoining properties and public streets. 
(f) ?Signs. Signs shall be required to be harmonious with the urban design theme of the project and 
shall be aesthetically pleasing and emphasize good principles and practices of streetscape 
design. 
(g) ?Pedestrian sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed along all collector and arterial streets in 
order to link major activity centers and shall also link vehicle use areas including parking areas 
with all principal buildings. The pedestrian circulation system shall include marked pedestrian 
crossings in order to separate vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(h) ?Loading docks. Loading docks shall comply with provisions in section 54-3-10.9. When 
required, they shall be located at the side or rear of the principal structure being served. 
Similarly, parking for trucks and all other company owned or controlled vehicles shall be located 
at the rear of the principal structure. Provisions for locating loading docks may be modified by 
the growth management director only if the size and shape of the property is insufficient or 
inadequate to reasonably accommodate the size and dimension criteria herein stated. 


Sec. 54-3-10.3. - Work within rights-of-way and easements. 
(a) ?Applicability. Work within the city rights-of-way and easements shall require prior approval from the 
city engineer. 
(1) ?Permits for right-of-way construction and/or easement use from the city are required prior to 
any work, including, but not limited to: 
a. ?Driveways. 
b. ?Culvert pipes. 
c. ?All utility installations, overhead or underground, but not limited to sanitary sewer, water 
lines, electric conductors, conduit, cable TV, or fiber optics. 
d. ?Construction site and/or material storage. 
e. ?Sprinklers. 
f. ?Pool installation. 
g. ?Pavement construction or repair (see section 90, article II of Code of Ordinances). 
h. ?Trees and landscape. 
i. ?Mail boxes-concrete, brick, large, etc. 
j. ?Signs. 
k. ?Placement of any item which may be construed as a hazard. 
(2) ?Permit application shall be filed with the city engineering department and accompanied by the 
requisite fee. The application shall include a survey, which accurately depicts the type, location, 
and dimensions of the proposed work or activity. Free-hand sketches will not be accepted for 
construction activities. 
(3) ?Permits are valid for one year. 
(4) ?Work by city forces on city property is exempt from permitting. 
(b) ?Inspections: 
(1) ?The city engineering staff will perform inspections after receiving a 48-hour notice. The 
applicant will be required to remedy all findings resulting from the inspection. 
(2) ?Release of bonds or final approvals shall not occur until the city engineering staff has 
performed the final inspection. 
(3) ?All other inspections are on an as-needed basis as determined by the engineering department. 


Sec. 54-3-10.4. - Driveway access, internal circulation, off-street parking and other traffic impacts. 
    The city engineer and/or designated staff shall advise on matters related to this section: 
(a) ?Internal circulation system design and access/egress considerations. Driveways, curb cuts, 
aisles, bicycle ways, pedestrian ways, and areas for parking and internal circulation of vehicles, 
bicycles, and pedestrians shall be located, designed and controlled so as to provide for safe 
and convenient circulation within the site and safe and convenient access from and onto 
adjoining streets. The city engineer shall review such design considerations based on standard 
traffic engineering principles and practices and such specifications as may be adopted by 
resolution of the city council. Requirements of article XV shall be applied for off-street parking. 
Among factors to be considered shall be the need for acceleration and deceleration lanes; the 
number, location and size of curb cuts, access drives, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways from 
adjacent streets, bicycle ways and pedestrian ways together with any special markings 
necessary to avoid conflict among vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians; the location and design 
of driveways, access aisles, and bicycle ways to parking spaces; the arrangement, delineation 
and marking for parking areas; and the means of access to buildings for fire-fighting apparatus 
and other emergency vehicles. 
(b) ?Separation of vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. Parking areas and driveways shall be clearly 
identified and separated from principal pedestrian routes and recreation areas by curbs, 
pavement markings, planting areas, fences or similar features designed to promote pedestrian 
safety. 
(c) ?Driveway and curb-cut approvals. The city shall require that the proposed location of driveways 
and curb-cuts be coordinated with utility companies responsible for providing utility services in 
order to ensure that proposed construction activities are consistent with improvement plans as 
well as operation and maintenance activities and policies of utility service providers. No 
development plan or building permit shall be issued until proof of such coordination is presented 
to the city by the applicant/developer. In addition, the applicant/developer submitting plans for 
driveway and curb-cut improvements shall comply with applicable surface water management 
regulations of article XII and driveway design standards established by this article. 
(d) ?Traffic impact studies. Traffic impact studies shall be performed in accordance with article 
XVIII, Site Plans. 


Sec. 54-3-10.5. - Construction of driveways and roadside swales. 
(a) ?City approval required. The construction of all drainage facilities for new or existing driveways or 
other elements of the circulation system potentially impacting traffic and drainage on any city 
maintained public road shall be approved by the city engineer prior to commencement of 
construction or excavation activity. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee. 
    A permit must be obtained from the city engineer after paying the established fee in order to change, 
modify, construct, reconstruct, or repair any drainpipe under a driveway, or any other structure or landfill 
accessory to any driveway, if any such structure or landfill might adversely affect drainage of any 
drainage swale. This fee shall not be required for any driveway in existence on the effective date of this 
section. No drainage in conjunction with a driveway other than the properly sized pipe will be permitted. 
(b) ?General design criteria. 
(1) ?Primary driveways are required to be surfaced with asphalt topping or concrete, and culverts 
shall be designed to meet accepted engineering standards. The city engineer shall apply best 
management principles and practices in implementing the provisions of this section. The city 
engineering department can approve alternative surfacing materials after thorough review of the 
product specifications determines that the proposed material satisfies the intent of this 
ordinance. If removed in conjunction with any approved city right-of-way work, replacement of 
alternative materials will be the responsibility of the owner; 
(2) ?New driveways and/or improvements to existing driveways and other elements of the 
circulation system shall provide adequate drainage, swales, ditches or similar stormwater 
channels; and 
(3) ?Any swale, drainage ditch or other drainageway shall be sloped and contoured to properly 
direct the surface water to the drainage ditches or swales. Swales in the front of the lot shall 
also be shaped to discourage ponding of water therein. Where any culvert pipe is laid under a 
driveway or similar installation, the final grade of the fill with sod overlay shall be at least two 
inches below the invert of the ends of the pipe so that the sod does not obstruct the flow of 
water from the pipe. 
(c) ?Single-family and duplex lots. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, single-family 
and duplex lots that are less than 20,000 square feet in area shall not exceed the following criteria 
for driveway widths within a city, county or state right-of-way: 
(1) ?Single drive. The pavement width shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and not exceed 24 feet 
with a ten-foot radius. 
(2) ?Circular or dual drives. In lieu of a single drive, a circular or dual driveway may be permitted, 
provided that the maximum width shall not exceed 16 feet. In addition, there shall be a minimum 
separation of 30 feet between the driveways. 
(3) ?Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, single-family and duplex lots that are at 
least 20,000 square feet in area shall be permitted an additional driveway, not to exceed 16 feet 
in width with a minimum separation of 30 feet from any other existing driveway(s) on the same 
lot. 
(4) ?One auxiliary driveway may be permitted per lot and shall be a minimum of eight feet and 
maximum of 16 feet in width and maintain a minimum 30 feet separation from other drives and 
shall not be located in any side yard easement. 
(d) ?Commercial sites. The following criteria shall apply to all multifamily and commercial sites: 
(1) ?All uses which are required to provide off-street parking spaces shall have entry and exit ways 
and drives at least 22 feet in width to accommodate two-way traffic, unless a one-way traffic 
system is utilized, in which case entry and exit ways and drives shall be at least 12 feet in width. 
In the event that a one-way traffic system is utilized, appropriate traffic direction markers shall 
be installed. 
(2) ?There shall be no more than two driveways for each 200 feet of street frontage on any lot and 
the maximum combined width of driveways shall not exceed 60 feet. 
(3) ?Vehicular circulation must be completely contained within the property and vehicles located 
within one portion of the site must have access to all other portions of the site without using the 
adjacent street system except for lots abutting a public alley. 
(4) ?Site plans shall demonstrate that proper consideration has been given to the surrounding 
streets, traffic volumes, proposed street improvements, vehicular street capacities, pedestrian 
movements, and safety. 
(e) ?Minimum standards for construction of driveways. Minimum standards for the construction, 
alteration or repair of driveways shall be as follows: 
(1) ?No driveways shall be placed within 30 feet of an intersection, such 30 feet being measured 
from the right-of-way lines of the intersection, unless plans for the construction, alteration, or 
repair of such driveways are approved by the city engineer. 
(2) ?Driveways on state roads: 
a. ?No driveways shall be constructed on a state road unless the applicant shall have first 
obtained a permit from the State Department of Transportation and submitted such permit 
to the city engineer. 
b. ?The minimum standards shall be the minimum standards established by the State 
Department of Transportation. 
(3) ?Driveways on non-state roads where curb and gutter are in existence: 
a. ?Applicant shall maintain existing drainage and gutter. 
b. ?Applicant shall meet sidewalk grade if existing. 
c. ?Applicant shall rebuild curbing, of like construction of existing curb, as per city standard 
design. 
(4) ?Driveways on non-state roads where curb and gutter are not in existence. 
a. ?Applicant shall maintain drainage in swale ditch. Side slopes shall not exceed three to one. 
b. ?Applicant shall furnish a culvert pipe for drainage as specified by the city engineer. 
Applicant shall provide a mitered end on both sides of the pipe as per city standard design. 
The pipe shall be installed under the driveway at the proper elevation and set back as 
established by the approved drainage plans, this Code, and/or established by the city 
engineer. 
c. ?Minimum radius on all commercial driveways shall be 25 feet. 
(5) ?Commercial driveways shall be constructed with concrete or asphalt and shall satisfy all 
applicable regulations as established in article XIX, Subdivisions. 
(6) ?Driveways shall not block or unreasonably obstruct the natural flow of water or drainage of 
water by any means, including construction, excavation, or fill of land. Any structure, driveway, 
pipe, excavation, or fill of land in violation of this section shall be brought into compliance with 
this section at the owner's expense. Owners shall keep drainpipes and swales clear and 
mowed. 
(7) ?All residential driveway construction shall be on 95% compacted fill, four inches thick, 3,000 psi 
concrete. The concrete shall be reinforced with 6 × 6 #10 gauge wire or fiber mesh concrete. 
(f) ?Drains under driveways for swale ditches. 
(1) ?All driveways over a swale ditch shall be provided with a swale drainage pipe. The pipe size 
depends on the location within the drainage basin and shall be determined by city engineer. The 
pipe shall be constructed of corrugated aluminum, high-density polyethylene or reinforced 
concrete pipe. The culvert pipe length is determined by the city engineer and is based upon 
sufficient length to provide a three to one sloped mitered end headwall on each end of the pipe. 
(g) ?Inspections. The following inspections are required by the engineering department. 
(1) ?Line and grade. 
(2) ?Pipe inspection (pre-pour) and driveway. 
(3) ?Final inspection. 
(4) ?Location of driveways shall satisfy all established design standards. 
(5) ?Reclamation: It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to make proper repairs of all 
negligent damage to road pavement, swales, or adjacent properties prior to issuance of final 
approvals. Repairs shall be made in accordance with standard details in the engineering 
department. 
    No final inspection or bond release will be approved until all re-inspection fees have been paid. No 
permanent power hookups or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building department until the 
appropriate release is obtained from the engineering department. 
(h) ?Maintenance not an obligation of city. The issuance of a permit under this article does not constitute 
any obligation on the city to maintain driveways. Additionally, the city will not be responsible for 
maintenance of alternative surfacing or architectural materials/features of driveways. 
(i) ?Bonds. When a certificate of occupancy is desired prior to completion of work, a cash bond may be 
required by the engineering department to cover any uncompleted work in right-of-way or easement. 
    The bond shall allow six months for completion at which time the engineering department will inspect 
and release bond if work was performed satisfactorily. 
    If the builder fails to complete work within the prescribed period, the bond will be used to cover the 
cost to complete the work. 


Sec. 54-3-10.6. - Design and specifications for parking areas. 
(a) ?General design standards. 
(1) ?Parking in yards. Unenclosed parking spaces may be located within a required yard. Carports 
and covered parking shall not be located within the required setbacks. 
(2) ?Landscaping. All parking areas other than for single-family homes and duplexes shall conform 
to the landscape requirements of this Code as exists, or as may hereinafter be amended. 
(3) ?No backing into a public street; exceptions. Each parking stall for all parking areas other than 
for single-family homes, duplexes, and city designated areas approved for parking in public 
rights-of-way shall be accessible from an aisle or driveway and designed so that no automobile 
shall back into a public street in order to exit a parking stall. The internal design of the parking 
lot shall be designed to facilitate vehicular circulation and avoid conflict between pedestrian and 
vehicular movements. 
(4) ?Separation from doorways or pedestrian entrances. No door or pedestrian entrance at ground 
level shall open directly upon any parking space, driveway or access aisle unless the doorway 
or pedestrian entrance is at least four feet from said parking space, driveway or access aisle. 
(5) ?Drainage. All off-street parking facilities shall be suitably sloped and drained so as not to cause 
any discharge of runoff to adjacent or public property. Stalls, aisles and driveways. The 
following criteria is applicable to all parking spaces except single-family and duplex homes: 
Parking  
Angle  
(Degrees)  
(A) 
Stall Width  
(Feet)  
(B) 
Stall Length  
(Feet)  
(C) 
Aisle Width  
(Feet)  
(D) 
Curb Width  
(Feet)  
(E) 
Overall Width  
(Feet)  
(F) 
?0 
?9 
22 
12 
23 
30 
30 
10 
18.2 
12 
20 
48.4 
45 
10 
20.5 
12 
14.1 
53 
60 
10 
21.5 
18 
11.5 
61 
90 
10 
20 
22 
10 
62 
90 
?9 
20 
25 
?9 
63 
90 
?9.5 
20 
23.5 
?9 
62 
 
All parking spaces, aisles and driveways shall substantially conform to the indicated design. 
(c) ?Striping. All paved parking spaces shall have lines between spaces, at least four inches in width, of 
a contrasting color to the pavement or, unpaved surface and each stall may be required to be 
equipped with wheelstops if deemed appropriate by the city engineer and the planning and zoning 
commission. 
(d) ?Lighting. Parking areas shall be lighted and entrances at public streets shall provide private area 
lighting. 
(e) ?Wheelstops. Wheelstops shall comply with the following standards: 
(1) ?Standard precast concrete wheelstops or other types as approved by the city for stalls adjacent 
to landscaped strips shall be located two and one-half feet from the front end of the stall to 
prevent encroachment into required landscaped areas. The front two feet of the stall may be 
kept as a maintained grass strip although no credit will be extended toward the open space 
requirements of this Code. 
(2) ?Standard precast concrete wheelstops or other types as approved by the city for stalls not 
adjacent to landscaped strips shall be located two and one-half feet from the front end of the 
stall. The front three feet of the stall may be kept as a maintained grass strip although no credit 
will be extended toward the open space requirements of this Code. 
(3) ?All wheelstops shall be permanently anchored. 
(f) ?Compact spaces. Parking lots with 20 or more spaces may be comprised of a maximum of 15% 
compact parking stalls but only if approved by the planning and zoning commission. Such compact 
car stalls shall be seven and one-half feet wide by 15 feet long and marked for use by small vehicles. 
All markings shall be on the pavement surface where possible. 
(g) ?Handicapped spaces. Handicapped parking spaces accessible to disabled persons shall be 
provided in accordance with this Code, and as may be applicable, the Americans with Disabilities 
Act, and other federal and state laws and regulations. All publicly maintained and operated parking 
facilities intended for public use, and all businesses, firms or other persons licensed to do business 
with the public shall provide non-porous parking spaces for the handicapped as set forth below: 
Total Spaces Required 
Required Number of  
Handicap Spaces 
?1—25 
1 
?26—50 
2 
?51—75 
3 
?76—100 
4 
101—150 
5 
151—200 
6 
201—300 
7 
301—400 
8 
 
Refer to the Standard Building Code for exceptions. 
    Such parking spaces shall be designed and located as follows: 
(1) ?All spaces shall have access to a curbramp or curbcut, when necessary, to allow access to the 
building served, and shall be located so that users will not be compelled to wheel behind parked 
vehicles. 
(2) ?Diagonal or perpendicular parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide with a five-foot 
wide designated loading zone. 
(3) ?Parallel parking spaces shall be located either at the beginning or end of a block or adjacent to 
alley entrances. Curbs adjacent to such spaces shall be of a height which will not interfere with 
the opening and closing of motor vehicle doors. 
(4) ?Each such parking space shall be prominently outlined with blue paint and posted and marked 
with a permanent sign and markings of a color and design approved by the Florida Department 
of Transportation, bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption 
"PARKING BY DISABLED PERMIT ONLY". 
(h) ?Queuing spaces. In addition to other parking requirements for a principal use, stacking spaces shall 
be provided for drive-up windows in compliance with the following minimum specifications: 
(1) ?Spaces. Number of spaces required including receiving or service window space: Six stacking 
spaces per drive-up window. Where this requirement is demonstrated by the applicant to be 
inconsistent with the traffic generating characteristics of a specific use, the applicant may 
request that the standard be modified by the planning and zoning commission. The planning 
and zoning commission may approve a reduction in the required waiting spaces for such use 
provided the applicant demonstrates that the intended use generates a low volume of drive-up 
traffic and does not require the standard six stacking spaces. The commission shall consider 
the nature of the use, its intensity, size, other parking facilities provided and other traffic 
generating characteristics. 
(2) ?On-site. The required queuing shall be located on site and shall not include any public right-of-
way or accessways to the property. No vehicle may block other parking stalls, access aisles, 
driveway, or off-street parking 
(3) ?Length of spaces. Each space shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length. 
(4) ?Width of spaces. Each queuing lane shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. On curves with a 
radius of 25 feet or less, a minimum pavement width of 12 feet shall be provided. On curves 
with a radius of more than 25 feet, a minimum pavement width of ten feet shall be provided. 
(5) ?Vertical clearance. Minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet. 
(6) ?Surface. Surface requirements shall be the same as those specified for parking areas in 
section 54-3-10.10. 
(7) ?Parking. Queuing spaces may not be used to satisfy any off-street parking requirements or 
loading requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-12-07, § 1, 9-26-2012) 


Sec. 54-3-10.7. - Entries, exits, drives and vehicle maneuvering areas for multifamily (excluding duplex 
lots), commercial, industrial and institutional lots. 
(a) ?Entries and exits. 
(1) ?All uses which are required to provide off-street parking spaces shall have entry and exit ways 
and drives at least 22 feet in width to accommodate two-way traffic, unless a one-way traffic 
system is utilized, in which case entry and exit ways and drives shall be at least 12 feet in width. 
In the event that a one-way traffic system is utilized, appropriate traffic direction markers shall 
be installed. 
(2) ?One driveway shall be permitted for ingress and egress purposes to any project. 
(3) ?The planning and zoning commission may either increase or reduce the following separation 
distances based upon a recommendation by the city engineer after an analysis of street 
frontage, trip generation, or other factors, as deemed appropriate has been performed. 
(4) ?A joint access driveway shall be considered as adequate access for any two adjacent parcels 
and shall be encouraged. For a project where more than one driveway is requested, the 
applicant shall submit a traffic report justifying the need, describing the internal circulation and 
parking system and identifying the impact of development of the project and its proposed 
access facilities on the operation of the street system. 
(5) ?Minimum spacing between two-way driveways fronting on the same side of a street shall 
conform to the table below. Distance between driveways shall be measured from centerline to 
centerline. These standards shall not apply to single-family dwellings and duplexes. 
MINIMUM DRIVEWAY SEPARATION (FEET) 
Speed  
(mph) 
Principal  
Arterial 
Minor  
Arterial 
Collector 
Local 
30 
125 
125 
125 
70 
35 
150 
150 
150 
70 
40 
185 
185 
185 
70 
45 
230 
230 
230 
70 
50 
275 
275 
230 
70 
 
(6) ?Driveways on opposite sides of any undivided street classified collector or arterial shall either 
be aligned on the same centerline or be offset a minimum of 200 feet measured from centerline 
to centerline, whenever geometrically possible, and shall provide for emergency vehicle access. 
(7) ?For projects proposing more than one two-way driveway, based upon parcel size, projected trip 
generation of the site, amount of roadway frontage, and other appropriate design 
considerations, additional driveways may be permitted if approved by the city engineer. 
(8) ?Vehicular circulation must be completely contained within the property and vehicles located 
within one portion of the site must have access to all other portions of the site without using the 
adjacent street system except for lots abutting a public alley. 
(9) ?Site plans shall illustrate that proper consideration has been given to the surrounding streets, 
traffic volumes, proposed street improvements, vehicular street capacities, pedestrian 
movements, and safety. 
(10) ?Driveways shall not be constructed in the radius return of an intersection. Driveways shall be 
located a minimum of 30 feet from intersecting right-of-way lines of local streets and 175/115* 
feet from intersecting right-of-way lines of all other streets of higher classification. Greater 
separation distances between driveways may be required by the city engineer. 
(11) ?Driveways or parking areas (other than shared access) shall not be installed within ten feet of 
adjoining property. 
(12) ?Driveways shall be constructed to meet the standards of section 54-3-10.5(e). 
(13) ?All drives and vehicular maneuvering areas shall be paved and contain traffic control signs 
and markings. All traffic controls, signage and pavement markings shall be designed and 
installed in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). All such 
devices shall be continually maintained. 
(b) ?Corner clearance. All proposed developments which are determined to generate or attract 100 or 
more peak hour turning movements into the site shall be prohibited from establishing driveways at 
locations which are closer to an intersection than the distances established below. These dimensions 
may be modified by the city engineer on a case by case basis when warranted by circumstances 
unique to the particular development. 
Type Intersection 
Driveway Access onto: 
Distance From  
Intersection (ft) 
Arterial/arterial 
Arterial 
230 feet 
Arterial/collector 
Arterial 
230 feet 
Arterial/local 
Arterial 
230 feet 
Collector/arterial 
Collector 
230 feet 
Collector/collector 
Collector 
175/115 feet* 
Collector/local 
Collector 
175/115 feet* 
Local/arterial 
Local 
230 feet 
Local/collector 
Local 
175/115 feet* 
Local/local 
Local 
50 feet 
 
*Corner clearance distance depending on relationship to intersection; right turn movement towards 
intersection, 115 feet; left turn movement 175 feet. 
(c) ?Internal circulation system. 
(1) ?The internal circulation system, including drives and maneuvering areas, shall be designed to 
permit convenient maneuvering of cars and service vehicles into and out of each parking and 
loading space, and shall be arranged so that no vehicle need back onto a public right-of-way 
unless otherwise specifically approved by the city. No occupied parking or loading space shall 
interfere with access to any other parking or loading space, or with any pedestrian walkway. 
(2) ?Dead-end aisles are not permitted unless adequate turnarounds are provided. 
(3) ?No more than 15 spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by a 
minimum landscape area of 180 square feet for single row, or 360 square feet for double row. 
(Ord. No. O-12-07, § 1, 9-26-2012) 


Sec. 54-3-10.8. - Restricted use of off-street parking areas. 
    All parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, dead storage, non-
emergency repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind. Where lighting is provided, it shall be 
arranged to reflect away from residential areas and public ways. 


Sec. 54-3-10.9. - Design and specifications for loading areas. 
(a) ?Off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained in 
accordance with the following schedule: 
(1) ?Retail loading requirements. For buildings or structures containing retail, food store, restaurant, 
laundry, dry cleaning or similar retail or service uses which have an aggregate gross floor area 
of: 
Over 5,000 square feet, but not over 25,000 square feet—One space; 
Over 25,000 square feet, but not over 60,000 square feet—Two spaces; 
Over 60,000 square feet, but not over 120,000 square feet—Three spaces; 
Over 120,000 square feet, but not over 200,000 square feet—Four spaces; 
Over 200,000 square feet, but not over 290,000 square feet—Five spaces; and 
Over 290,000 square feet—Five spaces, plus one space for every additional 100,000 square 
feet or fraction thereof in excess of 290,000 square feet. 
(2) ?Public buildings, hotels, and office loading requirements. For each auditorium, exhibition hall, 
museum, hotel, or motel, office building, or similar use, which has a gross floor area of over 
10,000 square feet, but not over 40,000 square feet, one space; plus one space for each 
additional 60,000 square feet over 40,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
(3) ?Industrial loading requirements. For any light manufacturing, warehouse, research and 
development, assembly or similar industrial uses which has a gross floor area of: 
Up to 15,000 square feet—One space; 
Over 15,000 square feet but not over 40,000 square feet—Two spaces; 
Over 40,000 square feet but not over 65,000 square feet—Three spaces; 
Each additional 80,000 square feet over 65,000 square feet—One additional space. 
(4) ?Other loading requirements. For any use not specifically mentioned in this section, the 
requirements for off-street loading for a use which is mentioned and to which the unmentioned 
use is similar shall apply. Where there is any question as to the off-street loading needs of any 
other use, said number shall be determined and set by the planning and growth management 
director. 
(5) ?Restrictions. Off-street loading facilities to meet the needs of one use shall not be considered 
as meeting the off-street loading needs of any other use. No area supplied to meet the required 
off-street parking areas for a use shall be utilized for or be deemed to meet the requirements of 
this section for off-street loading facilities. 
(6) ?Joint use of loading areas. Nothing in this section shall prevent the collective, joint or combined 
provision of off-street loading facilities for two or more buildings or uses; provided, that such off-
street loading facilities are equal in size and capacity to the combined requirements of the 
several buildings or uses and are so located and arranged as to be usable thereby. Plans for 
buildings or uses which require off-street loading facilities under the provisions of this section 
shall clearly indicate the location, dimensions, clearance and access of all such required off-
street loading facilities. 
(b) ?Design requirements. Each space shall have a direct access to a public right-of-way and shall have 
the following minimum dimensions: 
(1) ?Length: 25 feet; a larger length upward to 35 feet may be required upon recommendation by 
the city engineer and approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(2) ?Width: 12 feet. 
(3) ?Height: 14 feet. 


Sec. 54-3-10.10. - Surfacing requirements for parking and loading areas. 
    For all nonresidential uses, surfacing of all off-street parking areas and drives shall be as follows: 
(a) ?Non-porous surfaces. All parking areas and approaches thereto shall require the minimum 
surfacing material as follows: Concrete; five inches, 3,000 psi reinforced concrete, over eight 
inches of sub-base at 98% compacted or a comparable material. Asphalt; one inch over six 
inches of 95% compacted material over eight inches sub-base at 98% compacted or a 
comparable material. 
(b) ?Porous surfaces. The use of porous parking surfaces suitable for use on specific sites within 
the city and so demonstrated by the land owner or his designated agent may be approved by 
the planning and zoning commission upon recommendation of the city engineer, as an 
alternative to the surface requirements of subsection 54-3-10.10(a). Paved handicapped 
parking shall be provided at all sites where it is required. The consideration, approval and use of 
porous paving shall be limited to places of worship, historical structures, public recreation 
facilities, and establishments which do not have parking needs on a daily basis: 
(1) ?Application requirements and supportive information. In addition to other requirements of 
this chapter, the application for site plan approval which incorporates the use of porous 
parking or loading surfaces shall include the following information and/or requirements 
which shall be certified by a Florida registered engineer: 
a. ?A cross-section of the structural section to be used on the parking area certified as 
appropriate based on natural characteristics of the site, traffic generating 
characteristics and load bearing requirements of the proposed use, anticipated 
surface water run-off, and durability and porosity of proposed surface. 
b. ?Detailed drainage plan. 
c. ?Percolation tests in appropriate areas of the site to describe any varied soil 
permeability conditions present on-site. 
d. ?Estimated location of the groundwater table during wettest season. 
e. ?Description of existing soils on parking area to a depth of five feet below the bottom of 
the structural section or to the water table. 
f. ?Description of the traffic generating characteristics of the site including frequency of 
use, turnover, type of vehicles using surface and anticipated load bearing 
requirements in pounds per square inch. 
g. ?Test profile of proposed construction material including soil density, stability of 
materials and water absorption. The load bearing capacity of the proposed improved 
surface shall not be less than 50 pounds per square inch Florida bearing capacity or 
its equivalent for a depth of not less than eight inches. 
h. ?Maintenance program shall be submitted as a written statement and shall be directed 
toward achieving and maintaining orderly and neat appearance of grassed areas in 
perpetuity. Such program shall legally bind the applicant and successors in ownership 
to the continued maintenance of such areas including replacement of dead or 
unsightly sod or other plant material as well as the repair of surface damage or 
clogging of subsurface base. This legal instrument shall be submitted in a form which 
shall be approved by the city attorney prior to receipt of any city approval of the 
project. 
i. ?Other information as may be required by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2) ?Surface types. Porous surfaces shall be of the following types as provided by the planning 
and zoning commission. 
a. ?Commercially marketed porous paving blocks may be approved by the planning and 
zoning commission following favorable recommendation by the city engineer. 
b. ?For places of worship or other land uses generating highly infrequent traffic, as 
determined by the city engineer, sod may be placed on a stable sub-grade for the 
required parking spaces (driveways and vehicular access ways shall be paved), upon 
approval by the planning and zoning commission. Such approval shall be granted only 
for projects generating very limited traffic. Similarly, such approval shall be 
conditioned on stipulated traffic generation rates specified in the application. 
Subsequent changes in traffic generation shall constitute grounds by which the city 
engineer may request review by the planning and zoning commission in order to 
determine if the increased traffic generation rates warrant improvements to the 
parking surface. 
c. ?Stone may be used for parking space provided that the stone is required as part of an 
approved drainage system for the lot, that the stone is no smaller than a #57 stone in 
size and that the use is approved by the planning and zoning commission. Pea gravel 
is not acceptable. Driveways and vehicular access ways shall be paved. 
(3) ?Continuing maintenance. A continuing maintenance program shall be required to be 
carried out by the landowner in all cases where a porous surface is approved by the 
planning and zoning commission. Such maintenance program shall include maintenance 
provision cited in subsection 54-3-10.10(b)(1)h. Violation of such maintenance program 
shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-10 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(4) ?Procedure for review. Proposals for use of a porous surface shall be reviewed in 
accordance with the site plan review procedures described in article XVIII of this Code. The 
city engineer shall provide detailed comments concerning such proposals to the planning 
and zoning commission prior to consideration by the board. 


ARTICLE XI. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 


Sec. 54-3-11.1. - Preservation of wetlands and transitional wetlands. 
    In order to promote and preserve natural hydrological conditions and to preserve water recharge 
areas, water supply and water quality, and natural habitats, the following regulations shall be applied to 
wetland areas: 
(a) ?Wetlands defined. Wetlands shall be defined pursuant to state statute. 
(b) ?Wetland delineation (establishing the wetland line). A delineation of the upland wetland 
boundary shall be established based upon an on-site field survey by a professional biologist or 
registered engineer provided by the applicant and coordinated with the St. Johns River Water 
Management District, the Department of Environmental Protection, and/or the U.S. Corps of 
Engineers. 
(c) ?Wetland development restrictions and interpretations. No development activity shall be allowed 
in a wetlands, including upland buffer areas, until and unless the applicant has obtained all 
required permits or exemptions from the state and/or federal agencies having jurisdiction and 
has met all requirements of the land development code. Upland buffer areas shall be defined as 
the areas separating wetland and upland areas and in which development activities may be 
regulated to protect wetlands. The upland buffer shall be an area landward of the upland edge 
of a wetland (i.e., the upland/wetland jurisdictional line if applicable). The buffer area provides 
an undeveloped area that separates developed upland from a wetland area. The purpose of the 
buffer area is to ensure the continuing function of respective wetland communities, to prevent 
pollutants from surface water runoff from entering the wetlands, and to enhance water quality. 
The city shall retain the right to prohibit development within the buffer area. The boundary of an 
upland buffer area shall be consistent with best management principles and practices and shall 
be compliant with applicable St. Johns River Water Management District permitting standards 
for upland buffers adjacent to wetlands to sufficiently protect adjacent wetlands. 
(d) ?Required dedication of conservation easements. The city may require applicants for 
subdivision development approval to include the dedication of conservation easements or 
reservations where the city finds that the dedication is reasonable in order to protect the value 
and function of a wetland. 
(e) ?Administration of wetland development restrictions. The city shall coordinate with the 
jurisdictional agencies for purposes of rendering legal, equitable, and environmentally sensitive 
determinations of the development rights to be permitted on such wetlands and/or lands under 
the jurisdiction of the state or federal government. The developer of a parcel of environmentally 
sensitive land shall be responsible for obtaining permits or exemptions from the St. Johns River 
Water Management District (SJRWMD), Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) 
and from the Army Corp of Engineers, as may be appropriate, prior to obtaining a development 
order, subdivision construction permit, or site plan review approval from the city. Regardless of 
permitting by federal or state permitting agencies, the city shall reserve the right to determine 
the appropriate land use and density/intensity. 


Sec. 54-3-11.2. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a) ?Required soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. In order to prevent both soil erosion and 
sedimentation, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be required as a part of an 
application for a subdivision construction permit, site plan review, plot plan review of a single-family 
residential lot and whenever a development will involve any clearing, removal of native or protected 
vegetation, grading, transporting, or other form of disturbing land by the movement of earth. 
(b) ?Erosion control measures. All measures necessary to minimize soil erosion and to control 
sedimentation in the disturbed land area shall be implemented. The following protection shall be 
provided for all disturbed areas: minimize velocities of water runoff and wind erosion, maximize 
protection of disturbed areas from stormwater runoff, and prevent or retain sedimentation within the 
development site as early as possible following disturbances. A list of major problem areas for 
erosion and sedimentation control follows. For each one, the purpose(s) of requiring control is 
described. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures for all such areas shall be provided with 
a view toward achieving the specific purpose listed below for which a control plan is required: 
(1) ?Erodable slopes: Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles from slope. 
(2) ?Streams, streambeds, streambanks, bodies of water, lake shorelines: Prevent detachment and 
transportation of soil particles. 
(3) ?Drainageways: Prevent detachment and transportation of soil particles (which would otherwise 
deposit in streams, bodies of water, or wetlands); promote deposit or sediment loads (traversing 
these areas) before these reach bodies of water. 
(4) ?Land adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands: Prevent detachment and transportation 
of soil particles. The applicant shall not adversely impact aquatic vegetation within the sensitive 
transition zone located between the upland and the mean high water line (ordinary high water 
line for non-tidal waters). No such vegetation shall be disturbed without approval of the city. Any 
such approval shall be based on a demonstrated necessity that promotes the overall public 
health, safety and welfare. Furthermore, any such disturbance of aquatic vegetation shall be 
compensated by re-vegetation based on a plan approved by the city as stipulated herein. The 
applicant shall coordinate plans for riverfront development with the Florida Department of 
Environmental Protection as well as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers where tidal waters might 
be impacted. Where deemed appropriate, the site plan shall include the planting of native 
indigenous aquatic plant vegetation to promote stability of the shoreline. 
(5) ?Enclosed drainage structure: Prevent sedimentation in structure, erosion at outfall of system 
and deposit of sediment loads within system or beyond it. 
(6) ?Large flat surface areas (unpaved): Prevent detachment of soil particles and their off-site 
transportation. 
(7) ?Impervious surfaces: Prevent the detachment and transportation of soil (in response to an 
increase in the rate and/or volume of runoff of the site or its concentration caused by impervious 
surfaces). 
(8) ?Borrow and stockpile areas: Divert runoff from face of slopes exposed in the excavation 
process; convey runoff in stabilized channels to stable disposal points; leave borrow areas and 
stockpiles in stable condition. 
(c) ?Applicability. Appropriate measures shall be taken during land clearing and building operations to 
assure that exposed, destabilized or otherwise altered soil is expeditiously covered with an 
acceptable erosion control material. The provision shall be applicable to the act of subdividing and 
installation of related improvements as well as during the development review process including the 
period during which improvements may occur as well as the length of time soil may be exposed to 
the environment. The tree and native vegetation protection ordinance shall be applicable to all 
clearing and grading activities and shall include specifications for management principles guiding the 
removal or placement of vegetation and landscaping design. Regulations shall also require 
developers to take precautionary measures, where necessary, to avert destruction or damage to 
native vegetation. 


Sec. 54-3-11.3. - Aquifer recharge protection. 
(a) ?Aquifer recharge area defined. Aquifer recharge areas shall be defined as those areas determined 
by the Indian River Soil Conservation District as having good to excellent recharge potential as 
generally identified on Map B-5 of the City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan Goals, Objectives, and 
Policies. These areas include the following soil types: Paola, St. Lucie, Astatula, Archbold, Pomello, 
Orsino, Jonathan, and Satellite. 
(b) ?Restrictions on development within recharge areas. All development within designated recharge 
areas shall comply with the following development requirements: 
(1) ?Preservation of recharge potential. Development shall preserve the predevelopment conditions 
with regard to soil type, drainage rates, grade elevation, and shall be designed so as to 
minimize the reduction or recharge of the surficial aquifer. The groundwater level and 
fluctuations shall be substantially the same as predevelopment conditions. 
(2) ?Clearing. No clearing of soil or vegetation may occur before a permit for such activity is issued. 
(3) ?Excavation. Excavation which cuts below the seasonal high water table shall be prohibited 
unless a design/plan is prepared by a qualified engineer and approved by the city engineer 
which demonstrates that the work can be completed in a manner that will not detrimentally 
impact the groundwater table. 
(c) ?Prohibited land uses. The following land uses and activities are prohibited within aquifer recharge 
areas: 
(1) ?Sanitary landfills; 
(2) ?Animal feedlots; 
(3) ?Wastewater treatment facilities, not including duly permitted septic tanks; 
(4) ?Petroleum and pesticide bulk storage facilities without proper containment; 
(5) ?Incinerators; 
(6) ?Above-ground or below-ground pipes for pollutants or contaminants. 
(7) ?All other land uses that store, handle, or generate hazardous materials or wastes. The 
following state and federal rules define and regulate additional hazardous material: 
• ?The Florida Substance List as published by the State of Florida and amended periodically. 
• ?Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 261 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous 
Wastes). 
• ?Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 302.4, Table 302.4 (List of Hazardous 
Substances and Reportable Quantities). 
• ?Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations part 355, Appendix A and B (List of Extremely 
Hazardous Substances). 
(8) ?Sandmines. 
(Ord. No. O-10-08, § 1, 12-15-2010) 


Sec. 54-3-11.4. - Coastal resource impact analysis. 
(a) ?Estuarine shoreline protection. Applicants for development along the Indian River Lagoon, 
Sebastian River, or Collier Creek shall be required to submit as part of the permitting process, plans 
that demonstrate how the development shall incorporate features designed to protect against 
potential adverse impacts to: 
(1) ?Shoreline vegetation and stabilization; 
(2) ?Water quality; 
(3) ?Native habitat, including seagrass beds and wetland habitats; 
(4) ?Living marine resources; and 
(5) ?Shoreline access. 
No shoreline development shall be approved until the applicant has demonstrated that potentially adverse 
impacts shall be prevented or that compensatory mitigation shall occur. 
(b) ?Shoreline vegetation and stability. No vegetation shall be removed from a shoreline without a duly 
authorized permit (article XIV). Where the city approves shoreline alterations, the applicant shall be 
required to re-vegetate, stabilize, and enhance damaged shorelines by planting native vegetation, 
including mangrove and/or appropriate native plant species which: 
(1) ?Contribute to marine productivity and water quality; 
(2) ?Offer protection from erosion and flooding; and 
(3) ?Contribute to the natural soil building process. 
    Whenever vegetation is removed, the applicant/developer must provide mitigation plan ensuring that 
re-vegetation shall occur. In order to establish such assurance, the mitigation plan shall include a re-
vegetation that contains an appropriate ratio of replacement plants to continue the physical and biological 
functions of the vegetation, especially any pre-existing function as a habitat. The mitigation plan shall be 
subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and by the appropriate federal and/or state 
agencies having jurisdiction. Activities along the shoreline require FDEP permit. 
    Hardening of the Indian River Lagoon shoreline or the shoreline of the Sebastian River with rip-rap or 
other similar approved devices shall not be allowed unless erosion constitutes a critical peril to upland 
property and the use of vegetation has failed to stabilize the shoreline. In such case, coquina rip rap shall 
be the first alternative. Such shoreline hardening structures shall not be vertical seawalls or bulkheads. 
The specific location and design of such structures shall: 
(1) ?Comply with the best management principles and practices and be accomplished by use of the 
least environmentally damaging methods and designs possible; 
(2) ?Avoid a vertical slope that generates erosive tendencies, especially to adjacent unprotected 
shoreline properties. Pervious interlocking tile systems, filter mats, and similar stabilization 
methods shall be used in lieu of vertical walls; 
(3) ?Not be located waterward of the mean (or ordinary as applicable) high water line except when it 
is shown to be in the public interest; 
(4) ?First be approved by other public agencies having jurisdiction; and 
(5) ?Incorporate a program of shoreline vegetation or re-vegetation in order to build, enhance, and 
stabilize a natural shoreline. 
(c) ?Living marine resources, including but not limited to seagrass beds. Development along the coastal 
shoreline or within an area extending into the jurisdictional tidal waters of the city shall avoid adverse 
impacts of development on benthonic communities within tidal waters, including seagrass beds and 
other live bottom communities as well as adverse impacts on the coastal marsh and other coastal 
non-tidal wetland habitats. 
    Since these areas are sensitive to increased turbidity and other forms of pollution, water run-off and 
introduction of nutrients, these forms of pollution shall be regulated through effective water quality 
management criteria. Plans for development impacting marine resources shall be coordinated with state 
agencies having jurisdiction prior to the city granting development plan approval and/or prior to release of 
any permit for construction. Compensatory mitigation may be permitted in cases of overriding public 
benefit where both the state and federal agencies having jurisdiction approve the mitigation measures 
proposed by the developer. Any such development shall ensure continuance and maintenance of 
essentially natural conditions in order to further propagation of fish and wildlife as well as public recreation 
opportunities. 
    All applicants proposing development activities along any estuarine shoreline or within submerged 
areas shall be required to submit a site plan pursuant to site plan review regulations. Such site plan shall 
provide information describing marine life potentially impacted by proposed land uses as well as related 
construction activity. The plan shall stipulate assurances that the proposed project shall not adversely 
impact marine life or water quality. For instance, the city may require water quality control techniques 
such as the use of weirs for purposes of managing turbidity. In addition, the city shall require surveys of 
existing conditions, specifications of planned site improvements, and techniques to be used during 
construction as well as in operating and maintaining the land use in order to prevent damage to living 
marine organisms. 
(d) ?Water-related and water dependent uses. All water-related uses shall be built on uplands landward 
of the high velocity hurricane storm surge zone (VE-zone). All construction activities shall be 
predicated on plans compliant with applicable state and city building codes. Dredging and filling of 
wetlands or open water in order to accommodate water-related uses shall not be permitted unless all 
state agencies having jurisdiction have approved the construction plans and the city approves such 
activity pursuant to provisions for wetland protection (section 54-3-11.1), the surface water 
management (article XII), and all other relevant site plan review criteria. 
    Within the wetland estuarine shoreline, no development other than water dependent native shoreline 
vegetation, approved elevated accessways (of wood or other material which allow light to pass through 
and air and/or water to circulate underneath and to support plant life), or other water dependent uses 
approved by all state and/or federal agencies having jurisdiction and approved by the city pursuant shall 
be permitted. No structures that constrict water circulation in the lagoon shall be permitted. 
    No non-water dependent uses shall be permitted on submerged lands or wetlands. Development on 
uplands adjacent to wetlands shall preserve a buffer measured from the nearest upland/wetland 
boundary. The buffer area shall be coordinated with St. Johns River Water Management District 
permitting guidelines. Within the buffer area all exotic vegetation shall be removed and native plants shall 
be planted. The purpose of the buffer area is to protect ambient water quality and to prevent degradation 
of water quality from pollutants from surface water runoff within coastal waters. 
(e) ?Impacts of coastal development on tidal flushing and circulation patterns. Tidal flushing and 
circulation patterns generally shall not be altered by development activities. No development shall 
produce changes in tidal flushing and circulation patterns unless the applicant for development 
clearly demonstrates that no adverse environmental impacts shall be occasioned by the proposed 
changes in tidal flushing and circulation patterns. The applicant shall provide hydrographic 
information sufficient to support this premise. Additionally, no alteration in tidal flow shall be 
permitted which causes stagnation or siltation. The city shall grant no alteration permit unless all 
other agencies having jurisdiction have granted clearance, including all requisite permits. 
(f) ?Marinas and dock facilities. The city shall not approve docks or marina improvements until the 
applicant demonstrates compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and administrative 
rules, as well as applicable policies of regional agencies. Site plans shall include an environmental 
impact component for all docks and marinas, which adequately address marina siting criteria cited 
herein. These plans must demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that the facilities shall not adversely 
impact living marine resources, including, but not limited to, seagrasses, estuarine waters, manatees 
and other living marine organisms. The plans shall comply with the following criteria: 
(1) ?The plan shall indicate the following: 
a. ?Location relative to all potentially impacted natural marine resources. 
b. ?Structural specifications. 
c. ?Description of all impacted natural marine resources, including their location and physical 
characteristics. 
d. ?The location of multi-slip dock or marina facilities shall be located so as to prevent or 
minimize dredging and shall not disturb seagrass beds or adjacent wetlands. 
e. ?Availability and location of sewage pump-out facilities. 
f. ?Hurricane contingency plans. 
g. ?Mitigation techniques proposed to compensate for any potential environmental disruption. 
(2) ?New marinas shall not be allowed in or immediately adjacent to the following sensitive areas: 
• ?Aquatic preserves; 
• ?Marina sanctuaries; 
• ?Estuarine sanctuaries; and 
• ?Areas of essential manatee habitat, as determined by DEP. 
(3) ?Marinas must have sufficient upland area for all non-water-dependent uses. Dredging and 
filling of wetlands or open water in order to accommodate uses that are not water-dependent 
shall not be allowed. Exceptions may be granted in cases shown to be overwhelmingly in the 
public interest, such as the presence of sensitive upland systems. 
(4) ?Cumulative effects of several marinas and/or boat ramps in one area shall be considered in the 
review of proposed marina projects. 
(5) ?All new and expanded marinas shall provide a demonstration of compliance with state water 
quality standards by maintaining a water quality monitoring program approved by the Florida 
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 
(6) ?Grassbeds and other submerged habitat deemed valuable by DEP will be subject to protection 
regardless of their size. DEP frequently imposes their jurisdiction based on size and connection 
to other wetlands, so this may be contradictory. 
(7) ?In reviewing applications for new or expanded docking facilities, ways to improve, mitigate, or 
reverse adverse environmental impacts caused by previous activities shall be explored. This 
may include shallowing dredged areas, restoring wetland or submerged vegetation, or marking 
navigational channels. Such mitigation or restoration may be a condition of approval of new, 
renewed, or expanded facilities. 
(8) ?Immediate access (ingress and egress) points shall be delineated by channel markers, 
indicating speed limits, manatee area warnings, and any other applicable regulations. 
(9) ?All new or expanded marinas must provide treatment of stormwater run-off from upland areas 
to the extent necessary to ensure that state water quality standards are met at the point of 
discharge to waters of the state. In addition, all requirements of the water management district 
and DEP shall be met. 
(10) ?Boat maintenance activities in new or expanded marina facilities shall be located as far as 
possible from open water bodies in order to reduce contamination of water bodies by toxic 
substances common to boat maintenance. Run-off from boat maintenance must be collected 
and treated prior to discharge. 
(11) ?Open wet slips will be preferred to covered wet slips in marina design to reduce shading of 
water bodies which result in lowered biological productivity. 
(12) ?Marina design shall incorporate natural wetland vegetative buffers whenever possible near 
docking area and in access areas for erosion and sedimentation control, run-off purification and 
habitat purposes. 
(13) ?The West Indian manatee shall be afforded protection from boating activities that may have 
an adverse impact upon the species. The following criteria apply in the implementation of this 
policy: 
a. ?Marina operators shall undertake the following manatee protection measures in areas 
where manatees are known to occur: 
1. ?Implement and maintain a manatee public awareness program which will include 
posting signs to advise boat users that manatees are an endangered specie which 
frequents the waters of the region's estuaries and lagoon; 
2. ?Declare the waters in and around marinas as "idle speed" zones; and 
3. ?Post phone number(s) to report an injured manatee. 
b. ?Local manatee protection plans shall be included as part of the coastal management and 
conservation elements of the comprehensive plan. The plan should: 
1. ?Assess the occurrence of manatee activity within the jurisdiction; 
2. ?Document the number of manatee accidents and deaths; 
3. ?Identify manatee habitats; 
4. ?Determine the potential for adverse impacts to the manatee population from various 
activities and identify the level of protection necessary to ensure least possible 
interference; and 
5. ?Recommend local mitigative actions to be undertaken in support of the regional policy. 
(14) ?In addition to the above listed criteria, accessory docks and unwalled boat shelters, davits, 
lifts and pilings shall be permitted and erected in accordance with the following regulations. 
a. ?All docks, piers or wharves and associated pilings, and all davits or lifts whether associated 
with a dock or erected separately, shall require a building permit from the building 
department and other applicable permit(s), as required, through the State of Florida and/or 
federal regulatory agencies, including the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or any other 
agency having appropriate jurisdiction. 
b. ?All docks, pilings, or wharves, as permitted, shall be located in a manner that does not 
interfere with the riparian rights of adjacent properties. 
c. ?All docks, piers, wharves, davits and lifts, as permitted, shall be located to meet the 
following requirements: 
1. ?Local canals and lakes—Said structure is located within the center one-third of the 
waterfront footage of the property and shall not extend further than 20 feet or one-third 
of the width of the waterway, whichever is the lesser distance. 
2. ?Indian River Lagoon and Sebastian River—As permitted by applicable state and 
federal regulations. 
d. ?All off-shore pilings shall not project further above the surface of the water than is 
reasonably necessary for their use and be located no further from the rear property line 
than: 
1. ?Local canals and lakes—20 feet or one-third the width of the waterway, whichever is 
the lesser distance. 
2. ?Indian River Lagoon or Sebastian River—As permitted by applicable state and federal 
regulations. 
e. ?This section notwithstanding, alternate site plan specifications may be presented to the 
planning and zoning commission for review and approval, as deemed necessary by the 
applicant. 
(g) ?Estuarine water quality. In order to protect the water quality of the aquatic preserve, no new point 
source pollution shall be permitted to discharge into the lagoon or into ditches or canals flowing into 
these lagoon. In addition, in order to reduce non-point source pollutants the city shall require surface 
water management plans that comply with the city's adopted drainage level of service standard cited 
in article IX, provisions of article XII, and shall satisfy all applicable federal, state, and regional 
standards and policies governing estuarine water quality. 
(h) ?Restrictions in coastal high hazard area. The coastal high hazard area includes all area within the 
category I evacuation area established in the Treasure Coast Regional Hurricane Evacuation Study. 
The city shall enforce land use controls within the coastal high hazard area, especially areas east of 
Indian River Drive. Enforcement activities shall include but not limited to enforcing: 
(1) ?Exclude habitable structures from locations within the V-zone. No habitable structures shall be 
permitted within the V-zone. 
(2) ?Prohibit potential point pollutants. Water and sewer treatment plants, industrial holding ponds 
and other potential point pollution sources within the coastal high hazard area are prohibited. 
(3) ?Storm and flood-proofing standard for structures. Construction within the coastal high hazard 
area shall meet storm and flood-proofing standards exceeding those required for a 100-year 
storm. 
(4) ?Manage density. Residential development and/or redevelopment in the coastal high hazard 
shall not exceed existing residential. 
(5) ?New development to exclude septic tanks. No new development or redevelopment within the 
coastal high hazard area shall be permitted to use septic tanks. 
(6) ?Publicly funded infrastructure. Publicly funded infrastructure shall not be built within the coastal 
high hazard area unless the facility is for the protection of public health and safety. 
(i) ?Restrictions on development impacting Class II waters. Class II waters are defined by DEP as 
coastal waterbodies which currently do or have potential for supporting shellfish harvesting. That 
portion of the Indian River within the city corporate limits has been classified by the Florida 
Department of Protection, Southeast Subdistrict, as a Class II waterbody. The following development 
restrictions shall be imposed: 
(1) ?Limitation on dredging. Dredging activities shall be limited to approved maintenance dredging 
and shall minimize adverse impacts on shellfish propagation or harvesting. 
(2) ?Intergovernmental coordination. Development petitions potentially impacting Class II waters 
shall be coordinated with the DEP and the SJRWMD in order to ensure that storm water run-off 
and all discharge processes are compliant with the laws enforced by agencies having 
jurisdiction. The city shall notify the appropriate agency with the jurisdiction as potential issues 
or problems are identified by the city. 
(3) ?Restriction on use. Use of Class II water shall be restricted to water dependent activities that 
are not contrary to the public interest and satisfy a community need. 
(4) ?Restrictions on modification of grassbeds. Modification of grassbeds shall be restricted to only 
those cases involving overriding public interest. Where modification of grass beds is permitted 
the city shall not approve a site plan unless the applicant for development has demonstrated 
compliance with the following: 
a. ?A determination of overriding public interest has been demonstrated prior to modification of 
grassbeds. 
b. ?Project run-off and nutrient introduction shall be controlled to prevent an increase in water 
turbidity. 
c. ?Projects damaging grassbeds during construction shall incorporate mitigative techniques 
which re-establish benthonic conditions favorable to natural regeneration. 
d. ?The city shall coordinate closely with state and federal agencies during the permitting 
processes to ensure that the intent of these policies is carried out. 
(j) ?Estuarine shoreline access. The city has adopted the state standard for shoreline access to the 
Indian River Lagoon and Sebastian River. The city shall preserve existing access points and shall 
strive to add additional access points in order to achieve access points at approximately one-half 
mile intervals along the estuarine shoreline. 
(k) ?Multi-agency review of coastal management issues. As part of the staff analysis and evaluation of 
site plans involving land adjacent to the Indian River Lagoon as well as major site plans impacting 
the St. Sebastian River, the planning and growth management director shall coordinate with 
representatives of county, state and federal agencies having jurisdiction over coastal issues, 
including as may be applicable the: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers, State Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), the St. Johns River Water 
Management District (SJRWMD), the Treasure Coast Regional Planning Council, Indian River 
County, and other federal, state, and regional agencies as may be appropriate in managing the 
following activities: 
(1) ?The city shall coordinate all development and resource conservation measures impacting the 
waters of the state and the Sebastian River with the above cited agencies. These activities shall 
include, but not be limited to, review of proposed development potentially impacting natural 
resources, including development petitions for docks, shoreline stabilization, dredging, or other 
alteration of natural resources under federal or state jurisdiction. 
(2) ?The city shall coordinate with technical staff within DEP and SJRWMD in order to ensure 
implementation of sound principles and practices of coastal resource management during 
review of major site plans as well as in the formulation of policies impacting coastal resource 
management. 
(3) ?The city shall coordinate with the SJRWMD, the DEP, as well as other appropriate state 
agencies in matters surrounding stormwater management, drainage, water quality and quantity, 
and consumptive use permitting. 
(4) ?The city shall ensure that all issues surrounding development impacts on wetlands or other 
resources under federal and/or state jurisdiction are managed based on timely coordination, 
exchange of information, and appropriate follow-up by the city and all agencies having 
jurisdiction over the issue. The city shall request jurisdictional determinations from all 
appropriate agencies prior to the issuance of development orders or building permits for all sites 
within the city. 
(5) ?The city shall coordinate with Indian River County on issues surrounding hurricane evacuation, 
stormwater management on county roadways, public access, and other coastal issues of 
mutual concern. 
(l) ?Regulating impacts of development on waterbodies. Site plans adjacent to estuarine waters shall 
comply with the following performance criteria: 
(1) ?Surface water management systems shall be consistent with the city's adopted drainage level 
of service cited in article IX, Concurrency Management, and applicable federal, state, and 
regional standards. 
(2) ?In addition to requirements of article XII, Stormwater Management, the stormwater 
management plan shall indicate the characteristics of the wetland buffer, if required pursuant to 
section 54-3-11.4(c), which requires an upland buffer separating wetland (in this case, the 
submerged land) and upland areas and in which development activities may be regulated to 
protect the estuary. The upland buffer shall be an area landward of the upland edge of an 
estuary and shall provide an undeveloped area that separates developed upland from the 
estuarine waters. In this case the purpose of the buffer area is to ensure the continuing function 
of the estuary and related wetland communities, to prevent pollutants within surface water runoff 
from entering the estuarine waters, and to enhance water quality. The city shall retain the right 
to prohibit development within the buffer area. The boundary of an upland buffer area shall be 
consistent with best management principles and practices and shall be compliant with 
applicable St. Johns River Water Management District or other applicable permitting standards 
for upland buffers adjacent to the estuary. 
(3) ?A vegetated and functional littoral zone shall be established as part of the surface water 
management system of lakes occurring on all property. Prior to construction of the surface 
water management system for any phase of a project, the developer shall prepare a design and 
management plan for the wetland/littoral zone that will be developed as part of these systems. 
The plan should: 
a. ?Include typical cross sections of the surface water management system showing the 
average water elevation and the -3 foot contour (i.e., below average elevation), or a 75-foot 
distance from the wetland buffer, whichever is greater; 
b. ?Specify how vegetation is to be established within this zone, including the extent, method, 
type and timing of any planting to be provided; and 
c. ?Provide a description of any management procedures to be followed in order to ensure the 
continued viability and health of the upland, wetland transition area and water body. The 
upland buffer zone shall consist primarily of native vegetation and shall be maintained 
permanently as part of the water management system. A minimum, ten square feet of 
vegetated littoral zone per linear foot of lake shoreline shall be established as part of the 
surface water management system. The developer's buffer zone management plan shall 
include a plan acceptable to the city for the long-term management/maintenance of 
stormwater, shoreline stabilization, and estuarine water quality protection. The burden for 
perpetual maintenance rests with the property owner. 
d. ?Should it be necessary to establish or replenish shoreline or buffer zone vegetation, the 
developer should use plants that are highly salt tolerant as part of the aquascape (i.e. 
mangroves). Aquatic planting that is necessary shall be illustrated on the required 
landscape plan submittal for site plan review. 
(4) ?Outstanding Florida Waters, Class II, and Class III Waters shall be protected by incorporating 
the following provisions into the city's land development regulations: 
a. ?Dredging and filling activities shall be limited to DEP, U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, and 
SJRWMD and any other applicable agency approved dredging. 
b. ?Ensure good water quality by coordinating with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services, DEP, 
and the SJRWMD in monitoring the quality of stormwater run-off and all discharge 
processes where these agencies have jurisdiction. 
The city shall notify the appropriate agency with jurisdiction as potential issues or problems 
are identified by the city. The city's amended land development regulations shall provide 
performance criteria designed to ensure that new development provides effective and 
adequate storm-water management improvements concurrent with the impacts of new 
development. All new development shall comply with drainage level of service criteria. 
c. ?Prohibit the use of these waters for water dependent activities that are contrary to the 
public interest and do not satisfy a community need. 
d. ?Prohibit modification of marine grassbeds unless required by an overriding public interest, 
and the activity is approved by federal, state, and/or regional agencies having jurisdiction. 
e. ?Where modification of grassbeds is permitted by agencies having jurisdiction, the city shall 
ensure that: 
1. ?A determination of overriding public interest has been demonstrated prior to 
modification of grassbeds. 
2. ?Project run-off and nutrient introduction shall be controlled to prevent an increase in 
water turbidity. 
3. ?Projects damaging grassbeds during construction shall incorporate mitigative 
techniques which re-establish benthic conditions favorable to natural regeneration. 
Mitigation should only be allowed at a three or four to one ratio as recommended by 
the Marine Resources Division of DEP. 
4. ?Special attention shall be given to stipulations cited in (1) through (3) above during the 
development review process. The city shall coordinate closely with state and federal 
agencies during the permitting processes to ensure that the intent of these policies is 
carried out. 
f. ?Protect aquatic and wetland wildlife and vegetative species. 
(m) ?Exemptions to coastal resource protection regulations. The following activities shall be exempt from 
the coastal resource protection regulations. 
(1) ?Minor maintenance or emergency repairs to existing structures or improved areas. 
(2) ?Clearing of shoreline vegetation (excluding protected species) to create walking trails having no 
structural components, not to exceed four feet in width. The city reserves the power to restrict 
the number and design of walking trails. 
(3) ?Timber catwalks, docks, and trail bridges that are less than four feet wide, provided that no 
filling, flooding, dredging, draining, ditching, tiling or excavation is done, except limited filling and 
excavating necessary for the installation of pilings. 
(4) ?Recreational fishing and temporary blinds. 
(5) ?Constructing fences where no fill activity is required. 
    Notwithstanding, any permitted development shall provide a plan acceptable to the city that ensures 
maintenance of water quality and coastal resource integrity in perpetuity. 


Sec. 54-3-11.5. - Wildlife habitat preservation and protection of flora and fauna. 
    Vegetative communities and wildlife habitats (particularly those identified as primary habitat for 
endangered or threatened species or species of special concern) which are deemed environmentally 
significant shall be protected from adverse impacts associated with development. Table VI-1: 
"Endangered, Threatened, and Species of Special Concern by Habitat" is contained within the 
comprehensive plan conservation element data inventory and analysis. This table identifies essential 
breeding, feeding or habitat sites for endangered or potentially endangered flora or fauna that shall be 
protected pursuant to the following regulations. 
    Applicants for development within any areas identified as refuge, breeding, feeding, or habitat areas 
of endangered or threatened species or species of special concern shall prepare a habitat management 
plan which shall as a minimum comply with regulation in subsections (a), (b) and (c) below. 
(a) ?Critical habitat management plan required. Site plans and preliminary plats shall include a 
"critical habitat management plan" prepared by a professional biologist, ecologist, or other 
related professional. The plan shall ensure the protection of endangered and threatened flora 
and fauna as determined by the state or federal government. As a minimum standard this plan 
shall analyze the following issues: 
(1) ?Identify the occurrences of designated species by a qualified ecologist; 
(2) ?Land needs to support continued on-site presence of the species; 
(3) ?Impacts of proposed development that will disturb the species; 
(4) ?Management plans and measures necessary to protect the subject species; 
(5) ?Cost to developer to implement the recommended management plan as approved. 
(b) ?Criteria for reviewing critical habitat plan. Development activities that have an adverse effect 
upon a designated species shall require mitigation acceptable to the city or shall not be 
permitted. Viable (i.e., capable of living) habitat for endangered or threatened species or 
species of special concern occurring on a site shall be identified on the management plans as 
preservation areas. All development activities shall be prohibited within these preservation 
areas with the exception of recreational and educational uses where such uses shall not 
adversely affect such species. 
The city staff shall review the critical habitat management plan as well as the federal and/or 
state agencies having jurisdiction. The final development plan shall comply with directives of the 
federal and/or state or local agencies having jurisdiction and the most restrictive shall apply. 
(c) ?Incentives for reservation of conservation easements. The applicant and the city may negotiate 
a development agreement that ensures the preservation of habitats. Where the applicant 
agrees to dedicate a conservation easement embracing the identified habitats, the city reserves 
the right to provide for a transfer of density or intensity to adjacent lands under common 
ownership which are unencumbered by environmentally sensitive ecosystems. 
(d) ?Buy out alternative. If the applicant desires to develop a critical habitat, the city, with consent of 
agencies having jurisdiction, may allow the applicant to develop the critical habitat only if the 
applicant pays a fee in lieu of dedicating a conservation easement to preserve the critical 
habitat. However, any payment allowed in lieu of preservation must be sufficient to purchase 
equally sensitive habitat of similar or greater size. Such cash payment shall be placed in a 
special fund for future purchase or debt retirement from the purchase or mitigation of critical 
habitat. 


Sec. 54-3-11.6. - Floodplain protection. 
    Development of the floodplain (the A, AE, and VE zone on the FIRM maps) shall meet the floodplain 
management requirements in article XII, Surface Water Management, and article XIII, Flood Protection. 


Sec. 54-3-11.7. - Hazardous waste storage and disposal. 
    No hazardous wastes shall be stored or disposed of on wetlands. Similarly, no hazardous wastes 
shall be stored or disposed of on upland buffers pursuant to this article. 


Sec. 54-3-11.8. - Conservation of potable water supply. 
    The city shall assist in regulating development for purposes of complying with policies of the St. 
Johns River Water Management District directed toward conservation of potable water supply and to 
achieve a reduction in the current rates of water consumption. Therefore, development plans shall be 
required to comply with the following potable water supply performance criteria: 
(1) ?If non-potable alternative sources of irrigation water are available, potable water supplies shall 
not be used to meet irrigation needs. 
(2) ?All new development shall be required to use water-saving plumbing fixtures. 
(3) ?In order to reduce demand for irrigation water (which in turn often places greater demand upon 
potable water sources), at least 50% of all landscaping material for commercial sites obtained 
from off-site sources for use on any site should be native plant material adapted to soil and 
climatic conditions existing on the subject site. Further, at least 50% of all trees used in 
landscaping shall be drought tolerant native species adapted to soil and climatic conditions 
existing on-site in order to lessen water demand. 


Sec. 54-3-11.9. - Irrigation wells. 
    Irrigation wells as regulated herein are defined as: Wells constructed for the obtaining of 
groundwater for the irrigation of lawns and landscaping, and whose size or capacity are below the 
thresholds for regulation by state agencies. For purposes of mitigating potential adverse impacts on land 
use caused by the construction of irrigation wells, the city shall require that any irrigation well installed 
within the city shall first obtain a permit for the irrigation well from the appropriate permitting agency. All 
irrigation wells shall be constructed by a water well contractor licensed under chapter 17-531, F.A.C., to 
engage in the business of construction, repair, or abandonment of wells. Similarly, all irrigation wells shall 
be constructed in accordance with all applicable state regulations and good engineering practices, 
including section 17-532.500, F.A.C. 


Sec. 54-3-11.10. - St. Sebastian River Upland Buffer. 
(1) ?For parcels created after March 1, 2007 along the St. Sebastian River, a 100-foot shoreline 
protection buffer is hereby established measured from the mean high water mark of the river or 50 
feet from the landward boundary of jurisdictional wetlands along the river or any tributary, whichever 
is greater. For parcels of record which existed in the city prior to March 1, 2007, or annexed after 
said date and having exited prior to June 18, 1991, a 50-foot shoreline protection buffer for unplatted 
parcels, and a 25-foot buffer for existing platted lots is hereby established on land parcels bordering 
the St. Sebastian River, measured from the mean high water line. In no case, however, with 
reference to pre-existing parcels or lots of record as described above, shall the buffer(s) exceed 20 
percent of the parcel or lot depth perpendicular to the applicable waterway 
(2) ?Within the shoreline protection buffer, no development shall be permitted with the exception of 
docks, boat ramps, pervious walkways and elevated walkways which provide the property owner 
with reasonable access to the waterway. No more than 20 percent or 25 feet, whichever is greater, 
of any shoreline may be altered for reasonable access. Native vegetation in the remainder of the 
shoreline protection buffer shall remain unaltered, except as may be allowed for trimming under city 
tree protection regulations. 
(3) ?Shoreline alteration shall be prohibited, unless it is in the public interest or prevents or repairs 
erosion damage, or provides reasonable access to the water, does not adversely impact water 
quality, natural or adjacent shoreline uses, and is permitted by all applicable jurisdictional regulatory 
agencies. Any native vegetation removed in such instances shall be relocated or replaced on-site 
with comparable vegetation and amount. 
(Ord. No. O-07-05, § 1, 3-14-2007) 


Sec. 54-3-11.11. - Roseland Road Buffer. 
(1) ?For city owned lands adjacent to Roseland Road, including the Sebastian Municipal Airport (SMA) 
and SMA leaseholds, a 50-foot vegetative buffer is hereby established and created. 
(2) ?The buffer shall exist from the Roseland Road eastern right-of-way and extend 50 feet eastward 
along the entire length of the property line of city or Sebastian Municipal Airport owned lands. 
(3) ?Existing vegetation within the Roseland Road Buffer shall remain unaltered, except to permit 
removal as regulated in article XIV of the city's land development code (section 54-3-14). Vegetation 
removal may also be required for generally recognized traffic safety standards specified in the 
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the Florida Department of Transportation Manuals and 
Indian River County Traffic Engineering standards. 
(4) ?The city reserves the right to replace and improve existing airport business directory signage. 
(Ord. No. O-09-14, § 1, 1-13-2010) 


ARTICLE XII. - SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT 


Sec. 54-3-12.1. - Applicability. 
    The minimum standards for surface water management and flood protection set forth in this article 
shall be applicable to all new construction, development or redevelopment requiring updated code 
compliance. 


Sec. 54-3-12.2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of 
Sebastian; to implement those policies and objectives found in the drainage element of the city's 
comprehensive plan; to ensure protection of land and improvements together with natural resources 
through the use of responsible stormwater management and flood protection practices; to restrict or 
prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or 
which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; to require that uses 
vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the 
time of initial construction; to control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural 
protective barrier which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; to control filling, grading, 
dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; to prevent or regulate the 
construction of flood barriers which unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase hazards to other 
lands; and to ensure replenishment of the aquifer system and to provide a continuing usable water 
supply. 


Sec. 54-3-12.3. - Rules of construction. 
    These requirements are intended to complement regulations of the Florida Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP) and the St. John's River Water Management District (S.J.R.W.M.D.), all 
as adopted or as may be amended from time to time. Approval of a stormwater management system 
under these requirements shall not relieve any applicant of the necessity to obtain required permits or 
approvals from other state, regional or local agencies. In the event of a conflict between these regulations 
and state regulations, the state regulations shall prevail unless these regulations are more restrictive. 


Sec. 54-3-12.4. - Prohibited activity. 
(a) ?It shall be illegal for any person to construct, and/or alter, or arrange for, authorize, or participate in 
development within the incorporated area of the city without first obtaining a valid permit to construct 
either a drainage, stormwater management, and flood protection system pursuant to this code. 
(b) ?It shall be illegal for any person to construct any structure in such a manner as to impede the 
functioning of a drainage system that is: (1) publicly maintained or (2) located on private property and 
is a part of a drainage system serving more than one owner when such system is located in an 
easement which exists for the benefit of other land owners. A structure which meets the 
requirements of the city's standard specifications for the construction of public facilities and physical 
improvements shall be presumed not to impede the functioning of the drainage system. 


Sec. 54-3-12.5. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the surface water management permitting requirements 
herein established: 
(a) ?Any maintenance, alteration, renewal, repair, use or improvement of an existing structure which 
does not change or affect the rate or volume of stormwater runoff, or the construction of any 
structure or addition thereto which does not create an impervious surface exceeding ten percent 
of the site or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(b) ?Any activity or development project which is demonstrated by the applicant to have vested 
rights. 
(c) ?All activities undertaken by a governmental agency within their respective easements and 
rights-of-ways. These surface water management policies shall not be construed to prevent the 
committing of any act otherwise lawful and necessary to prevent material harm to or destruction 
of real or personal property as a result of a present emergency, including but not limited to fire, 
infestation by pests, or hazards resulting from violent storms or hurricanes or when the property 
is in imminent peril and the necessity of obtaining a permit is impractical and would cause 
undue hardship in the protection of the property. 
(d) ?A report of any such emergency action shall be made to the city engineer by the owner or 
person in control of the property upon which emergency action was taken as soon as 
practicable, but not more than ten days following such action. Remedial action may be required 
by the city engineer, subject to appeal to the city council in the event of dispute. 


Sec. 54-3-12.6. - Single-family drainage, stormwater management. 
    Drainage and flood protection regulations are applied to the construction of single-family and duplex 
homes. In newer subdivisions complete drainage systems have been constructed to address most, if not 
all, drainage concerns. Nonetheless, lots must be filled and graded in a manner to meet other 
requirements including the standards for septic tanks. The following drainage, stormwater management, 
and flood protection regulations apply to single-family and duplex homes. 
(a) ?Flood protection. Prior to constructing a single-family home or duplex on a parcel in a flood 
hazard zone, a Type "C" stormwater management permit shall be obtained from the city 
engineer. The city engineer shall approve any revisions to the approved permit. 
(b) ?Drainage and stormwater management. Prior to constructing a single-family home or duplex on 
a parcel not in a flood hazard zone, a Type "D" (known as a drainage permit) stormwater 
management permit shall be obtained from the city engineer. The city engineer shall approve 
any revisions to the approved permit. 
No certificates of occupancy shall be issued until a functional drainage system has been 
constructed and approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may require the construction 
of retaining walls, roof gutters, underdrains, or other facilities deemed necessary to provide 
adequate drainage. 


Sec. 54-3-12.7. - Commercial, industrial or institutional sites with less than 5,000 square feet impervious 
surface drainage, stormwater management. 
    Drainage and flood protection regulations are applied to the construction of commercial, industrial or 
institutional sites. Lots may need to be filled and graded in a manner to meet various requirements. The 
following drainage, stormwater management, and flood protection regulations apply to commercial, 
industrial or institutional sites that have less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface. 
(a) ?Flood protection. For each commercial, industrial or institutional facility located in a flood 
hazard zone, the site plan approval application shall include an application for a Type "B" 
stormwater management permit. The city engineer shall approve any revisions to the approved 
permit. 
(b) ?Drainage and stormwater management. For each commercial, industrial or institutional facility 
not located in a flood hazard zone, the site plan approval application shall include an application 
for a Type "A" stormwater management permit. The city engineer may waive any of the 
requirements of section 54-3-12.10, if the city engineer determines that such requirements are 
unnecessary. The Type "A" stormwater management permit shall be approved by the city 
engineer prior to the issuance of a land clearing or building permit. The city engineer shall 
approve any revisions to the approved conceptual plan. 
No certificates of occupancy shall be issued until a functional drainage system has been 
constructed and approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may require the construction 
of retaining walls, roof gutters, underdrains, or other facilities deemed necessary to provide 
adequate drainage. 


Sec. 54-3-12.8. - Commerical, industrial, or institutional sites with 5,000 square feet or more impervious 
surface drainage, stormwater management. 
    Drainage and flood protection regulations are applied to the construction of commercial, industrial or 
institutional sites. Lots may need to be filled and graded in a manner to meet various requirements. The 
following drainage, stormwater management, and flood protection regulations apply to commercial, 
industrial or institutional sites which have 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface. 
(a) ?Flood protection. For each commercial, industrial or institutional facility located in a flood 
hazard zone, the site plan approval application shall include an application for a Type "B" 
stormwater management permit. Site plan approval and a Type "B" permit shall be issued prior 
to the issuance of a land clearing or building permit. The city engineer shall approve any 
revisions to the approved permit. 
(b) ?Drainage and stormwater management. For each commercial, industrial or institutional facility 
not located in a flood hazard zone, the site plan approval application shall include an application 
for a Type "A" stormwater management permit. Prior to the issuance of a Type "A" permit, the 
project's engineer of record shall certify that the plans submitted to the city are the same as the 
drainage and stormwater management plans approved by the St. Johns River Water 
Management District (S.J.R.W.M.D.) or the department of environmental protection. Site plan 
approval and a Type "A" permit shall be issued prior to the issuance of a land clearing or 
building permit. The city engineer shall approve any revisions to the approved permit. 
No certificates of occupancy shall be issued until a functional drainage system has been 
constructed and approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may require the construction 
of retaining walls, roof gutters, underdrains, or other facilities deemed necessary to provide 
adequate drainage. 


Sec. 54-3-12.9. - Subdivision developments, drainage and stormwater management. 
(a) ?Flood protection. For each subdivision where a portion of the site is determined to be in a flood 
hazard zone, a Type "B" permit shall be obtained prior to the approval of a construction permit. The 
Type "B" permit shall be consistent with the approved preliminary plat. The city engineer shall 
approve any revisions to the approved permit. 
(b) ?Drainage and stormwater management. Each subdivision not located in a flood hazard zone shall 
obtain a Type "A" stormwater management permit. A Type "A" permit shall be issued prior to the 
issuance of a construction permit. The city engineer shall approve any revisions to the approved 
permit. 


Sec. 54-3-12.10. - Type "A" permit, stormwater management (drainage), commercial subdivisions. 
(a) ?Criteria. No Type "A" permit shall be issued unless the following criteria are met: 
(1) ?Design storm. The design of the on-site stormwater management system shall be based at a 
minimum on a 25-year frequency, 24-hour duration storm event. The design of any off-site 
stormwater management system improvements shall be based upon a 25-year frequency, 24-
hour duration storm event. The modified Type 2 SCS rainfall distribution shall be used. Post 
development runoff shall not exceed pre-development runoff. 
(2) ?One or more elevation benchmarks NGVD (1929) must be established or referenced. The 
stormwater system is to be designed utilizing the benchmarks. 
(3) ?The hydrologic computations for the stormwater management system shall be based on full 
hydrograph generation for the development project and contributory area utilizing such methods 
as published by the National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) (U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, SCS "Natural Engineering Handbook," Section 4, Hydrology: 1985, and "Urban 
Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical Release No. 55: 1986). For projects of less than 
12.00 acres, the rational method of runoff computation is satisfactory. The rainfall intensity-
duration curves provided in Volume 2 - Procedures Florida Department of Transportation 
(FDOT) Drainage Manual are hereby incorporated as part of this code and shall be used in 
making all required hydrologic computations. 
(4) ?Required retention. Retention or detention with filtration of the first one inch of rainfall shall be 
provided on-site. Detention with filtration or retention shall be provided on-site for the initial one 
inch of rainfall plus additional stormwater runoff generated by the development project over and 
above that generated by the site prior to the proposed development unless there is a legal 
positive outfall available which has sufficient capacity to accept the additional runoff. All projects 
located east of the Florida East Coast Railroad shall retain the first one and one-half inch of 
rainfall on-site before discharge into a legal positive outfall or the Indian River. 
(5) ?Retention or detention design criteria. 
a. ?Retention or detention facilities shall be constructed in such a manner as to maximize 
utilization of available percolation capabilities on the site for recharge enhancement, to 
minimize mosquito breeding and shall be easy to maintain. All detention facilities shall 
have a skimmer if required by SJRWMD. 
b. ?Stormwater management systems that are to be dedicated to the city shall not penetrate 
the seasonally high groundwater table. 
c. ?Private wet retention/detention systems shall meet the following criteria: 
1. ?The applicant provide a water quality certification from the St. Johns River Water 
Management District or DEP that the direct connection to the groundwater table, as 
proposed, will not significantly adversely affect the quality of the groundwater. The 
issuance of a SRJWMD permit, exception, or waiver shall be sufficient and conclusive 
that all water quality standards are satisfied. If the site is below SJRWMD or DEP 
thresholds, the city engineer can waive this certification. 
2. ?The site is not located on a recharge area. 
d. ?As the SJRWMD requirements for treatment are equal to, or more stringent than the city's, 
the issuance to the applicant of an appropriate SJRWMD permit, exemption, or waiver 
shall be sufficient to show that all water quality treatment standards contained in this code 
are satisfied for Types A, B, and C permits. For issuance of Type A, B, C, or D permit, the 
applicant must show adherence to other sections of this code related to flood regulation, 
water runoff and quality discharge regulation, and other appropriate regulations contained 
herein. 
(6) ?Legal positive outfall required. Discharges from the development project shall be handled to a 
point of legal positive outfall. Tailwater stages of the receiving waters must be taken into 
account in design. 
(7) ?Dry detention discharge. The bottom of dry retention areas shall be sloped to form a permanent 
drain. A detention area shall have an outlet device, and shall not be lower than the elevation of 
the off-site receiving channel or water body unless protected by a suitably designed flap gate. 
(8) ?Open drainage ways. Where permitted, open drainage ways shall retain natural design 
characteristics and be so designed and protected that they do not present a hazard to life or 
property. The design shall include measures to protect against scour and erosion and provide 
for stable side slopes. Whenever possible, such waterways shall provide for adequate flushing 
action by prevailing winds and currents to assure the prevention of stagnant water and debris 
accumulation. 
(9) ?Disposition of stormwater runoff. The stormwater management system for developments 
located predominately on excessively drained soils should maximize stormwater infiltration. This 
shall be accomplished through the use of bottomless inlets, perforated pipe, grading to retard 
runoff, natural or artificial retention or detention basins, or other methods depending on the 
characteristics of the land area. Specific guidelines are as follows: 
a. ?Areas and lots shall be developed to maximize the amount of natural rainfall that is 
percolated into the soil and to minimize direct overland runoff into adjoining streets and 
watercourses. Stormwater runoff from roofs and other impervious surfaces should be 
diverted into swales, or terraces on the lot. 
b. ?Street drainage shall be sodded swales or curb and gutter in accordance with city 
specifications, provided all curb and gutter systems shall discharge or direct water across a 
sodded swale area or other filtering medium. 
c. ?Whenever practical, as indicated by soil characteristics, water table elevation, and 
topography, the overflow from any swale used shall be diverted to percolation areas, 
ponding areas, or natural or artificial seepage basins of sufficient capacity to retain and 
provide for the maximum infiltration of stormwater runoff from each drainage area for the 
design storm. 
d. ?Whenever practical, except in those development projects where temporary ponding is 
allowable, each percolation or retention area shall include positive drainage facilities which 
provide for drainage to public outfalls or a lake, or watercourse, to handle the runoff from 
storms of longer duration and severity than the design storm. 
e. ?The area surrounding a retention or detention basin is recommended to be used as private 
or public open space and shall be grassed unless the slopes exceed four to one which 
would require sod. 
f. ?The Soil Survey of Indian River County published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Soil Conservation Service: 1987, shall be the document to determine soil classifications. 
Such soil classification may be modified by on-site testing and engineering evaluation. 
g. ?Flood routing analysis for all new local road facilities shall show that the water elevation 
shall at no time during the design storm duration exceed an elevation that would: 
1. ?Permit floodwater encroachment outside existing drainage easements or right-of-way 
for a three-year/24-hour duration storm. 
2. ?Place more than 20% of the front yard or rear yard area below floodwater elevation 
any time during a ten-year/24-hour duration storm. 
3. ?Exceed two inches above the lowest elevation on the centerline profile of the roadway 
for a 25-year/24-hour duration storm. 
4. ?Exceed the finished-floor elevation of any structure for a 100-year/three-day duration 
storm for projects located in a flood hazard area. 
h. ?All new stormwater discharging into any canal or receiving water body shall be designed to 
convey the permitted discharge after tailwater conditions are considered. 
i. ?All bridges shall be designed to pass the 100-year/three-day duration storm event. 
j. ?All drainage easements shall be sodded. 
(10) ?Material specifications for culverts and storm sewers. The following pipe materials are 
acceptable: 
a. ?Reinforced concrete pipe; aluminum pipe; aluminum pipe arch; or HDPE. Other pipe 
material may be used if approved for the intended use by the Florida Department of 
Transportation (FDOT). In private systems, bituminous-coated steel may be acceptable as 
determined by the city engineer. 
b. ?Workmanship and pipe materials shall conform to FDOT Standard Specifications, latest 
edition. 
c. ?FDOT approved pipe material shall be used under city right-of-way pavement and/or into 
salt water outfalls. Concrete for reinforced concrete box culverts shall conform to FDOT's 
Standard Specifications, latest edition. 
(11) ?Inlets. Design and spacing of inlets shall be in accordance with FDOT's Standard 
Specifications or the city's standard specifications. 
(12) ?Drainage structures. All cross drains, driveway culverts, and storm sewers shall have 
headwalls, flared-end sections, mitered end sections or terminating structures in accordance 
with city standard specifications or FDOT's Standard Specifications, latest edition. Endwalls, 
inlets, or other appropriate terminating and intermediate structures, and backflow devices may 
be required where necessary. Exfiltration systems shall be equipped with clean-outs at all 
terminating points. Mitered ends for culverts shall be no greater than three to one slope. 
Culverts for driveways shall be sized by the engineer for the project to adequately handle runoff. 
The elevation shall be included in the designs. 
(13) ?Temporary ponding. Temporary ponding is allowable in areas specifically designed with high 
percolation rates so that ponding does not last more than eight hours. 
(14) ?Major road crossings. Materials used in drainage facilities which cross, traverse, or encroach 
major roads as depicted on the city thoroughfare plan shall be of FDOT approved materials and 
designed for a 50-year life. 
(15) ?Stormwater facilities. All stormwater facilities shall be established in dedicated water 
management tracts, easements or specified common areas. Condominium documents, deed 
restrictions or other legally binding instruments shall describe the location of such areas, 
specifically define the mechanism for preservation and maintenance of any private drainage 
systems, and shall appoint an entity responsible for maintenance and preservations. All water 
management tracts shall include maintenance access around the perimeter of the maintenance 
berm, the top of which may be level or have a slope not steeper than eight feet horizontal to one 
foot vertical slope and a minimum 15 feet wide, completely around and outside the area 
submerged by the designed stormwater elevation and connecting with an ingress-egress 
easement or public right-of-way, a minimum of 15 feet wide, for access if lots or tracts are to be 
under separate ownership. Common areas properly dedicated for access and maintenance of 
drainage facilities will meet this requirement if an owner's association is properly established. 
Open channels and swales, shall be located within an easement with a minimum 15-foot width 
for access and maintenance for single-family residential development. Retention and detention 
facilities above and below the designed high water elevation shall be graded to slopes not 
steeper than four feet horizontal to one foot vertical, or a properly designed retaining wall shall 
be used. Dry retention slopes and wet retention slopes above the designed low water elevation 
shall be grassed or otherwise stabilized. Retention or detention ponds with an area having more 
than two feet of water at design storm or a permanent pool with the exception of ponds, or 
lakes, in public parks, golf courses, or in developments in which the pond, or lake is designed to 
serve as an aesthetic amenity to the development, shall be fenced with a minimum four-foot 
high fence. 
(16) ?Master stormwater management plan. In watershed areas where the city has an adopted 
master stormwater management plan, all proposed facilities shall be in conformance with the 
adopted plan. 
(17) ?Receiving stormwater systems. Stormwater systems connected to any local, regional or state 
drainage district system shall be designed with consideration given to the capacity of the overall 
system and shall be compatible with the objectives of each respective jurisdiction. 
(18) ?Runoff. Rainfall runoff from roads, parking lots, roofs, and other impervious surfaces shall be 
directed to areas where percolation into soil can be accomplished prior to introduction into any 
off-site receiving facilities. Pervious areas on line shall be covered with grass or suitable ground 
cover that has effective filtering characteristics. 
(19) ?No adverse impact. The stormwater management system shall handle all stormwater that 
flows into, through and from the project without creating adverse impacts on other lands served 
by the stormwater management system or by the receiving waters relative to flooding, erosion 
hazards, or water quality and quantity. 
(20) ?Flood hazard zone. The applicant shall demonstrate that the development project is not in a 
flood hazard zone including area of shallow flooding, area of special flood hazard, coastal high 
hazard area and floodway. 
These areas may be identified through flood hazard studies and delineated on the official flood 
hazard map. Current maps and supporting information may be inspected at the planning and 
management department or city engineer's office. The city engineer shall obtain, review and 
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or 
other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other 
development in a flood hazard zone comply with the standards for flood protection set forth in 
this article. 
(21) ?Outstanding Florida waters. No permit required by this article shall be issued for any 
development which is designed to discharge directly into, or through an outfall discharging into 
"Outstanding Florida waters" designated by Florida Statutes, unless the system is designed in 
accordance with the following criteria and the criteria of the S.J.R.W.M.D., in addition to all the 
other criteria stated in this article: 
a. ?Runoff from roads, parking lots, roofs, and other impervious surfaces shall be directed to 
grass swales prior to entering a detention system unless off-line treatment or central 
treatment is provided. 
b. ?The system shall be designed in a manner complying with the requirements of the Florida 
Administrative Code, as amended from time to time, and applicant shall provide DEP 
documentation and proof of such compliance. 
(22) ?Existing developments. Provisions applying to existing development: 
a. ?When existing paved Local roads are being resurfaced, or rebuilt the crown of the road 
shall be raised to the minimum elevation of the two-year/24-hour duration storm event. The 
center two lanes of a rebuilt arterial or collector road shall be at a minimum elevation of the 
ten-year/24-hour duration storm event. 
b. ?All sites currently developed, required for any reason to get a major site plan approval, or 
modification of an existing land development permit must have a stormwater management 
system conforming to the provisions of this article for the area being redeveloped. 
c. ?All sites being redeveloped and required to obtain major site plan approval, or modification 
of an existing land development permit shall meet water quality level of service as required 
by this article for the area being redeveloped. 
(b) ?Required information for Type A surface water management permit application. A detailed 
description and drawing (scale one inch equals 50 feet or larger) of the proposed stormwater 
management system shall be submitted to the city engineer by a Florida registered engineer or, for 
any development project constructed on a site of one acre or less, a Florida registered architect as 
long as any engineering service involved in the design is purely incidental to the architect's practice, 
as provided for in section 481.229, F.S., as may be amended from time to time. The following 
information shall be required: 
(1) ?Hydrologic data including design rainfall, project drainage area, tributary off-site drainage area, 
existing and proposed impervious area and soil characteristics including depth to seasonal high 
water table. Soil borings at 400 feet spacing to a depth of six feet shall be provided. Alternate 
representative soil profiles may be used if approved in writing by the city engineer and if 
demonstrated to be from a reliable and generally recognized source. A one-foot contour interval 
of the development shall be provided. The delineation of the latter area shall be satisfactory to 
the city engineer. Justification for wet season water table elevations shall be provided. 
(2) ?Hydrologic calculations for determining existing and proposed stormwater runoff. 
(3) ?Hydraulic data including receiving water stages, stage-storage and stage-discharge data for 
proposed retention and/or detention facilities, and percolation test data as per the following 
procedure: 
a. ?The test holes shall be located as close as possible to the proposed location of exfiltration 
trench or other percolation facility (vertical and horizontal) and, if critical, to a depth two feet 
below the water table (MSL) at the time of the test. 
b. ?A hole for each test of approximately 12 inches diameter (or as required for a maximum 
clearance of one-half inch between the hole and the test casing) is excavated to the 
required depth and the casing is lowered into the hole with a minimum of 12 inches 
extending above the surface of the grade. 
c. ?The test casing shall consist of a pipe that is at least eight inches in diameter with 
perforations in approximately the bottom 75% of the length as measured from the surface. 
The bottom of the casing shall be pointed. Exfiltration increments shall be measured with a 
suitable gauging device. 
d. ?Fill the test bore to six inches above the surface of the existing grade and run test no later 
than two hours after level has exfiltrated to below surface of existing grade. In all cases test 
runs are to start only after the first two inches exfiltrated. If a dry season condition exists, 
the test shall begin when the soil is moist and a wet season is simulated. 
e. ?Run tests for at least 30 minutes and record at least the date, weather, project name, test 
run by, test number, location on site, sketch of hold and casing, groundwater conditions, 
incremental drop and time, and subsurface soil information. Information shall be tabulated 
and attested to by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of 
Florida. The city engineer must be notified at least 24 hours in advance of the tests being 
conducted and reserves the right to witness the test procedure. Exfiltration rates for 
designing the site drainage facilities shall be determined by the developer's engineer from 
these tests based on percolation rate experienced at the elevation of the proposed system 
using a safety factor of two or greater. Alternate percolation or permeability tests 
procedures may be used if approved in writing by the city engineer prior to their use. 
(4) ?Hydraulic calculations for sizing channels, culverts, inlets, retention/detention ponds, pond 
discharge structures, and determining discharge rates and maximum water surface elevations. 
(5) ?Erosion and sedimentation control plans, during and after construction. 
(6) ?Statement of all assumptions and reference sources used in the conduct of the study. 
(7) ?A certificate from a professional engineer licensed in the State of Florida that the soils are 
suitable and proper for the uses and purposes of the proposed development; or submission of a 
plan calling for the removal and replacement of unsatisfactory soils. If the applicant submits a 
plan for removal and replacement of soils, the applicant shall submit a certificate from a 
professional engineer, after the removal and replacement of soils has been completed, stating 
that the new soils are suitable and proper for the uses and purposes of the proposed 
development. Such certificate shall be furnished to the city engineer prior to the issuance of a 
certificate of completion. 
(8) ?Where percolation is proposed, at least one boring per basin shall be submitted. Said borings 
shall be to a depth of 20 feet below the invert of the basin or to a depth sufficient to locate the 
groundwater table or impervious soil layer. 
(9) ?A general description of the manner in which the stormwater management system is to be 
maintained, indicating who or what entity shall be responsible and by what method the 
responsibility shall be created and documented. 
(10) ?A list of all agencies (state, federal or local) having permit jurisdiction for the project. A copy of 
all state, local, S.J.R.W.M.D., and federal permits shall be submitted prior to issuance of a 
building permit. In cases where a surface water management permit is required from the 
S.J.R.W.M.D., identical plans and calculations shall be submitted for review and coordination 
between the city and the S.J.R.W.M.D. The engineer of record shall certify that the 
S.J.R.W.M.D. permit is based on the identical plans approved by the city prior to the issuance of 
a land clearing permit or building permit. 


Sec. 54-3-12.11. - Type "B" permit. 
(a) ?Criteria. When a development project other than a single-family house or duplex is determined to be 
within a flood hazard zone, a Type B permit shall be required and the project shall be reviewed under 
the criteria of sections 54-3-12.10 and 54-3-12.15 and must meet the following additional criteria: 
(1) ?An equal volume of storage capacity must be created for any volume of the regulatory flood 
that would be displaced by fill or structures, excepting storm surge flood areas along the Indian 
River. 
(2) ?The velocity of the regulatory flood must not be adversely altered on any watercourse. 
(3) ?All structures, including buried storage tanks, must be anchored as necessary to resist 
flotation, lateral forces and the impact of floating debris. 
(4) ?No development will be allowed that poses a significant threat of releasing harmful quantities of 
pollutants to surface waters or groundwaters during flooding. 
(5) ?Accessory buildings may be constructed below the flood protection elevation provided there is 
a minimal potential for significant damage by flooding. 
(6) ?If any lot in a residential subdivision lies within a flood hazard zone, then the following 
additional standards apply to approval of the plat: 
a. ?Each lot must include a site suitable for constructing a residential building in conformity 
with the standards of this code. 
b. ?One or more elevation benchmarks must be established and indicated on the plat. Said 
elevations must be referenced to the NGVD (1929) and shall be calculated to within 0.1 
foot. 
c. ?All prospective agreements for deed, purchase agreements, leases or other contracts for 
sale or exchange of lots within the flood hazard zone and all prospective instruments 
conveying title to lots within the flood hazard zone must carry the following flood hazard 
warning prominently displayed on the document: 
FLOOD HAZARD WARNING 
This property may be subject to flooding. You should contact local building and zoning 
officials and obtain the latest information regarding flood elevations and restrictions on 
development before making plans for the use of this property. 
(7) ?All roads shall be set at or above the ten-year flood elevation, but in no case shall a road be 
constructed at an elevation below five feet above sea level. All roads shall be designed to 
maintain drainage flow beneath the road bed so that equalization may occur. 
(8) ?If the development project is in a ten-year flood zone, it must be demonstrated that: 
a. ?The elevation or velocity of the regulatory flood will not be increased as a result of an 
obstruction or displacement of floodwaters. 
b. ?There is no significant threat of releasing quantities of pollutants which have the effect of 
degrading water quality below standards established in Florida Administrative Code, as 
amended from time to time, to surface or groundwater. 
c. ?The capacity of the critical flood zone to store and convey surface waters or perform other 
significant water management functions will not be impaired. 
(b) ?Required information to be submitted with a Type B permit applications. In addition to the 
information required for Type A permits in subsection 54-3-12.10(b), an applicant for a Type B permit 
shall submit to the city engineer all information showing compliance with section the following 
information: 
(1) ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all 
structures. 
(2) ?Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be 
floodproofed. 
(3) ?Provide a certificate from a Florida registered professional engineer or architect that the 
proposed structure and site work design meets the applicable criteria set forth in this article. 
(4) ?Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of 
proposed development. 
(c) ?Required information to be submitted by Type B permit applications after issuance of permit. 
(1) ?Flood elevation. Applicants receiving Type B permits shall provide to the city engineer a flood 
elevation for flood-proofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or in instances where 
the structure is in a coastal high hazard zone, after placement of the horizontal structural 
members of the lowest floor. Within 21 calendar days of establishment of the lowest floor 
elevation, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal 
structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit 
holder to submit to the city engineer a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, 
floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural 
members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level 
based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum. Said certification shall be prepared by, or under the 
direct supervision of, a Florida registered land surveyor or professional engineer and shall be 
certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall 
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and 
certified by same. Any work done within the 21 calendar day period and prior to submission of 
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city engineer shall review the flood 
elevation survey data submitted and shall respond promptly as to any deficiencies noted. 
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and 
prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey, or failure to make 
said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 


Sec. 54-3-12.12. - Type "C" permit. 
(a) ?Criteria. When a single-family house or duplex is determined to be within a flood hazard zone, a 
Type "C" permit shall be required and the project shall be reviewed under the criteria of section 54-3-
12.15 and the finished floor elevation shall be a minimum of 24 inches above the crown of the road. 
(b) ?Required information to be submitted with a Type C permit applications. An applicant for a type "C" 
permit shall submit all information showing compliance with section 3-12.11(a) and all information 
required in section 54-3-12.11(b). 
(c) ?Required information to be submitted to the city by Type C permit applications after issuance of 
permit. 
(1) ?Flood elevation. Applicants receiving Type C permits shall provide to the city engineer a flood 
elevation for floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or in instances where 
the structure is in a coastal high hazard zone, after placement of the horizontal structural 
members of the lowest floor. Within 21 calendar days of establishment of the lowest floor 
elevation, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal 
structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit 
holder to submit to the city engineer a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, 
floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural 
members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level 
based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum. Said certification shall be prepared by, or under the 
direct supervision of, a Florida registered land surveyor or professional engineer and shall be 
certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall 
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and 
certified by same. Any work done within the 21 calendar day period and prior to submission of 
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city engineer shall review the flood 
elevation survey data submitted and shall respond promptly as to any deficiencies noted. 
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and 
prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey, or failure to make 
said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project 


Sec. 54-3-12.13. - Type "D" permit. 
(a) ?Criteria. All conceptual drainage plans (plot plan) shall meet the following criteria: 
(1) ?Provide a sketch to show what elevation information and datum is required, and show how 
slopes are calculated. 
(2) ?Property grading shall not inhibit drainage of other property. 
(3) ?Stormwater runoff shall be directed through a proper system, including driveway culvert. 
Property grading shall not inhibit drainage of other property. 
(4) ?Stormwater runoff shall not encroach on adjacent properties, except in the proper drainage 
easement. 
(5) ?Slopes on the property shall not exceed a maximum of four feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
(6) ?The minimum finished floor elevation shall be a minimum of 18 inches above the crown of the 
adjacent road, unless it can be shown that the natural ground elevations provide adequate 
control for runoff. 
(7) ?The city shall determine the size and location of drainage facilities. 
(b) ?Required Information to be submitted with a Type "D" permit application. Each single-family or 
duplex home building permit, which is not located in a flood hazard zone, shall submit a conceptual 
drainage plan, otherwise called a plot plan, to the city. The plot plan shall depict on a survey. 
(1) ?The size and location of structures, including septic and drain field; 
(2) ?Tree locations; 
(3) ?Elevations of the structures; 
(4) ?Existing topography on property and elevations adjacent to all property lines; 
(5) ?Location and elevation of ditches, crossdrains, and swales; 
(6) ?Location and elevation of road; 
(7) ?Distance to nearest intersection in either direction; 
(8) ?Location and dimension of the driveway and any other data that may be deemed required by 
the city engineer; 
(9) ?Elevations shall be in NGVD (1929) and the benchmark shall be shown or location described 
for reference. 
(c) ?No changes to the plot plan will be allowed without approval of the revisions by the city engineer. 
(d) ?The city engineer shall place onto the plot plan the elevations, and size and location of drainage 
culverts constructed or other structures as may be necessary to construct the drainage system and 
meet the requirements of this section. If insufficient data is available on the plot plan or adjustments 
to the structures would be required in order to issue the permit, the city engineer shall return the plan 
unapproved to the applicant for revision and resubmission. 
(e) ?All plot plans shall be approved by the city engineer prior to the issuance of a land clearing or 
building permit. The city engineer shall approve any revisions to the approved conceptual plan. 


Sec. 54-3-12.14. - Surface water management permit application and review procedures. 
(a) ?Preliminary permit application. Any person who is in doubt as to whether a proposed activity 
requires a permit under this section may request a review by the city engineer upon completion of a 
preliminary application form supplied by the public works department. No fee may be charged for the 
preliminary application. The preliminary application form shall be filed by the owner/applicant and 
shall contain the following elements: 
(1) ?A location map; and 
(2) ?A statement and sketch expressing the intent and scope of the proposed project. The 
completed preliminary application shall be submitted to the city engineer for review. Within ten 
working days after submission of the complete preliminary application, the city engineer will 
notify the applicant that either the project is exempt or that a formal permit application must be 
filed for the project. 
(b) ?Review procedures for Type A or B permit applications. If a Type A or Type B permit is required for 
the project, a pre-application conference shall be held. This pre-application conference shall be held 
concurrent with the required pre-application conference for a site plan or subdivision approval. The 
applicant shall provide a description of the proposed drainage plan and a survey of the property. 
    The application for a Type "A" or "B" permit shall be submitted at the time of submission of a site 
plan approval application for a site plan or prior to the application for a construction permit for a 
subdivision. The applicant shall furnish all required stormwater management information, together with 
flood protection information, if applicable, to the city engineer on forms furnished by the public works 
department. 
    The requirements of this chapter shall be reviewed during the site plan or subdivision review process 
if the project would otherwise require site plan or subdivision review. If such a review is not required, the 
city engineer shall review the application and render a decision. 
(c) ?Review procedures for Type C or D permit applications. If a Type C or D permit is required for the 
project, the applicant shall furnish all necessary flood protection information to the city engineer on 
forms furnished by the public works department. The application shall be reviewed by the city 
engineer within ten working days of receipt of the application. 
    No permit shall be approved if such development will result in an increase in the elevation of the 
regulatory flood, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisance impacts, or 
violation of the public interest, or local ordinance. 


Sec. 54-3-12.15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-11-03, § 1, adopted April 13, 2011, repealed § 54-3-12.15, which 
pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from Ord. No. O-00-15, § 1, adopted June 14, 
2000. 


Sec. 54-3-12.16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-11-03, § 1, adopted April 13, 2011, repealed § 54-3-12.16, which 
pertained to administrative duties and derived from Ord. No. O-00-15, § 1, adopted June 14, 
2000. 


Sec. 54-3-12.17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-11-03, § 1, adopted April 13, 2011, repealed § 54-3-12.17, which 
pertained to variances and derived from Ord. No. O-00-15, § 1, adopted June 14, 2000. 


Sec. 54-3-12.18. - Violations. 
(a) ?In the event the city engineer determines a violation exists, a written notice of violation shall be 
issued to the owner of the property with a copy provided to the code enforcement division. The 
notice shall contain: 
(1) ?The name and address of the owner. 
(2) ?The street address when available or a description of the building or land upon which the 
violation is occurring. 
(3) ?A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
(4) ?A description of the remedial actions necessary to bring the development into compliance and 
a time schedule for completion of such remedial action. 
(5) ?A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the 
notice of violation is directed. 
(6) ?A statement that the city engineers determination of violation may be appealed to the city's 
board of adjustment by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days or the period of time 
specified in subsection (4) above, whichever is less. 
(b) ?The notice of violation shall be served in the same manner as a code violation provided for in 
chapter 2, Code of Ordinances. 
(c) ?If the violation is not corrected in the specified time then the matter shall be turned over to the code 
enforcement staff for action. The notice required in this article shall be deemed to be sufficient for 
notice of violation required in chapter of the Code of Ordinances. 


ARTICLE XIV. - TREE PROTECTION AND LANDSCAPING 


Sec. 54-3-14.1. - Applicability. 
(a) ?The minimum standards for landscaping set forth in this article shall be applicable to all new 
construction, as well as development activity otherwise requiring updated code compliance. 
(b) ?It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to cut down, destroy, remove, relocate or 
effectively destroy through damaging any protected, specimen or historic tree situated on any real 
property or clear any lot or acreage located within the city without first obtaining a permit as provided 
within these provisions. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 1, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.2. - Historic trees. 
    The removal of a "historic tree", as designated by resolution of the city council, requires a removal 
permit approved by the city council; however, historic tree(s) determined to be a hazardous tree(s) by the 
city manager or his designee which requires immediate action may be removed. All reasonable measures 
and alternatives shall be explored to avoid the removal of a historic tree. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 2, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.3. - Mangroves. 
    Mangroves shall not be removed except as provided by this section. Mangroves may be pruned 
provided that the pruning does not result in the death or decline of the mangrove and is in compliance 
with state law. A permit may be issued for the removal of a mangrove only to provide access to a dock or 
pier when there are no practical or permitable alternatives. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 3, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.4. - Undesirable exotic vegetation. 
    All undesirable exotic vegetation must be removed by the developer or property owner at the time of 
clearing, construction or redevelopment. Undesirable exotic vegetation shall not be used in any way to 
meet the tree or landscape requirements of the land development code. Undesirable exotic vegetation 
may be removed without a permit after receiving verification from the city manager or his designee. 
    Under no circumstances shall any of the following five tree species be deliberately introduced into 
the city and planted on public or private property. Any such action shall be deemed a violation of this 
article and shall also be deemed a public nuisance. 
(1) ?Ear tree (Enterolobium Cyclocarpum). 
(2) ?Chinaberry (Melia Azedarch). 
(3) ?Australian Pine (Casuarina Spp). 
(4) ?Punk Tree or Cajeput Tree (Melaleuca Quinquernervia or Melaleuca Leuadendron). 
(5) ?Brazilian Pepper (Schinus Terebinthifolius). 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 4, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.5. - Suitable trees. 
    The following trees shall be utilized in fulfilling the requirements of this article for planting or replacing 
trees: 
(1) ?Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum). 
(2) ?Live Oak (Quercus mytifolia)—Not desirable to plant near septic tanks. 
(3) ?Laurel Oak (Quercus laurifolia)—Not desirable to plant near septic tanks. 
(4) ?Red Maple (Acer rubrum). 
(5) ?Slash Pine (Pinuls elliottii). 
(6) ?Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora). 
(7) ?Southern Red Cedar (Juniperus silicicola). 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 5, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.6. - Tree protection standards. 
(a) ?Application before certain activities; provision of homeowner's packet; replacement of certain trees. 
Prior to grubbing, land clearing or removing any protected trees within the city limits of Sebastian, a 
person shall make application to the city for the appropriate permit. 
    The department shall provide to each permit applicant a "homeowner's packet" that includes, at a 
minimum, information and techniques relating to the protection of trees during land preparation for 
construction or construction activities. The owner of the lot must sign the application which acknowledges 
receipt of a "homeowner's packet" regarding tree protection. 
    All protected and historic trees destroyed or removed without a permit shall be replaced by a tree 
with a minimum height of 12 feet. The cost of replacing unlawfully removed trees shall be incurred by the 
party responsible for the removal or destruction. 
(b) ?Tree protection barricades. Prior to development or construction activity, the developer shall erect 
suitable brightly colored tree protection barricades, a minimum four feet tall, around all trees to be 
preserved and shall remain in place until the construction activities are completed. The area within 
the tree protection barricade shall remain free of all building materials, dirt or other construction 
debris, vehicles and development activities. Barricades shall be erected at a minimum distance from 
the base of the trees to be preserved according to the following standards: 
(1) ?For trees ten inches or less DBH. Tree protection barricades shall be placed a minimum 
distance of five feet from the base of each tree to be protected. 
(2) ?For historic trees and trees greater than ten inches DBH. Protective barricades shall be placed 
at a minimum distance of ten feet from the base of each tree to be protected plus an additional 
one foot for each additional inch DBH greater than ten inches. 
    Changes to grade or construction of impervious surface or utilities within the required protective 
barricade shall be permitted subject to the following guidelines: 
a. ?Changes in grade or construction within the protected zone must be approved by the city 
manager or his designee prior to beginning construction. Plans must be submitted which 
illustrate in detail protective measures necessary to protect the trees. 
b. ?Impervious surfaces shall maintain minimum clearance from the bases of all trees to be 
protected. Trees fifteen inches DBH or less shall have a minimum clearance of six feet. Trees 
over 15 inches DBH up to 20 inches DBH shall have a minimum clearance of nine feet. Historic 
and trees over 20 inches DBH shall have a minimum clearance of 12 feet. 
c. ?All roots outside the protective barricade to be removed during construction shall be severed 
clean. 
d. ?All pruning of historic and specimen trees shall be done by a qualified tree service during 
construction. 
(c) ?Restriction of attachments to trees. It shall be unlawful to attach anything to a protected, historic, or 
specimen tree other than supportive wires, braces or other similar noninjurious materials. 
(d) ?Removal of material or ground prohibited. It shall be unlawful to remove any material or ground 
within a ten-foot radius of any historic or specimen tree without a clearing permit. 
(e) ?Restriction as to harmful materials. The developer or property owner shall not cause or allow the 
disposal of waste material such as paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or any other material 
harmful to the life of a protected, specimen or historic tree within the dripline of such tree or groups of 
trees. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 6, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.7. - Tree removal, grubbing, and land clearing permits. 
(a) ?Grubbing. The application for a grubbing permit shall be filed with the city on forms furnished by the 
city manager or his designee. The application shall include a copy of the recorded deed indicating 
the current owner. The city shall then inspect the site for protected trees, historic trees, specimen 
trees, or mangroves. 
    A grubbing permit does not authorize the removal of any protected, specimen, or historic trees, or 
mangroves. 
(b) ?Tree removal and land clearing permit. All lands within the city are required to obtain a permit for 
protected tree removal, grubbing or land clearing. The application for such a permit shall be filed with 
the building department on forms furnished by the city manager or his designee. Any applicant for a 
protected tree removal, grubbing or land clearing permit must submit a plot/site plan showing the 
location of all protected, specimen and historic trees and which provides the city with reasonable 
assurances of compliance with the minimum tree requirements and the protection of historic or 
protected trees or mangroves. 
    The plot/site plan that is submitted with an application for a protected tree removal, grubbing or land 
clearing permit shall include as a minimum the following information: 
(1) ?Location of all present and proposed structures, driveways, parking areas and other planned 
areas. 
(2) ?Location and kind of all protected trees, all specimen trees and all historic trees. 
(3) ?Recorded deed indicating the current owner. 
(4) ?Species and size of trees to be removed. 
The staff shall then inspect the site for protected trees, historic trees, specimen trees, or mangroves. The 
following criteria for removal of protected trees shall be used: 
a. ?Necessity to remove trees which present a hazard or other unsafe condition to people, vehicular 
traffic or threaten to cause disruption to public services or public easements. 
b. ?Necessity to remove trees which present a hazard to structures or other improvements. 
c. ?Necessity to remove diseased or fallen trees or trees weakened by age, storm, or fire. 
d. ?The extent to which tree removal is likely to result in damage to the property of others, public or 
private, including damage to lakes, ponds, streams or rivers, drainage canals or swales. 
e. ?Proposed landscaping improvement including plans whereby the applicant has planted or will 
plant trees to replace those that are proposed to be cleared. 
f. ?Good forestry practices; i.e., the number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support. 
g. ?Necessity to remove trees in order to construct proposed improvements to allow economic use 
of the property, including: 
1. ?Need for access around the proposed structure for construction equipment (maximum of 
ten feet). 
2. ?Need for access to the building site for construction equipment. 
3. ?Essential grade changes. 
h. ?Topography of the land and the adverse impact of tree removal on erosion, soil retention and 
the diversion or increased flow of surface water, which is necessary to use the land while 
conserving natural resources. 
i. ?Must be removed in order for the applicant to use the property for any use permitted, conditional 
or special use for the zoning district in which the property is located and that such a use could 
not be made of the property unless the tree is removed. Alternative site plans shall be 
considered to determine if the specimen trees can be saved without the removal or damaging of 
the trees. 
j. ?That the conditions of the tree with respect to disease, danger of falling or interference with utility 
services is such that the public health, safety or welfare require its removal. When there is a 
question of tree hazard, the building director may require documentation or certification from an 
arborist who has been certified by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
Upon making a finding that a reasonable balance of the factors above indicates that the public interest is 
best served by allowing removal, the city manager or his designee shall issue a land clearing permit for 
the removal of a protected tree. The tree(s) approved for removal shall be replaced as follows: 
i. ?Protected trees : On a one-for-one basis, by a tree equal to Florida grade number 1 or greater, 
having a minimum height of eight feet and a minimum diameter of one and one-half inches or a 
circumference of 4.7 inches DBH, as defined by nursery standards established by the State of 
Florida, Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, up to the number of trees required to 
meet the minimum tree requirements for new construction. 
ii. ?Specimen trees : On a one-for-one basis, by a tree equal to Florida grade number 1 or greater, 
having a minimum height of 12 feet and a minimum diameter of two and one-half inches or a 
circumference of 7.8 inches DBH, as defined by nursery standards established by the State of 
Florida, Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, up to the number of trees required to 
meet the minimum tree requirements for new construction. 
iii. ?Sabal palms (Sabal palmetto, cabbage palms) : Sabal palms having a clear trunk six feet or 
greater (measured from existing grade to bottom of lowest fronds) shall be replaced on a one-
for-one basis by Sabal palms having at least six feet clear trunk, up to the number of trees 
required to meet the minimum tree requirements for new construction. 
Applicant shall post a copy of the permit at the site prior to commencement of grubbing, tree removal or 
land clearing. Permitted activities may only be undertaken between the hours of 8 a.m. and 5 p.m., 
Monday through Friday, and not during holidays in which city hall is closed. In the event of questionable 
activities during other times, enforcement personnel shall order the activities to cease and desist until the 
matter can be resolved during regular business hours. 
(c) ?If any inspection of the site indicates the presence of gopher tortoises, the applicant shall be 
required to obtain the necessary permits from the State of Florida prior to issuance of a permit 
hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 7, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.8. - Residential landscaping requirements. 
    All areas of residential lots not covered by a building or impervious surface shall be grassed, sodded, 
seeded or fully covered with landscape rocks, except for landscaped areas including protected existing 
natural vegetation. Landscaped areas shall be mulched, rocked or planted with a ground cover to prevent 
soil erosion. Water bodies such as lakes, ponds, wetlands, or waterways are exempt from this 
requirement. Further, a yard may be exempted if the owner submits a landscape plan utilizing accepted 
principles of xeriscaping. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 8, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.9. - Residential tree requirements. 
(a) ?Required trees. 
(1) ?All residential lots shall have the following minimum number of trees: 
Lot size (sq. ft.) 
Minimum number of trees 
10,000 or less ..... 
Five trees 
10,000 to 15,999 ..... 
Seven trees 
16,000 to 19,999 ..... 
Twelve trees 
20,000 to 29,999 ..... 
Fifteen trees 
30,000 to 39,999 ..... 
Eighteen trees 
40,000 or more ..... 
Twenty trees 
 
(2) ?Required trees shall be equal to Florida grade number 1, or greater, as defined by nursery 
standards established by the State of Florida, Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs. 
(3) ?Tree credits. All existing trees that meet the following criteria may be applied towards meeting 
the minimum number of trees as required in subsection (a)(1) above. 
a. ?Existing trees. 
Size (DBH in inches) 
Credit 
2—4 ..... 
One tree 
Over 4—10 ..... 
Two trees 
Over 10—20 ..... 
Three trees 
Over 20 ..... 
Five trees 
 
b. ?Sabal Palm trees may be utilized on a one-for-one credit basis. 
c. ?To encourage tree-lined streets, new trees, other than palms, planted in the front yard 
setback shall receive credits as outlined above. No more than two trees may be used for 
this requirement. 
d. ?Limitations . Citrus trees may be used, provided that none is less than four feet in height 
and the number shall not exceed three or comprise more than 25%, whichever is greater, 
of the required minimum number of trees on the lot. If palms are used, they shall constitute 
no more than 35% of the total tree requirement and shall have a minimum of six feet of 
clear wood. 
(b) ?Certificate of occupancy. The required number of trees shall be planted prior to the issuance of a 
certificate of occupancy for new residences. Each lot owner where a residential unit is located must 
maintain on the lot a sufficient number of trees to comply with the requirements in this section. Any 
tree which dies must be replaced within 30 days. 
(c) ?Maintenance requirements. Landscape areas shall be permanently maintained including watering, 
weeding, pruning, trimming, edging, fertilizing, insect control, and replacement of plant materials and 
irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. 
    Maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant or agent, jointly and 
severally. Said landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and 
orderly appearance. All landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds, refuse and debris. 
    If at any time after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or other form of approval, the landscaping 
of a development to which this article is applicable is found to be in nonconformance, the city manager or 
his designee shall issue notice to the owner that action is required to comply with this section and shall 
describe what action is required to comply. The owner, tenant or agent shall have 30 days to restore the 
landscaping as required. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 9, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.10. - Commercial tree requirements. 
    All multifamily, commercial, industrial and institutional sites shall meet the following requirements. 
(1) ?Trees along public streets. One tree for each 25 lineal feet or fraction thereof along all public 
streets, with a minimum of two trees on any one street frontage. 
(2) ?Tree requirement along perimeter not adjacent to the right-of-way. One tree for each 35 lineal 
feet or fraction thereof of the perimeter of the property not adjacent to public streets. 
(3) ?Tree requirements for off-street parking areas. There shall be one tree for every five parking 
spaces or fraction thereof. 
(4) ?Tree specifications for open space. Open space shall include all required open space in this 
code, as identified in the approved site plan. Such open space areas shall not include water 
areas. This requirement may be modified or waived by the planning and zoning commission for 
open areas that are inappropriate for the introduction of trees. There shall be one tree per 2,000 
square feet, or portion thereof, of open space. 
(5) ?Location of tree plantings. Trees, as required above, should be spaced in clusters or situated in 
strategic locations consistent with good principles of design and plant installation with 
consideration for utilities, stormwater management, and potential root damage to sidewalks and 
vehicular areas. 
(6) ?Credit for existing trees. Credit shall be granted for exceptional quality trees which are 
preserved on a site and which meet the tree requirements of any landscaping provision of this 
article. All existing trees that meet the following criteria may be applied towards meeting the 
minimum number of trees as required in this section. 
a. ?Existing trees: 
Size (DBH in inches) 
Credit 
2—4 ..... 
One tree 
Over 4—10 ..... 
Two trees 
Over 10—20 ..... 
Three trees 
Over 20 ..... 
Five trees 
 
b. ?Palm trees may be utilized on a one-for-one credit basis. 
Exceptional quality shall be judged on the basis of such factors as extraordinary size of tree, vigorous 
health, large canopy cover, historic value, rareness, and age. No credit will be granted for preserved trees 
which are classified as undesirable, are extremely poor specimens or which are in declining health. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 10, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.11. - Commercial landscaping requirements. 
(a) ?General requirements for landscaped areas. Landscaped areas shall include a combination of the 
following types of materials: trees, shrubs, annuals and/or perennial plants, vines, and/or ground 
cover. No more than 50% grass shall be used in the landscape area. The use of existing native 
vegetation including ground cover, shrubs, and trees, is strongly encouraged. These standards shall 
also be used in conjunction with the installation of the required interior landscape off-street parking 
requirements established herein. 
    The following are common planting design concepts that should be implemented whenever possible: 
(1) ?Trees used in informal groupings and rows at major focal points. 
(2) ?Extensive use of flowering vines both on walls and arbors. 
(3) ?The use of planting to create shadow and patterns against walls. 
(4) ?Trees to create canopy and shade, especially in parking areas. 
(5) ?The use of flowering trees in informal groups to provide color. 
(6) ?Informal massing of colorful plantings. 
(7) ?Use of distinctive plants as focal points. 
(8) ?Berms, plantings, and low walls to screen parking areas from view of public right-of-way while 
allowing filter views of larger buildings beyond. 
(9) ?The use of trees and plantings to reduce the apparent mass of a building. Inanimate materials 
commonly used in landscaping such as, but not limited to organic mulches, rocks, pebbles, 
walls and fences, but excluding paved surfaces, may also be utilized in landscaped areas. 
Pervious, decorative paving materials and brick pavers may be used in the form of walkways or 
driveways through landscaped areas; however, off-street parking area paved with such 
materials shall not be considered landscaped areas. All landscape areas shall be covered by a 
minimum of 75% living plant material prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
If an existing landscape strip is provided on the adjacent lot, the required landscape strip may be reduced 
to five feet in width upon the recommendation of the planning and growth management director and 
approval of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b) ?Perimeter landscape strip. A landscape strip shall be provided on the entire perimeter of all 
multifamily, commercial, industrial and institutional property, except properties with zero-foot 
setbacks. The landscape strip shall be a minimum of ten feet in width; however, property having a 
width or depth of 50 feet or less, the required landscape strip may be reduced to five feet in width. 
Necessary accessways from public rights-of-way or adjacent parcels through such landscape strip 
shall be permitted. Landscape strips located in easements may be adjusted upon the 
recommendation of the planning and growth management director and city engineer. 
    Any combination of hedges, landscaped berm or ground cover shall be planted or installed along the 
entire length of each required landscape strip. In all multifamily residential or commercial districts, the 
barrier, hedge, or landscape berm shall be a minimum of four feet in height; except in commercial 
districts, where the barrier, hedge or landscaped berm along street rights-of-way shall be a minimum of 
three feet in height. In addition, there shall be a minimum of one shrub for each six lineal feet of the 
required landscape strip. Said shrubs may be planted in groupings. 
    When the required perimeter landscape strip coincides with a required off-street parking or parking 
lot landscaping strip, the perimeter landscaping requirements shall prevail, except a continuous hedge 
shall be required. In no case shall a landscape strip be required to exceed ten feet in width. 
(c) ?Interior landscape requirements. 
(1) ?Off-street parking areas. Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped with a minimum of 15 
square feet of landscape area for each parking space. Each landscape area shall be a minimum 
of 50 square feet in size. 
(2) ?Use of interior landscape strips. Interior parking landscaping shall, insofar as possible, be used 
to delineate and guide major traffic movement within the parking area and to prevent cross 
space driving wherever possible. Landscaping dividing strips, with or without walkways, shall be 
used to subdivide parking areas into parking bays with not more than 30 spaces, provided that 
no more than 15 spaces shall be in an uninterrupted row. A portion of the required landscaping 
for interior parking spaces may be relocated so as to emphasize entrance corridors or special 
landscaped areas within the general parking area. 
(d) ?Parking lot landscaping requirements. Landscaping shall be provided around the perimeter of off-
street parking areas, loading areas, or other vehicular use areas pursuant to the following standards: 
(1) ?A landscape strip at least ten feet in width shall be located between the abutting property lines 
and parking, loading or other vehicular use area except where permitted driveway openings are 
to be provided. Where drainage or other utility easement exist along property lines, the 
landscape strip shall be located between the parking, loading or other vehicular use area and 
the utility or drainage easement. Landscape strips located in easements may be adjusted upon 
the recommendation of the planning and growth management director and city engineer. 
(2) ?A hedge shall be planted within the landscape area and shall be a minimum of three feet in 
height and form a solid and unbroken visual screen immediately upon planting. 
(3) ?Parked vehicles may overhang a landscape strip no more than 24 inches, provided curbing or 
other wheel stops are installed to insure no greater overhang of the landscape strip. 
Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be so located as to prevent their damage 
and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
(e) ?Specifications for living plant materials. 
(1) ?Trees. Immediately after planting, all trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height, have a 
minimum diameter of one and one-half inches or a circumference of four and seven-tenths 
inches DBH, and shall have a minimum of five feet of clear trunk space if necessary to preserve 
a safe sight distance for traffic safety. Trees shall be of a species having an average mature 
crown of greater than 20 feet and having trunks that can be maintained with over six feet clear 
wood. Trees or palms having an average mature crown spread of less than 20 feet may be 
substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a 20-foot crown spread. 
Such a grouping shall count as one tree toward meeting the tree requirement for any provisions 
herein. 
Fifty percent of the trees shall be native and drought tolerant. 
If palms are used, they shall constitute no more than 35% of the total tree requirements for any 
provisions herein and shall have a minimum of six feet of clear wood. 
No tree species shall account for more than 50% of the total number of trees. 
(2) ?Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs and hedges shall be used to complement the tree planting. 
Individually planted shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height immediately after planting. 
Shrubs planted for required hedges shall meet the minimum height requirements as established 
herein immediately after planting. Additionally, whenever possible all shrubs and hedges shall 
be planted in offset rows in order to create a more immediate visual barrier. 
(3) ?Groundcovers. Groundcovers are plants that normally reach a mature height of no more than 
24 inches. Rooted cuttings from flats shall be planted no more than 12 inches on center, and 
containerized woody shrub groundcovers shall be planted no more than three feet on center. 
Groundcovers shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and 100% 
coverage within one year after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(4) ?Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height immediately after planting and may be 
used in conjunction with fences, screens and walls to meet physical barrier requirements. 
(5) ?Lawn grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the 
vicinity of the City of Sebastian, Florida. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or 
seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. When 
grass seed is sowed it shall be a variety of seed that produces complete coverage within 90 
days from sowing. 
(6) ?Quality. All plant materials shall conform to standards for "Florida No. 1" or better, as stated in 
"Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants," Part I (1973) and Part II (1975), State of Florida, 
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Affairs, as amended. Grass sod shall be clean and 
reasonably free of noxious pests or diseases. 
(7) ?Synthetic plants. Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground covers or 
vines shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this article. 
(f) ?Existing native vegetation. The site plan shall include a description of the existing, natural 
vegetation. The natural vegetation should be incorporated into the landscape plan. Where such 
natural vegetation is to be used, protective barriers shall be installed prior to land clearing. 
(g) ?Protection of landscape strips. All landscape strips shall be protected from vehicular encroachment 
by raised curbing. Where such strips abut parking stalls, raised wheel stops shall be required to 
protect the landscape strips. 
(h) ?Berms. Berms are encouraged for use in meeting the landscape barrier requirements of this article. 
If berms are utilized, they shall be landscaped with living plant material to achieve the required 
heights. 
(i) ?Maintenance requirements. Landscape areas shall be permanently maintained including watering, 
weeding, pruning, trimming, edging, fertilizing, insect control, and replacement of plant materials and 
irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. 
    Maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant or agent, jointly and 
severally. Said landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and 
orderly appearance. All landscaped areas must be equipped with an irrigation system approved by the 
city engineer. All landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds, refuse and debris. 
    If at any time after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or other form of approval, the landscaping 
of a development to which this article is applicable is found to be in nonconformance, the building director 
shall issue notice to the owner that action is required to comply with this section and shall describe what 
action is required to comply. The owner, tenant or agent shall have 30 days to restore the landscaping as 
required. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 11, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.12. - Commercial landscape plan requirements. 
(a) ?Landscape plan components. A landscape plan shall be submitted to and approved by the growth 
management department as part of the site plan application. The landscape plan shall contain the 
following: 
(1) ?Name, address and phone number of the owner and landscape architect or other person with 
similar qualifications in the field of landscape design. 
(2) ?North arrow, scale and date; minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet. 
(3) ?Property lines, easements and rights-of-way with internal and property line dimensions. 
(4) ?Location of existing or proposed underground and overhead utility service. 
(5) ?Location and size of any existing or proposed structures. 
(6) ?Location and size of any existing or proposed site features, such as earthen mounds, swales, 
fences, walls and water areas. 
(7) ?Location and size of any existing or proposed vehicular use areas. 
(8) ?Location and size of any existing or proposed sidewalks, curbs and wheel stops. 
(9) ?A description of the irrigation system as required by section 54-3-14.13. 
(10) ?Calculations of required type, dimensions and square footage of landscape material and of 
required landscape areas, including: Total site area, parking areas, percentage of nonvehicular 
open space, perimeter and interior landscape strips, and required number of trees. 
(11) ?Location, dimensions and square footage of required landscape areas. 
(12) ?Location, name, height and size of all existing plant material to be retained. 
(13) ?Location, size, height and description of all landscape material including name, quantity, 
quality, spacing and specified size and specification of all plant material. 
(14) ?Height, width, type, material and location of all barriers of nonliving material. 
(15) ?Location, dimensions and area of landscaping for freestanding signs. 
(16) ?Show all landscaping, buildings or other improvements on adjacent property within five feet of 
the common property line. 
(17) ?If the site has been filled, identify what soil improvements will be implemented to ensure the 
viability of the landscaping. 
The landscaping plan shall be drawn by a landscape architect or other person with comparable 
qualification in the field of landscaping. 
(b) ?Review and approval procedure. Landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved at the time of 
site plan approval. A representative of the planning and growth management department shall 
inspect all landscaping and the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the landscaping is 
completed in accordance with the approved site plan and the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 12, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.13. - Commercial irrigation standards. 
    All multifamily, commercial, industrial, and institutional sites shall provide a permanent irrigation 
system for all landscape areas. 
(1) ?All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid surface runoff, overspray, or similar conditions 
where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures. 
(2) ?Irrigation systems shall use drip, trickle, low flow sprinkler heads or any other recognized 
method of low volume, high efficiency irrigation and shall be designed to apply water uniformly 
over the irrigated area. 
(3) ?Irrigation systems design flows shall meet peak irrigation requirements of the plant material. 
(4) ?Sprinkler spacing should not exceed manufacturer's recommendations. 
(5) ?Special attention shall be given to avoid erosion due to runoff on slopes. 
(6) ?Rain sensing override devices shall be required on all automatic irrigation systems. Soil 
moisture sensing devices are encouraged. 
(7) ?For those sites where the installation of reclaimed water system is feasible and meets all 
regulatory requirements, such a system shall be installed. Where such reclaimed water is not 
available, well water should be used. Any irrigation system connected to the drinking water 
supply shall have a cross connection devices approved by the Indian River County Utilities 
Department. 
(8) ?A maintenance plan shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, §, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.14. - Screening and buffer yard requirements. 
(a) ?Required screening of abutting residential and nonresidential uses. In order to maintain stability of 
residential areas, nonresidential development within or abutting residential districts and multiple-
family development abutting single-family residential districts shall provide a wall, fence, landscaped 
earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing vegetation, or any combination thereof so as to provide a 
continuous 90% opaque solid screen not less than five feet in height to form a continuous screen 
along such abutting property lines. In addition, one tree shall be provided for each 25 lineal feet or 
fraction thereof of such landscape barrier. Notwithstanding, all developments shall comply with the 
landscape requirements of this code. Where a conflict exists with the standards of this paragraph, 
the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
    Credit may be given for existing plant material against the requirements of this section. Adjustments 
may be rendered by the planning and zoning commission to the requirements of this paragraph based on 
demonstrated need by the applicant. 
    The site plan applicant and successors in ownership shall maintain the continuous screen in 
perpetuity. 
(b) ?Applicability of screenings. Any one of the following types of screening may be required by the 
planning and zoning commission or city council during the site plan review process, for the purpose 
of minimizing the impact of potentially objectionable areas such as parking lots, major thoroughfares, 
unsightly rear entrances, utility or maintenance structures, solid waste disposal facilities, loading 
facilities and swimming pools and active recreational areas. Screening may also be required where 
land uses of different intensities are located in close proximity to each other. 
(c) ?Description of screening types. Three (3) basic types of screening are hereby established: Type "A", 
Opaque Screen; Type "B", Semi-Opaque Screen; and Type "C", Intermittent Screen. 
(1) ?Type "A" opaque screen. An opaque screen is intended to completely exclude all visual contact 
between uses. The type "A" screen shall be completely opaque from the ground up to a height 
of at least six feet, with large trees utilized as intermittent visual obstructions from the opaque 
portion to a mature height of at least 20 feet. The opaque screen may be composed of a wall, 
fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing vegetation, or any combination 
thereof which maintains a completely opaque screen of at least six feet in height. Compliance of 
planted vegetation screens or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of the average 
height and density of foliage of the subject species at the time of planting, or field observation of 
existing vegetation. The six-foot opaque portion of the screen must be opaque in all seasons of 
the year. 
(2) ?Type "B" semi-opaque screen. The semi-opaque screen is intended to partially block visual 
contact between uses. The type "B" screen shall be completely opaque from the ground to a 
height of at least three feet, with large trees utilized as intermittent visual obstructions from the 
opaque portion to a mature height of at least 20 feet. The semi-opaque screen may be 
composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation or any combination 
thereof which maintains a completely opaque screen of at least three feet. Compliance of 
planted vegetative screens or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of average mature 
height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field observation of existing vegetation. 
(3) ?Type "C" intermittent screen. The intermittent screen is intended to create the impression of a 
separation of spaces without necessarily eliminating visual contact between the spaces. The 
type "C" screen shall utilize large trees having a mature height of at least 20 feet. The 
intermittent screen may be composed of fences, berms, and either existing or planted 
vegetation. Compliance of planted vegetation screens or natural vegetation will be judged on 
the basis of the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field 
observations of existing vegetation. 
(d) ?General standards for screening and buffer yards. In addition to the commercial landscape 
requirements where the provisions of this article require screening or buffering, the following 
standards shall apply: 
(1) ?Landscaped buffer strip required. A landscaped buffer strip not less than ten feet in width shall 
be provided in conjunction with all screening required herein. The buffer strip may be contained 
within required setbacks. Each buffer strip shall be landscaped with ground cover (preferably 
native species) in addition to the required screening materials and trees. The landscape strip 
shall contain no parking area or stormwater management. 
(2) ?Tree plantings required as intermittent obstructions. All screen types ("A", "B", or "C") shall 
include one tree for each 25 lineal feet or fraction thereof of screen length. Such trees shall 
satisfy the requirements for intermittent visual obstructions for all types of screens. 
The above trees are in addition to the trees required under the commercial tree requirements above. 
All trees required by this provision shall be planted in the buffer strip. Trees shall be planted to 
maximize screening effect. 
(3) ?Grading of berms. Whenever berms are utilized, they shall be constructed with a grade not to 
exceed one foot vertical to three feet horizontal (1:3 slope) with a four-foot wide flat top for 
plantings. If berms are used in satisfying the screening and buffering requirements, they shall 
be landscaped with plant material, preferably native, to achieve the required heights. 
(4) ?Quality and maintenance of plant materials. All plant materials utilized to fulfill the requirements 
of this section shall be cold tolerant and shall meet criteria of this article. Synthetic or artificial 
material in the form of trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover or artificial turf shall not be used in lieu 
of plant requirements in this section. 
(5) ?Credit towards other required landscaping. Where the landscaping provided under this section 
meets the requirements of other provisions of this Article, such landscaping may be credited 
toward fulfilling those requirements, with the exception of any required recreational open space. 
(6) ?Front yards, visibility triangles. The above standards notwithstanding, no screening shall be 
required which conflicts with front yard fence or wall height limitations or required visibility 
triangles. 
(7) ?Maintenance. Landscape areas shall be permanently maintained including watering, weeding, 
pruning, trimming, edging, fertilizing, insect control, and replacement of plant materials and 
irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. 
Maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant or agent, jointly and 
severally. Said landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a healthy, neat 
and orderly appearance. All landscaped areas must be equipped with an irrigation system approved 
by the city engineer. All landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds, refuse and debris. 
If at any time after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or other form of approval, the landscaping 
of a development to which this article is applicable is found to be in nonconformance, the building 
director shall issue notice to the owner that action is required to comply with this section and shall 
describe what action is required to comply. The owner, tenant or agent shall have 30 days to restore 
the landscaping as required. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 14, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.15. - Exemptions to tree protection standards. 
(a) ?During the period of any emergency proclaimed by the governor of the State of Florida, the city 
council of the City of Sebastian or the mayor of the City of Sebastian as provided within the City 
Charter, all requirements of this article may be temporarily suspended by the city manager for the 
period of time required by private or city work forces to remove hazardous trees or clear public 
thoroughfares. 
(b) ?All properly licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the provisions of this article only in 
relation to the trees growing on the premises of the nursery and so planted or growing for the sale or 
intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of the licensee's business. 
(Ord. No. O-05-18, § 15, 10-16-2005) 


Sec. 54-3-14.16. - Screening and buffer yard requirements. 
(a) ?Required screening of abutting residential and nonresidential uses. In order to maintain stability of 
residential areas, nonresidential development within or abutting residential districts and multiple-
family development abutting single-family residential districts shall provide a wall, fence, landscaped 
earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing vegetation, or any combination thereof so as to provide a 
continuous 90% opaque solid screen not less than five feet in height to form a continuous screen 
along such abutting property lines. In addition, one tree shall be provided for each 25 lineal feet or 
fraction thereof of such landscape barrier. Notwithstanding, all developments shall comply with the 
landscape requirements of this code. Where a conflict exists with the standards of this paragraph, 
the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
    Credit may be given for existing plant material against the requirements of this section. Adjustments 
may be rendered by the planning and zoning commission to the requirements of this paragraph based on 
demonstrated need by the applicant. 
    The site plan applicant and successors in ownership shall maintain the continuous screen in 
perpetuity. 
(b) ?Applicability of screenings. Any one of the following types of screening may be required by the 
planning and zoning commission or city council during the site plan review process, for the purpose 
of minimizing the impact of potentially objectionable areas such as parking lots, major thoroughfares, 
unsightly rear entrances, utility or maintenance structures, solid waste disposal facilities, loading 
facilities and swimming pools and active recreational areas. Screening may also be required where 
land uses of different intensities are located in close proximity to each other. 
(c) ?Description of screening types. Three (3) basic types of screening are hereby established: Type "A", 
Opaque Screen; Type "B", Semi-Opaque Screen; and Type "C", Intermittent Screen. 
(1) ?Type "A" opaque screen. An opaque screen is intended to completely exclude all visual contact 
between uses. The type "A" screen shall be completely opaque from the ground up to a height 
of at least six feet, with large trees utilized as intermittent visual obstructions from the opaque 
portion to a mature height of at least 20 feet. The opaque screen may be composed of a wall, 
fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation, or existing vegetation, or any combination 
thereof which maintains a completely opaque screen of at least six geet in height. Compliance 
of planted vegetation screens or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of the average 
height and density of foliage of the subject species at the time of planting, or field observation of 
existing vegetation. The six-foot opaque portion of the screen must be opaque in all seasons of 
the year. 
(2) ?Type "B" semi-opaque screen. The semi-opaque screen is intended to partially block visual 
contact between uses. The type "B" screen shall be completely opaque from the ground to a 
height of at least three feet, with large trees utilized as intermittent visual obstructions from the 
opaque portion to a mature height of at least 20 feet. The semi-opaque screen may be 
composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation or any combination 
thereof which maintains a completely opaque screen of at least three feet. Compliance of 
planted vegetative screens or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of average mature 
height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field observation of existing vegetation. 
(3) ?Type "C" intermittent screen. The intermittent screen is intended to create the impression of a 
separation of spaces without necessarily eliminating visual contact between the spaces. The 
type "C" screen shall utilize large trees having a mature height of at least 20 feet. The 
intermittent screen may be composed of fences, berms, and either existing or planted 
vegetation. Compliance of planted vegetation screens or natural vegetation will be judged on 
the basis of the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field 
observations of existing vegetation. 
(d) ?General standards for screening and buffer yards. In addition to the commercial landscape 
requirements where the provisions of this ordinance require screening or buffering, the following 
standards shall apply: 
(1) ?Landscaped buffer strip required. A landscaped buffer strip not less than ten feet in width shall 
be provided in conjunction with all screening required herein. The buffer strip may be contained 
within required setbacks. Each buffer strip shall be landscaped with ground cover (preferably 
native species) in addition to the required screening materials and trees. The landscape strip 
shall contain no parking area or stormwater management. 
(2) ?Tree plantings required as intermittent obstructions. All screen types ("A", "B", or "C") shall 
include one tree for each 25 lineal feet or fraction thereof of screen length. Such trees shall 
satisfy the requirements for intermittent visual obstructions for all types of screens. 
The above trees are in addition to the trees required under the commercial tree requirements 
above. All trees required by this provision shall be planted in the buffer strip. Trees shall be 
planted to maximize screening effect. 
(3) ?Grading of berms. Whenever berms are utilized, they shall be constructed with a grade not to 
exceed one foot vertical to three feet horizontal (1:3 slope) with a four-foot wide flat top for 
plantings. If berms are used in satisfying the screening and buffering requirements, they shall 
be landscaped with plant material, preferably native, to achieve the required heights. 
(4) ?Quality and maintenance of plant materials. All plant materials utilized to fulfill the requirements 
of this section shall be cold tolerant and shall meet criteria of section 54-14.11.(e)(6). of this 
ordinance. No plant species prohibited pursuant to section 54-14.5 shall be permitted in 
satisfying requirements of this article. Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, 
vines, ground cover or artificial turf shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this section. 
All landscape screening and buffering shall be maintained pursuant to requirements of section 
54-14.16 of this ordinance. 
(5) ?Credit towards other required landscaping. Where the landscaping provided under this section 
meets the requirements of other provisions of this ordinance, such landscaping may be credited 
toward fulfilling those requirements, with the exception of any required recreational open space. 
(6) ?Front yards, visibility triangles. The above standards notwithstanding, no screening shall be 
required which conflicts with front yard fence or wall height limitations or required visibility 
triangles. 
(7) ?Maintenance. Landscape areas shall be permanently maintained including watering, weeding, 
pruning, trimming, edging, fertilizing, insect control, and replacement of plant materials and 
irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. 
Maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner, tenant or agent, jointly and 
severally. Said landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a healthy, 
neat and orderly appearance. All landscaped areas must be equipped with an irrigation system 
approved by the city engineer. All landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds, refuse and 
debris. 
    If at any time after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or other form of approval, the landscaping 
of a development to which this article is applicable is found to be in nonconformance, the building director 
shall issue notice to the owner that action is required to comply with this section and shall describe what 
action is required to comply. The owner, tenant or agent shall have 30 days to restore the landscaping as 
required. If the landscaping is not restored within the allotted time, such person shall be in violation of this 
code, the punishment for which shall be as provided pursuant to section 1-10 of the City of Sebastian 
Code of Ordinances. 


Sec. 54-3-14.17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-18, § 16, adopted Oct. 16, 2005, relocated § 54-3-14.17 to § 2-
240 of the Sebastian Code of Ordinances. 


ARTICLE XV. - PARKING REQUIREMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-10-05, § 1, adopted Sept. 22, 2010, amended Art. XV in its entirety to read as 
herein set out. Former Art. XV, §§ 54-3-15.1—54-3-15.5, pertained to off-street parking, and derived from 
Ord. No. O-00-15, § 1, adopted June 14, 2000. 


Sec. 54-3-15.1. - Applicability. 
    Parking shall be provided and maintained in all districts at all times. Parking and loading shall be 
reviewed at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity by a change 
of use or the addition of dwelling units, floor area, seats, employees or other factors determinative of 
parking or loading demand as stated in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05, § 1, 9-22-2010) 


Sec. 54-3-15.2. - Parking spaces required by use. 
    The following uses shall have such parking spaces as designated by this section: 
Use 
Required Parking 
Auto sales. 
One space per 500 square feet of showroom and office space plus one 
space per 2,500 square feet of outdoor display area. 
Auto repair. 
Two spaces for each bay, grease rack or similar facility, plus one space per 
400 square feet of office and/or sale area. No such bay, rack or similar 
facility shall be counted as a parking space for meeting the parking 
requirements of this article. 
Bar and lounges. 
One space for each three persons based on the maximum capacity. 
Bowling lanes. 
Four spaces per lane plus the spaces otherwise required for accessory 
uses (restaurant and meeting rooms). 
Business and professional 
offices (excluding medical 
offices). 
One space for each 200 square feet of office space. 
Child care. 
One for each five children based on licensed capacity. 
Churches, temples, places of 
worship. 
One space for every four seats figuring maximum seating capacity. 
Convenience stores. 
One space per 150 square feet of retail area. 
Flea markets. 
Three spaces per booth. 
Funeral homes. 
One space for every three seats within the chapel(s) plus one space per 
300 square feet of all other building areas. 
Furniture and appliance 
stores and furniture repair 
shops. 
One space per 400 square feet of display area. 
Health clubs. 
One space per 200 square feet. 
Hospitals. 
Two spaces for each bed intended for patients, excluding bassinets. 
Hotels, motels. 
One space for each unit plus one space for each 400 square feet of 
accessory meeting room(s). 
Kennels and animal 
hospitals. 
One space per 750 square feet. 
Libraries. 
One space for each 300 square feet of gross building area. 
Manufacturing and 
wholesale. 
One space for each 500 square feet of gross building area or one space 
for each employee of the shift of employees that employs the greatest 
number of employees, whichever is greater, plus one space for each 
vehicle operating from the premises. 
Marinas. 
One space for each 300 square feet of principal building; plus one parking 
space for each transient live-aboard vessel slip, one space for every two 
wet slips, and one space for every four dry slips; plus 

Charter and party boats shall have one parking space for every three 
occupants based on the maximum capacity of each such boat in 
accordance with the Coast Guard License issued to each such boat (This 
does not include "six-pack" boats"), which shall be calculated at two 
spaces per boat; plus 

Rental facilities for vessels, kayaks, canoes, rowboats, paddle boats, 
sailboat and sailboards of any kind, (hereinafter collectively referred to as 
"water transports") shall maintain one space for every water transport. 
Medical offices, dental 
offices and outpatient 
clinics. 
One space for each 175 square feet. 
Mini-storage. 
One space plus one per 3,000 square feet. 
Model home. 
Five spaces. 
Museums. 
One space for each 300 square feet of gross building area. 
Nursing homes and assisted 
care facilities. 
0.6 spaces per bed based on the maximum capacity of the building; plus 
one space per 200 square feet of medical offices within the facility. 
Plant nurseries. 
One space per 250 square feet of indoor retail sales area plus one space 
per 1,000 square feet of greenhouse area plus one space per 5,000 
square feet of exterior sales area. 
Areas of public assembly, 
theaters, auditoriums, public 
or private clubs or lodges. 
One space for every three persons figuring maximum occupancy. 
Public parks and recreation. 
Parks—Two spaces per acre. 

Athletic fields—20 spaces per field. 

Stadiums—One space for each four seats; one seat is equal to two feet of 
bench length. 

Golf courses—Five spaces per hole plus the spaces otherwise required for 
accessory uses (restaurant and meeting rooms). 

Swimming pools—One space per 100 square feet of pool surface area. 

Tennis—Two spaces per court. 
Residential, single-family. 
Two spaces for each single-family dwelling. 
Residential, duplex. 
Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Residential, multifamily. 
Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
Residential, mobile home. 
Two spaces for each single-family dwelling. 
Residential, commercial 
resort. 
One space per unit. 
Residential, mobile home 
parks or courts. 
Two spaces per unit; one must be at lot site. 
Restaurants (sit down). 
One and one-half spaces for each 100 square feet of gross floor area 
(excluding food preparation area) including outside customer service 
areas. 
Restaurants (take out only). 
Three parking spaces plus one additional space for each 200 square feet 
of gross building area. 
Restaurants (food service 
delivery only, no on-site 
consumption). 
One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross building area. 
Retail sales stores. 
One space per 150 square feet for buildings <= 5,000 square feet. One 
space per 200 square feet for buildings > 5,000 and  
<= 10,000 square feet. One space per 250 square feet for buildings > 
10,000 square feet. 
Schools, junior high and 
elementary schools. 
One space for each ten students. 
Schools, high schools. 
One space for each four students. 
Transportation terminals. 
One space for each 200 square feet of floor space. 
Warehousing. 
One space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 10,000 
square feet, and one additional space for each 2,000 square feet above 
10,000 square feet. 
 
(Ord. No. O-10-05, § 1, 9-22-2010) 


Sec. 54-3-15.3. - Computation of parking spaces. 
    In computing the number of required parking spaces the following rules shall govern: 
(a) ?Floor area calculation. Floor area means the gross floor area of a particular use. Retail area 
means that floor area accessible by the public. 
(b) ?Interpretation of computation with fractions. Where fractional spaces result, the number of 
spaces required shall be construed to be the next whole number. 
(c) ?Requirements for uses not identified. The parking requirement for any use not specified shall 
be the same as that required for a use of a similar nature as recognized herein; or where not 
recognized herein, shall be based on criteria published by the American Planning Association or 
similarly recognized standards of their profession and such standard shall be approved by the 
planning and zoning commission. 
(d) ?Requirements for mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces shall be equal to 
the sum of the several uses computed separately. 
(e) ?Applicability of standards to expanding uses. Whenever a building or use is enlarged in floor 
area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or in any other manner so as to create a need 
for a greater number of parking spaces than that existing, such spaces shall be provided in 
accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05, § 1, 9-22-2010) 


Sec. 54-3-15.4. - Parking requirements. 
(a) ?Location of off-street parking spaces. 
(1) ?Residential. The required parking for single-family and duplex units shall be located on the lot 
where the structure is located. The garage shall not be counted toward the parking requirement. 
(2) ?Multifamily. Parking for multifamily residential uses shall be located on-site. Spaces shall be 
within 150 feet of the door of the unit that the spaces are intended for. 
(3) ?Model homes. The required parking for a model home shall be located on the same lot as the 
model, or on a contiguous lot, owned by the contractor or developer, or may be located in the 
adjacent right-of-way if approved by the city engineer. All parking shall meet the following 
requirements: 
a. ?Any parking located on a corner lot shall be designed so as not to obstruct the view of 
approaching traffic. 
b. ?Ingress and egress to the parking area shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any corner and 
a minimum of ten feet from any property line. 
c. ?The driveway may be counted for two parking spaces. 
(4) ?Commercial, institutional, industrial zoning districts. Off-street parking spaces required by this 
section shall be located on or adjacent to the lot on which the main building or use is located, 
except as specifically provided herein. For buildings or uses located in a nonresidential district, 
parking spaces may be located on another site, provided such site is not more than 500 feet, if 
the full amount of the required facilities cannot be provided on the same parcel of land. This 
shall be measured from the property line of the development to the property line of the off site 
parking area. No more than 50% of the total required spaces may be located in the off-site 
facility. Such parking spaces shall be within a nonresidentially zoned district. Such sites can not 
be separated by streets of a major collector, roadways with more than two lanes or by a railroad 
right-of-way. Parking sites located across public streets may require safeguards as determined 
by the planning and zoning commission. Any sites utilizing off-site parking shall execute a cross 
access agreement by all parties having a legal interest in the property(s) covered. Said 
agreement shall be provided at the time of site plan application for the properties affected. The 
easement agreement shall provide for the perpetual access and use of the adjacent property's 
parking spaces and driving aisles. The easement agreement must be approved as to legal form 
and sufficiency by the city attorney. The easement agreement must be recorded in the public 
records prior to the approval of the project site plan or in cases where no site plan approval is 
necessary (applicable), prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(5) ?Within the commercial waterfront residential and commercial riverfront zoning districts the 
following shall apply: 
a. ?Increases to the floor area of an existing building, construction of a new building having 
greater floor area or a change to the approved uses in an existing building, the parking 
requirements of this section shall apply. In lieu of meeting these requirements, owners or 
developers in the community redevelopment area (CRA) shall be allowed to purchase 
required parking spaces by paying a fee in accordance with this subsection (5). 
(i) ?Establishment of riverfront parking trust fund. The riverfront parking trust fund is 
hereby established to receive the fee paid by developers in lieu of providing on-site 
parking necessary for a project and shall be used only to develop and maintain public 
parking within the community redevelopment area east of the Florida East Coast 
railroad tracks. This program is available to commercial uses and properties within the 
commercial riverfront (CR) and commercial waterfront residential (CWR) districts only. 
(ii) ?Establishment and calculation of trust fund spaces. The fee amount shall be 
calculated on a "per space" standard. Fees shall be determined by the city based 
upon the cost of design and construction per parking space. If the city purchases 
additional land to be utilized as public parking, then the costs shall include the 
acquisition costs. These fees will be adopted by the city council and may be amended 
from time to time by resolution. 
(iii) ?Maximum. The maximum number of spaces that may be purchased in this program 
is 30 per development. 
(iv) ?Nonexclusive use. Any public parking utilized in this program is not assigned to a 
business or to be reserved in any manner. Participating in this program confers no 
rights upon the business to place any advertisement, notices or signage upon the 
parking spaces the city expressly retains all such rights. 
(v) ?Exceptions. Residential and multifamily uses are excluded from utilizing the parking 
trust fund to meet their parking requirements. 
(b) ?Joint use. A single parking area may be used to service more than one establishment if the normal 
hours of operation of the establishments do not overlap. If a single parking area is so used, 
additional parking may be required as a condition of continued occupancy at any time the hours of 
operation of the establishments are altered to run during any concurrent period. Any joint use of 
parking spaces on a prorated basis must have a document of joint use signed by all parties 
concerned and approved as binding by the city attorney. 
(c) ?Historical structures. When the parking standards are applied to an historic structure and such 
requirements would detrimentally affect the historic character of the property, the planning and 
zoning commission may reduce the parking requirement. A maximum reduction of one space or ten 
percent of the total parking spaces required, whichever is greater, may be permitted. The planning 
and zoning commission shall find that a reduction in parking will not create a hazardous condition or 
detrimentally affect traffic movement. 
(d) ?Specimen or historic trees. A maximum reduction of one space or ten percent of the total number of 
parking spaces required, whichever is greater, may be permitted to save specimen or historic trees. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05, § 1, 9-22-2010) 


Sec. 54-3-15.5. - Parking areas not to be reduced in area. 
    Areas designated for off-street parking or loading in accordance with the requirements of this Code 
shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it served is 
discontinued or modified, except where equivalent parking or loading space is provided and approved 
pursuant to article XVIII, site plan review. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05, § 1, 9-22-2010) 


ARTICLE XVI. - SIGNAGE AND ADVERTISING 


Sec. 54-3-16.1 - Purpose, intent and scope. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare through 
reasonable, consistent and non-discriminatory sign standards. The sign regulations in this article are also 
designed and intended to meet the statutory requirement that this municipality adopt land development 
regulations that regulate signage, a requirement set forth in Section 163.3202(f), Florida Statutes. The 
sign regulations in this article are not intended to censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are 
intended to regulate the adverse secondary effects of signs. The sign regulations are especially intended 
to address the secondary effects that may adversely impact aesthetics and safety. The sign regulations 
are designed to serve substantial governmental interests and, in some cases, compelling governmental 
interests such as traffic safety and warning signs of threats to bodily injury or death. 
    This article regulates signs, as defined in this Land Development Code, which are placed on private 
property or on property owned by public agencies including the city and over which the city has zoning 
authority. This division is not intended to extend its regulatory regime to objects that are not traditionally 
considered signs for purpose of government regulation. 
    The City of Sebastian is primarily a single family residential and small resort community on the east 
coast of Florida. The eastern boundary of the city is the Indian River Lagoon and much of the western 
boundary is the St. Sebastian River. Directly across the Indian River Lagoon is the Sebastian Inlet 
providing access to the Atlantic Ocean and Sebastian Inlet State Park, attracting more people annually 
than any other state park in Florida. The economic base of the city is heavily dependent on visitors from 
both Florida, as well as other areas of the United States, who are attracted to its "Old Florida Fishing 
Village" atmosphere. In order to preserve and promote the city as a desirable community in which to live, 
vacation and do business, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. The 
regulation of signs within the city is a highly contributive means by which to achieve this desired end. 
    These sign regulations have been prepared with the intent of enhancing the visual environment of 
the city and promoting its continued well-being, and are intended to: 
(1) ?Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; 
(2) ?Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of 
economic development and growth; 
(3) ?Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4) ?Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; 
(5) ?Foster the integration of signage with architectural and landscape designs; 
(6) ?Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper 
placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive size (area) of signs which 
compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(7) ?Allow signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation, while precluding the 
placement of signs that contribute to sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land uses 
or signs; 
(8) ?Encourage and allow signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located; 
(9) ?Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and building on which the sign is to be 
placed or to which it pertains; 
(10) ?Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the site and adjoining sites; 
(11) ?Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct the vision of or distract 
motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians; 
(12) ?Except to the extent expressly preempted by state or federal law, ensure that signs are 
constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner, and protect the public 
from unsafe signs; 
(13) ?Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all 
districts of the city; 
(14) ?Allow for traffic control devices consistent with national standards and whose purpose is to 
promote highway safety and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road users on 
streets and highways, and that notify road users of regulations and provide warning and 
guidance needed for the safe, uniform and efficient operation of all elements of the traffic 
stream; 
(15) ?Protect property values by precluding, to the maximum extent possible, sign types that create 
a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, 
illumination, brightness, or movement; 
(16) ?Protect property values by ensuring that sign types, as well as the number of signs, are in 
harmony with buildings, neighborhoods, and conforming signs in the area; 
(17) ?Regulate the appearance and design of signs in a manner that promotes and enhances the 
beautification of the city and that complements the natural surroundings in recognition of this 
city's reliance on its natural surroundings and beautification efforts in retaining economic 
advantage for its resort community, as well as for its major subdivisions, shopping centers and 
industrial parks; 
(18) ?Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations; 
(19) ?Promote the use of signs that positively contribute to the aesthetics of the community, are 
appropriate in scale to the surrounding buildings and landscape, and advance the city's goals of 
quality development; 
(20) ?Provide standards regarding the non-communicative aspects of signs, which are consistent 
with city, county, state and federal law; 
(21) ?Provide flexibility and encourage variety in signage, and create an incentive to relate signage 
to the basic principles of good design; and 
(22) ?Assure that the benefits derived from the expenditure of public funds for the improvement and 
beautification of streets, sidewalks, public parks, public rights-of-way, and other public places 
and spaces, are protected by exercising reasonable controls over the physical characteristics 
and structural design of signs. 
(Ord. No. O-16-05, § 1, 8-10-2016) 


Sec. 54-3-16.2. - Applicability. 
    No signs shall be erected or maintained in any land use district established by this land development 
code, except those signs specifically enumerated in this chapter. The number and area of signs as 
outlined in this article are intended to be maximum standards. In addition to the enumerated standards, 
consideration shall be given to a sign's relationship to the overall appearance of the subject's property as 
well as the surrounding community. Compatible design, simplicity, and effectiveness are to be used in 
establishing guidelines for sign approval, but shall not limit maximum standards for signs. 


Sec. 54-3-16.3. - Exempt signs. 
    Signs exempt from permitting. The following types of signs do not require a permit provided the sign 
shall not violate section 54-3-16.4, Prohibited signs. With the exception of public signs, the following signs 
shall comply with all applicable requirements in the zoning district where installed; comply with other 
provisions in this subsection; and be consistent with the spirit, intent and purpose of this article: 
(1) ?Address sign. Address signs not exceeding four square feet shall be permitted. 
(2) ?Instructional signs. 
(3) ?Home nameplate. Nameplate signs not exceeding two square feet shall be permitted for single-
family homes and duplexes. 
(4) ?Public signs. 
(5) ?Flags. When used for symbolic, noncommercial purposes. 
(6) ?Real estate signs. Only one sign, shall be permitted, per street frontage, on each parcel of land 
located in any district provided that such signs do not exceed an area of six square feet in a 
residential district and 16 feet in a commercial, industrial or institutional district. Said signs may 
include "Open House," "Open For Inspection," "Open" and other similar signs. Such signs shall 
be removed within 30 days after the closing of the sale. 
(7) ?Off-premises open house signs. Each residence that is open for inspection for sale or lease 
may have the seller or the agent install off-premises open house signs to direct persons to the 
open house, subject to the following: 
a. ?The sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign area, shall be located at least five feet 
from the adjacent road, and shall not exceed a height of three feet above the crown of the 
road. 
b. ?The message shall be limited to "Open House," "Open For Inspection," or substantially 
similar phrase, and the name of the owner of the sign. 
c. ?Each sign shall be made of metal, plastic, wood, or other weather resistant material. Paper 
or cardboard signs are prohibited. 
d. ?Each sign shall not be installed off-premise before 9:00 a.m. and shall be removed each 
day not later than 8:00 p.m. Any such sign in violation of these restrictions may be 
summarily removed by the city without notice. 
(8) ?Election season signs. Subject to the provisions of subsection 54-3-16.5(e)(3). 
(9) ?Construction signs. Construction signs shall be permitted only while construction is actually in 
progress and shall be removed within 15 days following the issuance of a certificate of 
occupancy, completion or abandonment of work, whichever occurs first. No such sign, however, 
shall be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit. Such signs shall not exceed an area 
of 16 square feet. Each sign shall be at least 20 feet from contiguous property lines of adjacent 
land owners and at least five feet from any right-of-way. 
(10) ?Window signs. For each facade, such signs, collectively, may not cover more than 50% of the 
total surface area of the transparent portion of all window(s) and door(s). Signs attached 
permanently to the interior of a building window or glass door shall be required to obtain a 
permit and the area of said sign shall be counted against the allowable signage permitted. 
(11) ?Holiday signs. Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of 
holidays. Such signs shall not be installed more than 60 days before the holiday and shall be 
removed within 30 days following the holidays. 
(12) ?Vehicular signs. 
(13) ?Future tenant identification sign. Such signs shall be permitted only while the development 
permit approval is in progress for a commercial or industrial activity and shall be removed within 
15 days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, completion or abandonment of 
work, whichever occurs first. Such signs shall not exceed an area of 32 square feet. Each sign 
shall be at least 20 feet from contiguous property lines of adjacent land owners, at least five feet 
from any right-of-way, and shall be located on the site where the use will occur. 
(14) ?Garage sale signs. Only one sign, not exceeding four square feet located on the property of 
the residence where the garage sale is being conducted is permitted. Such a garage sale shall 
have received a permit from the city as required by section 82-51, Code of Ordinances. Said 
sign shall not be erected before the beginning of the garage sale and shall be removed each 
day at the close of the garage sale or by the end of daylight, which ever occurs first. Said sign 
shall not be located in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O-16-05, § 2, 8-10-2016) 


Sec. 54-3-16.4. - Prohibited signs. 
    From and after the effective date of this article it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or use 
within the city: 
(1) ?Any swinging sign. 
(2) ?Any snipe sign. 
(3) ?Any banner, excepting approved special event signs. 
(4) ?Any sign erected, located or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any 
door, window or fire escape. 
(5) ?Any sign attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(6) ?Any sign or other advertising display which by reason of its position, shape or color interferes, 
obstructs or may be confused with any authorized traffic control device or emergency vehicle 
signal. 
(7) ?Any signs or other advertising display, except public signs or off-premises open house signs 
that are placed or erected on or over any public right-of-way, sidewalk, street, or curb. 
(8) ?Any other type or kind of sign which does not comply with the terms, conditions and provisions 
contained in this article and ordinances mandatory hereto and supplemental hereto. 
(9) ?Unauthorized sign on city property. 
(10) ?Any sidewalk, A-frame or sandwich sign unless otherwise allowed. 
(11) ?Any animated sign, except changeable copy signs, time/temperature, and barber signs. 
(12) ?Any add-on signs unless they shall have been issued a permit in conformance with the sign 
code. 
(13) ?Portable signs, excepting approved special event signs. 
(14) ?Revolving signs. 
(15) ?Roof signs 
(16) ?Off-site garage sale sign. 
(Ord. No. O-11-04, § 2, 7-13-2011) 


Sec. 54-3-16.5. - Permitted signs. 
(a) ?Signs in residential districts: In the RE-40, RS-20, RS-10, RM-8, R-MH, and residential portions of 
Planned Unit Development districts. The following signs are permitted subject to compliance with the 
provisions of this article: 
(1) ?Single-family residences and duplexes. No signs other than home address, nameplates, flags, 
decorative flags and instructional signs not exceeding two square feet each shall be permitted 
for single-family homes and duplexes. These signs do not require permits. 
(2) ?Multiple-family structures of ten units or less. A premises containing ten or less dwelling or 
rooming units may install a single sign per street frontage indicating the name and/or address of 
the premises, provided the sign has a maximum area not exceeding 16 square feet, and shall 
not be higher than six feet unless the sign is mounted flush against the wall of the building. 
These signs require permits. 
Address, nameplates, flags, decorative flags and instructional signs not exceeding an area of 
four square feet are allowed. These signs do not require permits and such signs shall be 
located on the site plan. 
(3) ?Multiple-family structures of more than ten units. A premises containing more than ten dwelling 
units or rooming units may install a single sign per street frontage, indicating the name and/or 
address of the premises. The sign shall have a maximum area not exceeding 32 square feet 
and shall not be higher than ten feet unless the sign is mounted flush against the wall of the 
building. These signs require permits. 
Address, nameplates, flags, decorative flags and instructional signs not exceeding an area of 
four square feet are allowed. These signs do not require permits and such signs shall be 
located on the site plan. 
(4) ?Approved nonresidential uses in residential districts. A premises containing an approved 
nonresidential use may install a single sign per street frontage, indicating the name and/or 
address of the premises and may include a changeable copy sign included in maximum area. 
The sign shall have a maximum area not exceeding 20 square feet and shall not be higher than 
ten feet unless the sign is mounted flush against the wall of the building. These signs require 
permits. 
Religious symbols may be erected and exceed the above referenced requirements subject to 
the approval of the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall 
review these types of signs to determine compliance pursuant to article X, section 54-3-10.2(f). 
Model homes with a valid conditional use permit may have one sign not to exceed six square 
feet and shall not be higher than six feet. Such signs may be illuminated. 
Address, flags, identification, and instructional signs not exceeding an area of four square feet 
are allowed. These signs do not require permits. Such signs shall be located on the site plan. 
(5) ?Subdivision entrance signs. One on-premises sign not exceeding 64 square feet in area may 
be erected at each principal entranceway to a duly platted residential subdivision. However, 
only one such sign shall be permitted for each common street serving a subdivision. These 
signs require permits. 
(b) ?Signs in nonresidential districts: The number and size of signs in the CL, C-512, CG, CR, CWR, IN, 
AI and nonresidential portions of the planned unit developments shall be governed by the 
percentages and limitations imposed herein, excluding temporary or instructional signs, which may 
be in addition to said percentages and limitations imposed herein. Additional restrictions may apply if 
property is in an area subject to overlay district regulations. 
(1) ?Freestanding signage. All freestanding signs shall be of a wide-based monument style. Pole 
signs are discouraged, but may be permitted when the supporting structures are completely 
screened from view with landscaping or berm features. Said landscaping and/or berm shall 
cover and screen the entire area beneath the sign at the time of certificate of occupancy (CO) 
issuance. 
Any freestanding signs constructed from flat panel materials, such as high density polyurethane, 
medium density overlay (MDO) plywood, sheet metal, or the like, shall have a distance of no 
less than eight inches from face to face, and shall be enclosed on all sides to cover internal 
frame. 
a. ?Sign area permitted. 
1. ?Front footage. There shall be one square foot of allowable cumulative sign area for 
each lineal foot of property frontage. Owner shall declare one street as his frontage 
street. 
2. ?Other streets. There shall be one-half square foot of allowable sign area for each 
lineal foot of property along said public rights-of-way. 
3. ?Support. Any monument sign may be supported by poles or columns and said 
supporting members shall have decorative covers or molding. 
4. ?Maximum size. No monument sign shall exceed 100 square feet in area unless 
approved by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning 
commission shall review signs over 100 square feet in area to determine compliance 
pursuant to article X, Appearance, Design and Compatibility; article XIV, Tree 
Protection and Landscaping and public safety. 
5. ?Building number. All monument signs shall display their building number on such sign. 
6. ?Religious symbols. Religious symbols may be erected and exceed the above 
referenced requirements subject to the approval of the planning and zoning 
commission. The planning and zoning commission shall review these types of signs to 
determine compliance pursuant to article X, section 54-3-10.2(f). 
b. ?Height regulation. The height of monument signs shall not exceed ten feet. 
c. ?Distance from property lines. Minimum setbacks for monument signs shall be: 
Front 0 
Side 5 
Rear 5 
d. ?Distance separating signs. There shall be a minimum of 48 feet between monument signs 
located on the same property. 
e. ?Location. The location of the monument sign shall be consistent with article X, Appearance, 
Design and Compatibility; article XIV, Tree Protection and Landscaping and public safety. 
f. ?Instructional signs. Instructional signs shall be exempt from the limitation on total sign area 
allowed per business and the requirement for a five-foot setback from any common 
property line. An instructional sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
(2) ?Signs attached to buildings. 
a. ?Applicability. Signs attached to building facades shall include wall, painted, vee-shaped 
and marquee signs. However, roof signs are prohibited. 
b. ?Copy area: 
1. ?For wall signs on frontage street facade. There shall be an allowable amount of sign 
area for signs attached to the frontage street facade of a building not to exceed 15% 
of the facade. In calculating the area of a building facade no additional credit shall be 
given for the surface of any canopy or awning. The calculation for the allowable 
facade credit shall always be calculated on a flat, two-dimensional plane and shall not 
include that part of any parapet, marquee, pylon or other surface that extends above 
the roof line. A mansard roof shall be classified as a parapet wall. If the lower edge of 
a slanted roof, other than a mansard roof, extends below the top of the supporting 
wall, the allowable facade shall be the area of the wall minus the area covered by the 
roof. 
2. ?For signs on facades other than frontage street facade. There shall be an allowable 
amount of sign area for signs attached to facades, other than the frontage street 
facade, not to exceed seven and one-half percent of the facade. However, when said 
facade faces residentially zoned property, the allowable amount of sign shall not 
exceed four percent of the facade. 
c. ?Placement of wall signs and marquee signs. No wall signs shall be erected at a distance of 
more than 18 inches beyond the face of any building, marquees being considered as a part 
of a building. The outside edge of wall signs or marquees shall not be closer than 24 
inches from the curb line. Signs may be placed in whole or in part upon a parapet, but no 
sign shall be extended above or be mounted upon the top of a parapet or marquee. One 
sign may be attached to the sides or front of a marquee or hung under a marquee at a 
business entrance, in which case the sign shall not exceed six and one-half square feet in 
area, shall maintain a seven-foot, six-inch minimum clearance above the sidewalk or 
ground level and shall not extend beyond the marquee's perimeter. 
d. ?Noncombustible material. The surface area of all electrical signs shall be of a 
noncombustible material. 
e. ?Regulation against obstruction. No wall signs shall cover wholly or partially any required 
wall opening, or project beyond the top of the wall to which it is attached. 
f. ?Wall sign projection. All bracing and/or lighting shall be hidden or covered so that it shall not 
be visible from the public right-of-way. The covered portion of the ends of such signs shall 
not be used for advertising purposes. 
g. ?Signs located on a canopy. Lettering, logos, and trim colors on canopy facia shall be 
considered a wall sign and shall be limited to 33% percent of the facia area of any one 
elevation. Internally illuminated signs shall not be placed on a canopy structure, and no 
sign shall be placed above the facia on a canopy structure. 
(3) ?Projecting signs. 
a. ?Not to encroach right-of-way. No projecting sign shall project over any public right-of-way. 
b. ?Allow substitution sign area and size. A projecting sign may be substituted for an allowed 
monument sign. However, the maximum allowable size for such a substitution shall not 
exceed one-half the allowable size of the monument sign for which it is substituted or shall 
not exceed the allowable amount of sign area for signs attached to facades as provided in 
this code, whichever is less. If a projecting sign is substituted for an existing monument 
sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, the monument sign must be removed. 
c. ?Placement. No projecting sign, which is entirely dependent upon a wall for support, shall be 
erected on a wall of any building so as to project above the roof line or parapet wall or 
above the roof level where there is no parapet wall. A sign attached to a corner of a 
building and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be deemed to be erected at a 
right angle to the building wall. A projecting sign shall not project more than 36 inches from 
the wall of a building and shall not overhang a public right-of-way. Such sign shall comply 
with height regulations of subsection 54-3-16.6(g) and shall be elevated a minimum of 
seven feet, six inches over any sidewalk or pedestrian way. No sign or part of a sign or its 
supporting structure shall cover any window or part of a window. No projecting sign or 
supporting structure shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct window light and 
vision. The city shall be held harmless for any liability associated with projecting signs. 
(4) ?Gasoline service stations. The restrictions imposed by this article shall not apply to signs or 
advertising on the actual fuel pumps. 
(5) ?Sandwich board signs. 
a. ?City owned properties bearing the IN and AI zoning designations are excluded. 
b. ?A temporary sign permit is required prior to the installation of the sign. Only one sandwich 
board sign is allowed per business and such permit is not transferable. Permits are valid 
for one calendar year beginning January 1, and ending December 31. There shall be no 
permit fee. 
c. ?A sketch including dimensions, copy area, materials, and location of the sandwich board 
sign must be attached to the permit application. The permit application must be approved 
and signed by city staff before the sandwich board sign may be displayed. If a sign is 
displayed prior to obtaining a sandwich board sign permit, application may be denied. 
d. ?The maximum height shall be 48 inches and the maximum width shall be 24 inches. Signs 
shall be self-supporting, A-shaped, with only two visible sides. Signs shall be professionally 
manufactured and enhance the ambiance of the immediate area. Signs located in 
performance overlay districts shall reflect the architectural design theme of the district. 
Each sign may have a changeable copy area, but may not be totally handwritten. Signs 
shall be weather resistant. Changeable copy areas shall be maintained. 
e. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be illuminated, nor shall they contain moving parts or have 
balloons, streamers, pennants, or similar adornment attached to them. Attaching sandwich 
board signs to structures, poles, objects, signs, etc. by any means is prohibited. Signs shall 
only be displayed during business operating hours. 
f. ?Location of sandwich board signs: 
1. ?Commercial properties along U.S. Highway 1: 
aa. ?Sandwich board signs may be located on the business property. These signs 
may not be located in the public right-of-way. 
bb. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be erected or maintained in a manner that 
prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
cc. ?Businesses located within a site fronting a roadway but not facing said roadway 
shall be allowed to place such signage in a location comparable to other 
businesses located within the site. 
dd. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be placed within a parking stall or travel lane of 
the business site. Signs located on the private sidewalk of a business site may 
not cause the sidewalk to be reduced below four feet in width. 
2. ?Commercial properties along Sebastian Boulevard: 
aa. ?Sandwich board signs may be located on the business property or within that 
portion of the public right-of-way between the sidewalk and business property 
line. 
bb. ?If the sign is to be located within the public right-of-way, business owners shall 
sign a disclaimer that indemnifies the city and any other relevant governing body 
of any liability for use of said public right-of-way. 
cc. ?Sandwich board signs within the public right-of-way may be moved/removed by 
the city for municipal purposes. (i.e. law enforcement, traffic issues, 
maintenance, etc.). 
dd. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be erected or maintained in a manner that 
prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
ee. ?Businesses located within a site fronting a roadway but not facing said roadway 
shall be allowed to place such signage in a location comparable to other 
businesses located within the site. 
ff. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be placed within a parking stall or travel lane of 
the business site. Signs located on the private sidewalk of a business site may 
not cause the sidewalk to be reduced below four feet in width. 
3. ?Properties along Indian River Drive: 
aa. ?Sandwich board signs may be located on the business property. These signs 
may not be located in the public right-of-way. 
bb. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be erected or maintained in a manner that 
prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
cc. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be placed within a parking stall or travel lane of 
the business site. Signs located on the private sidewalk of a business site may 
not cause the sidewalk to be reduced below four feet in width. 
4. ?All other commercial properties: 
aa. ?Sandwich board signs may be located on the business property. These signs 
may not be located in the public right-of-way. 
bb. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be erected or maintained in a manner that 
prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
cc. ?Sandwich board signs shall not be placed within a parking stall or travel lane of 
the business site. Signs located on the private sidewalk of a business site may 
not cause the sidewalk to be reduced below four feet in width. 
g. ?Sandwich board signs placed in violation of this section will result in immediate removal of 
the sign and the business' sandwich board privileges will be denied for the remainder of 
that year. Sandwich board signs displayed without approved permits shall be disposed of 
at owner's expense. 
h. ?The City of Sebastian authorization to permit signage does not preclude the enforcement of 
other regulations and restrictions by other governmental agencies. 
(c) ?Signs in public service district: In the PS zoning district, one sign shall be permitted per street 
frontage or per each 300 feet of street frontage, whichever is greater. Furthermore, where two or 
more monument signs are placed along a single street frontage, such signs shall be separated by a 
minimum distance of 48 feet. The cumulative area of all such signs shall not exceed one-eighth 
square foot per one foot of property frontage; however, the maximum area of any single sign shall 
not exceed 48 square feet. All monument signs shall be located at a minimum of ten feet from the 
front property line and twenty feet from any other common property line, and shall not be higher than 
ten feet unless mounted flush against the building. These signs require permits. 
    Scoreboards inside ballparks or recreational ball fields are exempt from the provisions of this 
subsection. These signs do not require permits. 
    Instructional signs shall be exempt from the limitation on total sign area allowed per business and the 
requirement of five-foot of setback from any common property line. An instructional sign shall not exceed 
six square feet in area. 
    Religious symbols and public signs may be erected and exceed the above referenced requirements 
subject to the approval of the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission 
shall review these types of signs to determine compliance pursuant to article X, Appearance, Design and 
Compatibility. 
(d) ?Signs in rights-of-way and on public property. Except for public signs: 
(1) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to place, nail, tack or otherwise attach any temporary sign or 
any advertising placard, poster, handbill or painted sign in a right-of-way or on any public 
property or to any tree, telephone or other utility post or building located in a right-of-way or on 
public property. 
(2) ?Where such sign or advertising is erected in the public right-of-way or on public property, the 
city shall have the right to remove any such signs without notification to any person. 
(3) ?It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any motor vehicle or other vehicle in 
the right-of-way or on public property in the city, for the purpose of advertising that such vehicle 
is being offered for sale, unless it is in connection with a purpose or business enterprise lawfully 
situated and licensed. For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a vehicle is 
being offered for sale if a sign or other written advertisement is prominently displayed thereon. 
For purposes of this section, the term vehicle shall include, but not be limited to trailers, 
motorcycles, boats and all other types of watercraft. 
(4) ?Municipal banners and all other public signs shall be allowed as approved by the city manager. 
(e) ?Temporary signs: All temporary signs not listed in subsections 54-16.5(e)(1) through 54-16.5(e)(3) 
and also not complying with all applicable criteria of this section shall be treated in all respects as 
permanent signs, except that such temporary signs shall not be included in calculating the total 
amount of permitted sign area. No temporary signs shall be illuminated except for holiday signs, or 
special event signs approved by the city manager. All temporary signs shall be located on private 
property. 
(1) ?Grand opening signs. Any new business or relocation of an existing business within the City of 
Sebastian shall be allowed grand opening signs. The grand opening sign may not be installed 
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall be removed within 60 days after the 
issuance of the permit. These signs require city approval. Such signs shall not exceed the 
following requirements: 
a. ?Properties with less than 100 feet of frontage shall be permitted a total of 32 square feet of 
sign area. 
b. ?Properties of more than 100 feet of frontage shall be permitted a total of 64 square feet of 
sign area. 
c. ?Banners and portable signs are permitted to be utilized as grand opening signs. 
(2) ?Subdivision entrance signs. On-premises active subdivision signs may be erected subject to 
compliance with the following conditions in addition to other applicable provisions of this section. 
a. ?Eligible sites. Such sign may be placed only on property consisting of land duly platted, as 
a subdivision, and within the platted boundaries of said property. 
b. ?Character of sign. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. Such sign must be located 
on the premises of the development subdivision, at least five feet from all rights-of-way, 
and at least 20 feet from contiguous property lines. These signs can be illuminated. 
c. ?Time of removal. Each active subdivision sign erected must be removed after a period of 
14 days after the last unit or lot in the subdivision is sold, leased or rented: 
d. ?Filing of plat. Prior to the erection of such a sign, a preliminary plat of the subdivision shall 
be placed on file in the office of the city clerk. 
e. ?Persons permitted. Only the agent of the developer or owner of the property shall be 
authorized to place signs on the property. The property owner's signed authorization 
consenting to the placement of a sign representing an exclusive real estate agent on his 
premises shall be filed in the office of the city clerk prior to the placement of the agent's 
sign. 
(3) ?Election season signs. Election season signs are defined as temporary signs installed not more 
than 75 days before an election and remaining not more than five days after an election. 
a. ?General. Election season signs shall not be posted on or over any public property or right-
of-way. 
b. ?Election season signs in residential districts are allowed subject to the following provisions: 
1. ?No sign shall exceed 16 square feet; 
2. ?No sign shall be illuminated; 
3. ?Each sign shall be freestanding; 
4. ?Each sign shall be located wholly on private property; 
5. ?Each sign shall be placed at least five feet from all rights-of-way and sidewalks; 
6. ?No sign shall exceed five feet in height; 
7. ?No sign shall be placed on or attached to any tree or utility post. 
c. ?Election season signs in nonresidential districts are allowed subject to the following 
provisions: 
1. ?No sign shall exceed 20 square feet; 
2. ?No sign shall be illuminated; 
3. ?Each sign shall be freestanding; 
4. ?Each sign shall be located wholly on private property; 
5. ?Each sign shall be placed at least five feet from all rights-of-way and sidewalks; 
6. ?No sign shall exceed ten feet in height; 
7. ?No sign shall be placed on or attached to any tree or utility post. 
d. ?Posting time limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to post a political sign more than 75 
days prior to the election in which the candidate's name or the issue will appear, and it 
shall be unlawful to fail to remove a political sign within five days after the election in which 
the candidate is eliminated or elected or the issue is approve or disapproved. 
e. ?Removal of illegal signs. The code enforcement division shall order the immediate removal 
of any political sign found posted within the city in violation of this section. If the sign is not 
removed within two days, the code enforcement division shall remove the political sign. 
f. ?Fine. A fine of $25.00 per sign may be imposed upon the person posting said sign or upon 
the candidate promoted on said sign for any of the following: 
1. ?Failure to remove all signs within the applicable five-day period for removal; 
2. ?Placement of signs upon public property or upon any tree, utility pole, or similar object. 
g. ?Prima fascia evidence. Political signs placed in violation of this section which advertise a 
particular candidate shall be prima facie evidence of the placement or authorization of the 
placement of the sign by the candidate. 
h. ?Reimbursement for removal expense. The candidate or the president of the committee 
supporting or opposing the ballot measure, as applicable, shall reimburse the city for any 
and all expenses of removal incurred by the city. 
(4) ?Other temporary signs. The following criteria shall serve to regulate other temporary signs not 
identified in the foregoing categories. These signs require city approval. Other temporary signs 
must comply with each of the following criteria: 
a. ?Properties with less than 100 feet of frontage shall be permitted a (cumulative) total of 32 
square feet of sign area. 
b. ?Properties with 100 or more feet of frontage shall be permitted a (cumulative) total of 64 
square feet of sign area. 
c. ?Such temporary signs may be permitted up to seven days at a time and up to three times in 
a calendar year. 
d. ?Banners and portable signs are permitted to be utilized as other temporary signs. 
e. ?Feather flags are permitted to be utilized as other temporary signs with the time limitation 
as listed in c. above and with the following provisions: 
i. ?City owned properties bearing the IN and AI zoning designations are excluded. 
ii. ?A temporary sign permit is required prior to the use of the sign. Only one feather flag is 
allowed per business and such permit is not transferable. There is no cost for the 
permit. 
iii. ?A sketch including dimensions, copy area, materials, and location of the feather flag 
must be attached to the permit application. The permit application must be approved 
and signed by city staff before the feather flag may be displayed. If a feather flag is 
displayed prior to obtaining a feather flag permit, application may be denied. 
iv. ?The maximum height shall be 12 feet. 
v. ?Feather flags shall not be illuminated, nor shall they contain moving parts or have 
balloons, streamers, pennants, or similar adornment attached to them. Attaching 
feather flags to structures, poles, objects, signs, etc. by any means is prohibited. 
Feather flags shall only be displayed during business operating hours. 
vi. ?Feather flags shall be displayed in accordance with subsection 54-3-16.5(b)(5)f., 
location of sandwich board signs. 
vii. ?Feather flags placed in violation of this section will result in immediate removal of the 
feather flag and the business' feather flag privileges will be denied for the remainder of 
the year. 
viii. ?The City of Sebastian authorization to permit feather flags does not preclude the 
enforcement of other regulations and restrictions by other governmental agencies. 
(f) ?Directional signs. The intent of this type of sign is to direct persons to a place, structure, or activity 
within the city limits. No directional sign shall be utilized exclusively to advertise a place of business 
without giving directions or utilizing an arrow. 
(1) ?Signs located in the Indian River. One sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area may be 
located in or on the waters of the Indian River for any approved marina within the City of 
Sebastian. These signs must have approval from the State of Florida prior to obtaining a permit 
from the City of Sebastian. 
(2) ?District in which directional signs are permitted. One sign not exceeding 32 square feet and ten 
feet high may be located on any lot within CL, CG and IN districts. 
(3) ?Distance separating signs. The minimum distance separating directional signs within the CL, 
CG and IN districts shall be 1,000 feet. 
(g) ?Billboards. All billboards shall be prohibited within the City of Sebastian. 
(h) ?Bench signs. The area of the bench sign shall be counted toward the allowable monument sign 
area. Bench signs may be located on city owned right-of-way through an agreement approved by the 
city council. Such an agreement shall identify construction standards, location criteria, permitted 
copy, and liability. The city is not responsible for bench signs permitted through such agreements. 
(Ord. No. O-11-04, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-2011; Ord. No. O-11-16, § 1, 8-24-2011; Ord. No. O-16-05, § 
2, 8-10-2016) 


Sec. 54-3-16.6. - General requirements. 
(a) ?Rules for interpreting sign calculations: 
(1) ?Determining the number of signs. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign 
shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements 
organized, related, and composed to form a unit. 
(2) ?Computation of sign area. Sign area shall be computed by including the area of all signs on the 
premises. 
Multi-sided signs, with respect to three-dimensional or multi-sided signs, the surface area shall 
be computed by including the total of all sides designed either to attract attention or 
communicate information. In the case of a sign consisting of two or more sides where the angle 
formed between any two or more sides or the projections thereof exceeds 45 degrees, each 
side shall be considered a separate sign area. 
Exceptions: 
a. ?Any double faced sign (back to back and parallel to each other) provided said face of each 
sign are not separated by more than two feet. The area of the largest face shall be 
included in the determination of sign area. 
b. ?A vee-shaped sign that is not parallel and the angle between said faces do not exceed 45 
degrees. The area of the largest face shall be included in the determination of sign area. 
(3) ?Total sign surface area. Unless otherwise provided in this article, the total surface area devoted 
to all signs on any lot shall not exceed the limitations set forth in article, and all signs except 
temporary signs shall be included in this calculation. 
(b) ?Construction standards. All signs shall comply with all applicable standards of the city's building 
code, fire code, health code, electrical code, land development code, and all other applicable codes. 
(c) ?Maintenance. All signs within the city limits including all supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be 
kept in good repair. The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not properly 
maintained. The expense of which will be the sole responsibility of the owner or lessee of said sign. 
(d) ?Signs not to constitute a traffic hazard. No sign shall be placed at any location in the city where it 
may interfere with or obstruct the view of any motorist, or be confused with any authorized traffic 
sign, signal or device. The building official shall have the authority to refuse the erection, or to order 
the removal of any sign, if any sign constituting an obstruction to motorists or pedestrians or 
otherwise are viewed to be impediments to traffic safety or traffic flow. 
(e) ?Signs not to encroach electric utility clear zone. No sign shall be placed closer than eight feet from 
the nearest part of any utility pole which supports electrical transmission lines. No sign shall be 
placed closer than eight feet from the nearest part of any electric transmission line. If the National 
Electrical Code is now or hereafter more restrictive than the provisions of this subsection, the most 
restrictive provisions shall prevail. 
(f) ?Illuminated signs: 
(1) ?Shielded light source. The light from any illuminated sign, or from any light source, shall be 
shaded, shielded or directed so that the light intensity or brightness shall neither adversely 
affect the surrounding premises nor impede safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on 
streets or parking areas. 
(2) ?Exposed lighting restrictions. No signs, except changeable copy signs and time and 
temperature signs, shall have exposed fluorescent lighting, exposed neon, fiber optics, 
fluorescent paint, or be phosphorescent. All unexposed neon shall be approved by any testing 
laboratory acceptable to the city. Similarly, illuminated tubing or strings of lights that outline 
property lines, sales areas, or similar areas are prohibited, except: 
a. ?Holiday observance signs. 
b. ?Any exposed neon signs or lighting totally within an enclosed building. All exposed or 
unexposed signs shall be counted against the allowable signage permitted in section 54-
16.5. 
(3) ?Light source. No sign shall have a light source that exceeds the following light intensity. 
Brightness and Intensity for Criteria Light 

Source Shall Not Exceed In: 
Light Source 
Residential or  
Residential  
Portions of  
PUD Districts 
PS and  
Commercial  
Portions of PUD  
Districts 
CL, CG, CR, CWR, C-512, AI,  
IN, and AI Districts 




Exposed Bulbs 
10 watts 
15 watts 
15 watts 
Luminous 
20 ft. lamberts 
90 ft. lamberts 
150 ft. lamberts 
Illuminated 
50 footcandles 
50 footcandles 
75 footcandles 
 
(4) ?Restriction on flashing signs. No flashing sign shall be permitted except time and temperature 
signs, public signs, and holiday observance signs. 
(g) ?Height of and distance separating signs. No part of any sign affixed to a building shall exceed the 
height of the building to which the sign is affixed or project above the roof. The height of monument 
signs is limited to ten feet. Distance requirements in this article shall be measured from the nearest 
part of any sign (or its structure) to the nearest point of the closest applicable restricting line of point 
of separation (including distance between signs) or height limitation. 
(h) ?Appearance of signs: 
(1) ?Shape, color, lettering, location and arrangement of signs shall be harmonious with the building 
design and surrounding landscape. 
(2) ?Every sign shall have good scale and good proportion in its design and in its visual relationship 
to buildings, surroundings, and other signs. 
(3) ?Colors shall be used harmoniously. Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external 
spot or flood lighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is shielded from view. 
(4) ?No sign installed in the city on the effective date of this section shall become nonconforming 
based solely on this subsection 54-3-16.6(h), "Appearance of signs." 


Sec. 54-3-16.7. - Sign regulating procedures. 
(a) ?Permitting procedures: 
(1) ?Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, display or install any sign or advertising 
display, or attach, apply or connect high voltage tube lighting to existing signs, in the city without 
first having obtained a permit or permits therefor as hereinafter required, except as provided for 
in subsection 54-3-16.3. 
(2) ?Applications. Applications for permits required by this article shall be filed by such applicant, or 
his agent, in the building department, upon forms to be furnished by said department. Said 
applications shall contain or have attached thereto the following information. 
a. ?Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
b. ?Name, address and telephone number of the sign owner. 
c. ?Name, address and telephone number of the contractor(s) installing said sign (if 
applicable). 
d. ?Location of building (or structure) and lot to which or upon which the sign is to be placed or 
maintained. 
e. ?Purpose of sign. 
f. ?Estimated value of sign. 
g. ?Position of the sign in relation to adjacent lot lines, buildings, structures, sidewalks, rights-
of-way, streets, intersections, and easements. 
h. ?Type of sign and general description of structural design and construction materials to be 
used. 
i. ?Three copies of detailed scaled drawings or plans containing specifications concerning 
structural details of the method of sign construction, installation, and anchoring to the 
building or ground. The specifications shall show height, perimeter and area dimensions, 
elevations, means of support, method illumination and any other significant aspect of the 
proposed sign. 
j. ?A statement indicating whether or not any electrical wiring is required. If so, a completed 
electrical permit shall also be submitted (if required). 
k. ?A layout with sign colors shown or specified. 
l. ?Any other information required by the building department in order to carry out the purpose 
and intent of this article. 
m. ?The following signs shall be designed by an engineer, who shall submit to the building 
official complete plans and calculations so as to determine whether the sign complies with 
the city's code: 
1. ?Projecting signs over 24 square feet in area. 
2. ?Monument signs over 40 square feet in area. 
3. ?Any sign that, in the opinion of the building director, contains unusual design features. 
It is the intention of this provision to insure the structural integrity of signs that are 
unique in design. 
(3) ?Issuance. Provided all of the provisions of this article shall have been complied with, and the 
sign or advertising display will not violate any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this 
ordinance, or of any other law or ordinance, the building official shall issue a permit for each 
sign or advertising display, retaining a copy thereof and a copy of plans of said advertising 
display for his records. 
(4) ?Inspections. The contractor or owner securing the permit for any sign shall call the building 
department and request an inspection whenever any sign is being installed, and before any 
concrete is poured; a final inspection shall be requested upon completion. 
(5) ?Revocations. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions 
of this code, if it is found that there has been any false statement, concealment or 
misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or 
approval was based. 


Sec. 54-3-16.8. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a) ?Continuance of preexisting structures. Any sign, billboard, or advertising display which lawfully 
existed and was maintained at the time this ordinance became effective, may be continued, although 
such structures do not conform to all the provisions hereof; provided that no structural alterations are 
made thereto. 
(1) ?Impact of damage to nonconforming signs. Any nonconforming sign which is destroyed or 
damaged, to the extent of 50% or more, or is altered or replaced, shall not be altered, replaced 
or reinstalled unless and until it shall have been made to conform to the provisions of this 
article. Public signs erected by the city are exempt from this requirement. 
(2) ?Removal of nonconforming signs: 
a. ?Destruction, damage or obsolescence. The use of any nonconforming sign shall terminate 
whenever the sign is damaged or destroyed beyond 50%, from any cause whatever, or 
becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable city ordinance to the extent the 
sign becomes a hazard or danger and upon termination shall be removed. 
(b) ?Additional enforcement. 
(1) ?Stop work orders (violations). Upon notice from the building official that work on any sign or 
advertising display is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or 
unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and 
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and 
shall state the condition under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no 
written notice shall be required to be given by the building official. 


Sec. 54-3-16.9. - Substitution and severability. 
(1) ?Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial speech. Notwithstanding anything contained 
in this article or Code to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this article or 
Code or otherwise lawfully existing with a commercial message may, at the option of the owner, 
contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message. The noncommercial message 
may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from 
commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one noncommercial message to another, as 
frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the sign is not a prohibited sign or sign-
type and provided that the size, height, setback and other dimensional criteria contained in this 
article and Code have been satisfied. 
(2) ?Severability generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, 
clause, term, or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of 
any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any 
other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of 
this article. 
(3) ?Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of 
severability set forth above or elsewhere in this article, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any 
part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this 
article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent 
jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, 
subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this article, even if 
such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting 
previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. 
(4) ?Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs and sign elements. Without diminishing or 
limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above elsewhere in this article, this Code, 
or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, 
phrase, clause, term, or word of this article is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or 
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not 
affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, 
or word of this article that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign 
elements that are prohibited by section 54-3-16.4. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, 
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 54-3-16.4 is declared 
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the 
declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other subsection, paragraph, 
subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of section 54-3-16.4, thereby ensuring that 
as many prohibited sign-types as may be constitutionally prohibited continue to be prohibited. 
    It is the intent of the city to regulate signage in a manner that implements the purposes of this article 
as expressed in section 54-3-16.1. The city finds that the purposes stated in section 54-3-16.1 are 
legitimate, substantial, and compelling public interests, that the regulation of signage provided by this 
article is unrelated to the suppression of free expression, and that the incidental restrictions on expression 
that may occur as a result of these regulations is no more than is essential to the furtherance of the public 
interests. However, if a court of competent jurisdiction finds any regulation herein to be based upon 
content and, further, declares such regulation unconstitutional, then it is the intent of the city council that 
only that portion of the provision that is found unconstitutional be severed from this article, and if it is not 
possible for the court to strike only the portion of the provision that is found unconstitutional, then it is the 
intent of the city council that all signs that would be subject to the stricken provision will instead be subject 
to the next surviving provision for a sign of like geometry and character that is more restrictive than the 
stricken provision in terms of sign area. 
(Ord. No. O-16-05, § 4, 8-10-2016) 


Chapter IV - PLAN REVIEW AND SUBDIVISIONS 


ARTICLE XVIII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES 


Sec. 54-4-18.1. - Intent of site plan review. 
    The intent of site plan review is to set forth uniform procedures, well-defined application processes 
and information requirements. The purpose is to ensure that: 1) development of individual sites within the 
City of Sebastian is consistent with all applicable development standards; 2) approval of such 
development will be based upon the provision and availability of adequate public facilities and services 
coincident with the impact of the development; and 3) development is compatible and coordinated with 
existing and anticipated development within the immediate area surrounding the site. 


Sec. 54-4-18.2. - Applicability and filing procedure. 
    In all cases requiring site plan review, no structure or parking area, or part thereof, shall be erected 
or used, or land or water used, or any change of use consummated, nor shall any building permit be 
issued therefor, unless a site plan for such structure or use shall have been reviewed and approved 
pursuant to this article. 
(a) ?Fees. The fee schedule for site plan review shall be determined by resolution of the city 
council. 
(b) ?Conformance with zoning regulations required. Any such building, structure or use approved 
pursuant to this article shall be erected, altered, installed, and maintained in full conformity with 
the provisions of the zoning ordinance and the approved site plan. 
(c) ?General site plan review procedure. All development requiring site plans shall comply with the 
land development regulations including chapter III, Performance Criteria. In all cases requiring 
site plan review, no structure or parking area, or part thereof, shall be erected or used, or land 
or water used, or any change of use consummated, nor shall any building permit be issued 
therefore, unless a site plan for such structure or use shall have been reviewed and approved 
pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(1) ?Required pre-application procedures. Prior to making application for preliminary plat 
approval, the applicant for subdivision approval shall meet with the planning and growth 
management department and appropriate city staff to discuss, informally, preliminary 
concepts and sketches of the proposed subdivision and their relationship to these 
regulations. This procedure is mandatory and is intended to provide an opportunity for the 
applicant to receive staff assistance and advice prior to expending funds for preparing a 
preliminary plat. 
(2) ?Filing. Seven copies of an application for site plan approval and all supporting information 
shall be filed with the planning and growth management department for dispersal to all 
appropriate intergovernmental agencies and city staff for review. 
(3) ?Application. Such application shall be in a form prescribed by the planning and growth 
management director. 
(4) ?Ownership/disclosure. All applications shall include a notarized affidavit showing each and 
every individual person having a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the property 
upon which the application for site plan approval is sought, except publicly held 
corporations, in which case the name and address of the corporation and principal 
executive officers together with any majority stockholder will be sufficient. If the applicant is 
not the owner, the applicant must provide an original notarized statement from the current 
property owner authorizing representation of the specific site plan review application. 
(5) ?Phasing. A site plan may be phased and the initial conditions, final site plan and each 
phase shall be depicted on separate sheets. Additionally, a binding schedule for 
completion of each phase shall be included and each phase or combination of phases shall 
meet the requirements of this article. 
(d) ?Review by planning and growth management director. Each application shall be reviewed by 
the planning and growth management department and transmitted to appropriate city staff and 
intergovernmental agencies based upon the development issues surrounding the proposed site 
plan. The planning and growth management director shall review each application for 
compliance with all applicable land development regulations including, but not limited to, 
performance criteria in chapter III, city land development code, and other local, state, and/or 
federal laws. 
(e) ?Conformance with land development regulations required. All buildings, structures or uses shall 
be erected, altered, installed and maintained in full conformity with the provisions of the land 
development regulations and approved site plans. 
(f) ?Performance bond may be required. A performance bond may be required from applicants as a 
condition of site plan approval to insure all on- or off-site infrastructure improvements are in 
place at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If required, such bond shall be 
submitted prior to issuance of building permits. The performance bond shall be furnished and 
payable to the city in the sum of 125% of the total cost of the engineer's estimates for extension 
of potable water distribution system components; sanitary sewerage system components; street 
improvements, including acceleration and/or deceleration lanes, traffic control devices, 
markings signage, and/or related street improvements; sidewalks, curbs, and/or gutters; 
stormwater management improvements; and/or other improvements required in the site plan 
approval. 


Sec. 54-4-18.3. - Administrative and major site plan review decisions. 
    A site plan requiring an administrative site plan review shall be reviewed by the director of planning 
and growth management according to procedures stated below: 
(a) ?Administrative site plan review. Site plans which meet the following criteria may be approved 
administratively, in accordance with this section: 
A proposed site plan which contains less than 1,000 square feet of impervious surface; or 
A proposed site plan which is comprised of one or two dwelling units located east of Indian 
River Drive. 
(1) ?Decisions of the planning and growth management director. The review of an 
administrative site plan by the director of planning and growth management shall be 
carried out in conformance with the procedures and criteria established in this article, 
including, but not limited to, a review of the site plan's compliance with performance criteria 
stated in chapter III of the land development code. The planning and growth management 
director shall establish application forms and procedural guides with typical time lines in 
order to prevent unnecessary inconvenience and delay to the project. If deemed 
necessary, the planning and growth management director may schedule an administrative 
site plan for a regular planning and zoning commission meeting in order to obtain a 
recommendation. After considering city staff comments (and if necessary P&Z's 
recommendation) the director of planning and growth management shall approve the site 
plan, with or without conditions, or disapprove the site plan. The planning and growth 
management director may attach to an approved site plan any reasonable conditions, 
limitations or requirements which are found necessary, in the director's judgement, to 
effectuate the purpose of this article and carry out the spirit and purpose of the 
comprehensive plan and the land development code. 
Where a site plan is approved with conditions or is disapproved, the conditions or reasons 
for disapproval, as appropriate, shall be stated in writing and shall be signed by the 
planning and growth management director. Such documentation shall include a cross 
reference to the code provisions and the comprehensive plan citations, where applicable, 
that have not been satisfied. Decisions of the planning and growth management director on 
an administrative site plan shall be final unless appealed to the planning and zoning 
commission. 
(2) ?Appeals of site plan decisions of the planning and growth management director. Appeals 
of decisions of the planning and growth management director shall be to the planning and 
zoning commission pursuant to section 54-1-2.2(d). 
(b) ?Minor modifications. Minor modifications to approved developments shall be reviewed as an 
administrative site plan. Minor modifications include changes such as: 
(1) ?General. Redesign and different location of pools, drives and driveways; or modifications 
in stairs or elevations of decks, porches, terraces and fencing; 
(2) ?Additional parking. Addition of parking spaces, not to exceed 25%, including fractions 
thereof, of the total number of existing parking spaces or five spaces, whichever is the 
lesser amount; and no such additional parking shall consume the approved landscaped 
area. 
(3) ?Minor utility system improvement. Installation of essential utility system improvements 
including buildings not exceeding 200 square feet, for water and sewerage services, 
electric service, telephone service, drainage, landscaping and similar services. 
(4) ?Building additions. An addition to a building which does not increase the floor area in 
excess of 500 square feet. 
(c) ?Site plan development. All proposed plans not qualifying as administrative or minor 
modifications shall otherwise be known as site plan developments. Said plans shall commence 
with a review by the director of planning and growth management pursuant to the procedures 
and criteria established in this article, including, but not limited to, a review of the site plan's 
compliance with performance criteria stated in chapter III of the land development code. The 
planning and growth management director shall establish application forms and procedural 
guides with typical time lines to prevent unnecessary inconvenience and delay to the project. 
(1) ?Review by planning and growth management director and staff. After considering city staff 
comments the director of planning and growth management shall recommend approval of 
the site plan, with or without conditions, or shall recommend disapproval of the site plan. 
Where a site plan is recommended for approval with conditions or recommended for 
disapproval, the conditions or reasons for disapproval, as appropriate, shall be stated in 
writing and shall be signed by the planning and growth management director. Such 
documentation shall include a cross reference to the code provisions and the 
comprehensive plan citations, where applicable, that have not been satisfied. 
(2) ?Notice and action by planning and zoning commission. After notice the director of planning 
and growth management's written recommendations shall be presented to the planning 
and zoning commission for final action at a regularly scheduled meeting. After considering 
these recommendations, the planning and zoning commission shall approve the site plan, 
with or without conditions, or disapprove the site plan. The planning and zoning 
commission may attach to its approval of a site plan any reasonable conditions, limitations 
or requirements which are found necessary, in its judgement, to effectuate the purpose of 
this article and carry out the spirit and purpose of the comprehensive plan and the land 
development code. Where a site plan is approved with conditions or is disapproved, the 
conditions or reasons for disapproval, as appropriate, the planning and zoning commission 
shall state in the record the grounds for disapproval including appropriate code citations. 
Such documentation shall include a cross reference to the appropriate code provisions and 
the comprehensive plan citations, where applicable, that have not been satisfied. Decisions 
of the planning and zoning commission on a site plan development shall be final unless 
appealed to the city council. 
(3) ?Appeals to site plan decisions of the planning and zoning commission. Appeals to 
decisions of the planning and zoning commission shall be to the city council pursuant to 
section 54-1-2.4(g). 


Sec. 54-4-18.4. - Information to be included in site plan. 
    A site plan, for the purposes of this section, shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the 
following requirements. All architecture or engineering designs must be prepared and sealed by a 
professional architect or engineer registered in the State of Florida pursuant to chapters 471 and 481 
respectively, Florida Statutes. 
(a) ?General site plan information. 
(1) ?Title block: 
a. ?Name of development; 
b. ?Name of owner/developer; 
c. ?Scale; 
d. ?North Arrow; 
e. ?Preparation and revision date; 
f. ?Location/street address of development. 
(2) ?Project information to be included on site plan: 
a. ?Zoning (include any special districts); 
b. ?Project site size (acreage and/or square footage); 
c. ?Legal description; 
d. ?Square footage together with maximum allowed/proposed building coverage; 
e. ?Floor area ratio, maximum allowed and proposed; 
f. ?Impervious surface ratio, maximum allowed and proposed; 
g. ?Pervious surface, including maximum allowed and proposed open space and green 
space; 
h. ?Parking spaces, including minimum required and proposed as well as total 
handicapped spaces provided; 
i. ?Delineate location of existing and proposed structures; 
j. ?Denote existing and proposed development type by land use including 
density/intensity; 
k. ?Setbacks; 
l. ?Finished floor elevation; 
m. ?Proposed height and elevation of the crown of the road of the lowest adjacent street; 
n. ?Landscape plan in accordance with article XIV; 
o. ?FEMA flood zone designation and map number. 
(b) ?Supplemental documentation. 
(1) ?Identification of key persons (name, business name, mailing address, phone number). 
a. ?Owner; 
b. ?Owner's authorized agent; 
c. ?Engineer and architect; 
d. ?Surveyor; 
e. ?Landscape architect and/or environmental consultant; 
f. ?Others involved in the application; 
g. ?Verified statement showing each and every individual person having a legal and/or 
equitable ownership interest in the subject property, except publicly held corporations 
whose stock is traded on a nationally recognized stock exchange, in which case the 
names and addresses of the corporation and principal executive officers together with 
any majority stockholders will be sufficient. 
(2) ?Other project information. A general outline of the proposed development shall include the 
following criteria where applicable: 
a. ?Proposed stages (or phases) of development or operation and facility utilization; 
b. ?Dates for each phase; 
c. ?Expected date of completion; 
d. ?Proposed site plan for the site; 
e. ?List of all permits required to be obtained prior to building permit issuance; 
f. ?A written description of characteristics of the proposed development (i.e., number and 
type of residential units, floor area by land use, number of tourist accommodations 
units, seating or parking capacities, number of hospital beds, any proposed outside 
facilities or areas to be used for storage, display, outside sales, waste disposal or 
similar use, and any other proposed uses); 
g. ?For planned unit developments, indicate design techniques to reduce public facility 
costs and disturbances to natural resources and for preserving scenic quality of site; 
h. ?Buildings and siting specifications to reduce damage potential and to comply with 
federal flood insurance regulations; 
i. ?Protection against encroachment together with proposed mitigation measures to be 
employed within environmentally sensitive areas; 
j. ?Identify existing and proposed hydrant locations in relationship to building(s) and other 
fire protection systems. The applicant may be required by the Indian River County 
North Fire District to provide fire wells to augment the available water supply. 
k. ?Identify proposed utility systems, including easements for required utilities and include 
affidavits of service availability from appropriate public and semi-public service 
providers, including, but not limited to, FP&L. 
(3) ?Existing site conditions. A general description of the existing site conditions including, but 
not limited to, the following: 
a. ?Use; 
b. ?Density; 
c. ?Building area (if applicable); 
d. ?Impervious area (if applicable); 
e. ?Vegetation; 
f. ?Soils; 
g. ?Groundwater; 
h. ?Topography; 
i. ?FEMA map designation. 
(4) ?Residential developments. If the development includes residential units, the following shall 
be discussed in the written description: a breakdown of the proposed residential units; 
tenure (i.e., owner occupied or rental); and structure type (such as single-family, duplex, 
multiple-family, mobile home). 
(5) ?Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study shall be required if trip generation thresholds 
are met. The study shall be prepared consistent with Indian River County Code section 
952.07. 
(6) ?Stormwater. A stormwater report shall be prepared consistent with article XII, Surface 
Water Management. 
(7) ?Intergovernmental coordination. 
a. ?Provide proof of coordination with applicable local, regional, state and federal 
agencies, including but not limited to those agencies cited below, that will be involved 
in the project: 
• ?Indian River County 
• ?Treasure Coast Regional Planning Council (TCRPC) 
• ?Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) 
• ?St. Johns River Water Management District (SJRWMD) 
• ?Florida Department of Community Affairs (DCA) 
• ?Florida Freshwater Fish and Game Commission (F&GC) 
• ?Florida Department of Transportation (DOT) 
• ?U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
• ?U.S. Fish and Wildlife, including National Wetlands Survey 
b. ?Provide evidence that any necessary permit, lease or other permission from 
applicable local, regional, state and federal agencies have been obtained for any 
activity that will impact wetland communities or submerged land. 
c. ?In cases where intergovernmental coordination efforts are incomplete the applicant 
shall provide evidence of good faith efforts towards resolving intergovernmental 
coordination issues. 
(c) ?Concurrency facilities and other utilities or services. Site plans shall satisfy concurrency 
management regulations cited in article IX. This component of the plan shall identify demands 
on concurrency facilities generated by the proposed development and identify how the demands 
shall be accommodated through improvements. The site plan shall also list the utility providers 
currently serving the site together with a description of the existing infrastructure serving the 
site. Include the location, design and character of all concurrency facilities and other utilities, 
such as underground or overhead electric lines, gas transmission lines, or other similar facilities 
or services, on the site plan. Concurrency facilities shall include the following: 
(1) ?Potable water supply. 
a. ?Identify projected average daily potable water demands at the end of each 
development phase and specify the consumption rates that have been assumed for 
the projection. 
b. ?Provide proof of coordination with Indian River County Utilities Department. Assess 
the present and projected capacity of the water supply system and the ability of such 
system to provide adequate water for the proposed development. 
c. ?Describe measures taken to ensure the water pressure and flow will be adequate for 
fire protection for the type of construction proposed. 
d. ?Denote both planned system improvements required to establish and/or maintain 
adopted level of service and proposed funding resources to provide these 
improvements. 
(2) ?Wastewater management. 
a. ?Provide projection of the average daily flows of waste water generated by the 
development at the end of each development phase. Describe proposed treatment 
system, method and degree of treatment, quality of effluent, and location of effluent 
and sludge disposal areas. Identify method and responsibilities for operation and 
maintenance of facilities. 
b. ?If public wastewater facilities are to be utilized, provide proof of coordination with the 
Indian River County Utilities Department and the Department of Environmental 
Protection, if applicable. Assess the present and projected capacity of the treatment 
plant and the availability of sewer lines to the subject site. If septic tanks are proposed 
demonstrate coordination with the Indian River County Health Department. 
c. ?If applicable, provide a description of the volume and characteristics of any industrial 
or other effluent. 
d. ?Denote both planned system improvements required to establish and/or maintain 
adopted level of service and proposed funding resources to provide these 
improvements. 
(3) ?Water quality. Discuss disposal areas, septic tank drain field, urban runoff areas 
impervious surfaces, and construction related runoff. Describe anticipated volume and 
characteristics. Indicate measures taken to minimize the adverse impacts of potential 
pollution sources upon the quality of the receiving waters prior to, during and after 
construction. 
a. ?Identify any wastewater disposal areas, septic tank drain field, urban runoff areas 
impervious surfaces, and construction related runoff. Describe anticipated volume and 
characteristics. Indicate measures taken to minimize the adverse impacts of these 
potential pollution sources upon the quality of the receiving waters prior to, during and 
after construction. 
b. ?Describe plans for re-vegetation and landscaping of cleared sites including a 
completion schedule for such work. 
(4) ?Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan for the site shall be provided 
which is consistent with the requirements of article XII. Additionally, an erosion and 
sedimentation control plan shall be provided. 
(5) ?Solid waste. Identify projected average daily volumes of solid waste generated by the 
development, including projected volumes by phase on phased projects. Indicate proposed 
methods of treatment and disposal. Provide proof of coordination with the Indian River 
County Solid Waste Disposal District to ensure compliance with concurrency management 
requirements of article IX. Assess the present and projected capacity of the solid waste 
treatment and disposal system and the ability of such facilities to provide adequate service 
to the proposed development. 
(6) ?Roadway. Provide an explanation of the results of the traffic impact study as they relate to 
the following items: 
a. ?A projection of the expected vehicle trip generation at the completion of each 
development phase. 
b. ?Describe in terms of external trip generation and average daily as well as peak hour 
traffic. 
c. ?Evaluate the capacity of the existing roadway network serving the development. 
d. ?Provide recommendations for any required improvements to the existing network 
required by the proposed development including additional R/W, roadway 
improvements, additional paved lanes, traffic signalization, access and egress 
controls, and other similar improvements. 
(7) ?Recreation. Identify projected demand generated by the development and cite land and 
facility improvements provided to ensure the city's level of service is not adversely 
impacted. 
(d) ?Appearance, design, and compatibility. The site plan shall satisfy criteria established in article 
X. 
(1) ?Site location and character of use. The site plan submitted for review should be in 
compliance with all applicable performance criteria set forth in chapter III of this code and 
any applicable overlay district criteria. 
a. ?Vicinity map. Provide a vicinity map with project's location noted together with a 
general written description of the proposed development. Show relationship of site to 
surrounding streets and public facilities at a scale of one inch to 200 feet. 
b. ?Land use compatibility. Identify adjacent land uses including current zoning 
designation and conditional uses within 50 feet of the boundaries for a developments 
requiring administrative review, and 100 feet of the boundaries for a major 
development. If applicable, assess the impact of the proposed development upon 
unincorporated Indian River County. 
c. ?Historic and archeological resource protection. Include appropriate site plan initiatives 
for developments impacting sites on the national register of historic places or on the 
state master file of historic and archaeological resources (cross reference—section 
54-2-7.18). 
d. ?Subdivision of land. If a site plan is proposed for land which has not been subdivided, 
the applicant shall be required to conform to the subdivision regulations, if applicable, 
prior to approval of the subject site plan. 
(2) ?Appearance of site and structures. The applicant shall submit a site plan that exhibits 
harmonious overall design characteristics in compliance with the performance standards 
stipulated in section 54-3-10.2. 
a. ?Site plan. Site plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger. The 
maximum sheet size for site plans shall be a minimum of 24 inches by 36 inches. 
Multiple sheets may be used provided each sheet is numbered and the total number 
of sheets is indicated on each sheet. Cross referencing between sheets shall be 
required. Necessary notes and symbol legends shall be included. Abbreviations 
should be avoided but if used they shall be defined in the notes. The site plan shall 
address the following issues: 
1. ?Existing (where appropriate) and proposed lot configuration. 
2. ?Existing (where appropriate) and proposed building layout, including building 
footprints. 
3. ?Finished floor elevations. 
4. ?Proposed topographic contours showing proposed drainage patterns and 
stormwater retention measures. 
5. ?Indicate dimensions on site plan to demonstrate compliance with setbacks and 
other size and dimension regulations. 
6. ?Label the proposed structures by use and/or residential structure type and 
number the parcels, lots and number of dwelling units as appropriate directly on 
the drawings. 
b. ?Architectural drawings. All architecture or engineering designs must be prepared and 
sealed by a professional architect or engineer registered in the State of Florida 
pursuant to chapters 471 and 481 respectively, Florida Statutes. Drawings submitted 
for site plan approval shall include the following minimum information: 
1. ?A scaled drawing of the side, front and rear facades of the building or structure, 
including roof pitch, fenestration including treatment of roof line. 
2. ?Description of materials to be used. 
3. ?Generalized floor plan indicating uses and square footage of each proposed use 
within each building or structure, building exterior construction material, and 
building height. 
4. ?Location, height and general character of perimeter or ornamental walls, fences, 
landscaping, including berms and other required screening devices and other 
plans for protecting adjacent property owners. 
c. ?Site amenities. The site plan shall include amenities required to comply with 
appearance, design and compatibility regulations outlined in article X. 
1. ?Existing. All existing site amenities (i.e., signs, lighting fixtures, water features, 
etc.) shall be indicated as to location, character, color, and dimension. 
2. ?Proposed. State the location, size, character, color, height and design of all newly 
proposed site amenities in the form of working drawings and/or photographs. 
d. ?Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study shall be submitted in accordance with 
Indian River County Code section 952.07. 
(3) ?Site survey. A topographic and boundary survey prepared by a certified land surveyor, in 
accordance with chapter 61G17-6 F.A.C., illustrating the following: 
a. ?Proposed development. The city shall require plans prepared by a Florida registered 
engineer and other competent professionals as may be required which shall 
demonstrate compliance with the city's surface water management performance 
criteria in article XII. In addition, the plans for land excavation or fill shall demonstrate 
that the proposed site alterations shall include mitigation techniques designed to 
comply with performance criteria addressed in article XII. 
b. ?Existing conditions. 
1. ?Topographic site survey. A topographic survey at a scale of one inch to 100 feet 
or larger showing topographic contours at five-foot intervals and extending 50 
feet beyond the property boundaries. Survey shall include NGVD benchmark 
information. 
2. ?Water bodies. High water elevation or boundaries of coastal shoreline and/or 
other water bodies and canals, both on site and within 50 feet of site. Survey 
shall include coastal construction control line, location of mean high water and 
submerged lands. 
3. ?Drainage features and key elevations. Existing surface drainage characteristics 
of site including relationship to adjacent land areas. The site survey shall include 
all existing structures. Any existing structures on-site which do not comply with 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood hazard regulations shall 
be identified on the survey. 
4. ?Flood hazard areas. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood 
hazard zone or limits of 100-year flood. 
5. ?Boundary survey. The boundary survey shall have been prepared within 12 
months of application and be prepared in accordance with chapter 61G17-6 
F.A.C. 
6. ?Environmentally sensitive areas. Boundaries of environmentally sensitive areas, 
including an environmental survey and audit as needed. Management plans must 
be submitted and approved by state and/or federal regulatory agencies for areas 
recognized as a habitat for species listed by the Florida Game and Freshwater 
Fish Commission as endangered, threatened, or species of special concern. 
(4) ?Soil survey. As identified in the Soil Survey, Indian River County, Florida, U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service or other competent expert evaluation. When soil 
suitability limitations are indicated for the proposed development, the city engineer may 
require, at the expense of the applicant, a preliminary soil analysis by a qualified soils 
engineer. The site plan shall comply with environmental protection criteria in article XI. 
(e) ?Environmentally sensitive areas. Using maps from the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA) and U.S.G.S., indicate whether or not the parcel is located within a floodplain, 
floodway or drainageway, wetland, open water, or upland wildlife habitat. Site specific surveys 
may be required. 
(1) ?Proposed impact. Illustrate how any activity or structure that will impact environmentally 
sensitive areas will be performed, located, constructed and/or maintained to prevent or 
mitigate any adverse impacts to wetland and endangered upland vegetative communities, 
wildlife habitats, floodplain, and other environmentally sensitive areas. 
(2) ?Shoreline protection. If the project fronts a shoreline, illustrate any structure that may 
impede movement along the shoreline below the mean high water line, and demonstrate 
measures being taken to mitigate any such impediment. The site plans shall comply with 
section 54-2-7.8, Regulation of watercraft, and applicable provisions of section 54-3-11.4, 
Coastal resource impact analysis. 
(3) ?General requirement. If environmentally sensitive areas are found in or adjacent to the site 
the following information is necessary: 
a. ?Existing conditions. Developers shall provide an existing vegetation map identifying 
boundaries of environmentally sensitive areas and indicating alterations in these 
areas including dredging, filling, spoil sites, canals and channels. 
b. ?Preservation. Developers shall preserve the functions of these environmentally 
sensitive areas and shall comply with restrictions and interpretations for development 
in wetlands found in article XI. Management plans must be submitted and approved 
by state and/or federal regulatory agencies for areas recognized as a habitat for 
species listed by the Florida Game and Freshwater Fish Commission as endangered, 
threatened, or species of special concern. 
(f) ?Land clearing, excavation and fill, tree protection, landscaping, and irrigation plan. 
(1) ?Land clearing, excavation and fill. The site plan and all development activity shall comply 
with section 54-2-7.15. The site plan shall include a statement of procedures which the 
developer shall carry out in order to ensure compliance with all applicable performance 
criteria in article XI governing: 1) native habitat preservation (cross reference sections 54-
3-11.1, 54-3-11.4, and 54-3-11.5); 2) soil erosion control and sedimentation (cross 
reference section 54-3-11.2); 3) aquifer recharge protection (cross reference section 54-3-
11.3); flood prevention (cross reference section 54-3-11.6); and 4) protection of native 
vegetation (cross reference section 54-3-11.5). 
(2) ?Tree protection. The site plan shall satisfy performance criteria of article XIV. The plan 
shall indicate location, size and type of existing trees as required, including all proposed 
tree removals requiring a tree removal permit. The relocation of trees shall be considered. 
The plan shall also identify existing trees to be protected and explain or illustrate method to 
preserve such trees during and after construction. 
(3) ?Landscaping plan. The site plan shall satisfy the performance criteria of article XIV as well 
as the open space (section 54-2-5.10(c)) and land use screening requirements of article 
XIV. The landscaping plan shall include a scaled working drawing indicating planting 
specifications for landscaping, buffers, open spaces, recreation areas and other required 
landscaped areas which shall comply with those performance criteria included in article 
XIV. The plan shall also show any environmentally sensitive areas and preservation areas, 
as well as those areas involving aquatic plantings. The planning and zoning commission 
shall give conceptual approval of the landscape plan and the planning and growth 
management director shall give final approval of the plan. 
(4) ?Irrigation plan. The site plan shall satisfy the performance criteria of section 54-3-11.8 and 
article XIV. The irrigation plan shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect, 
engineer or an irrigation contractor and shall utilize the current techniques emphasizing 
design efficiency and water conservation, as well as public health, safety, and welfare. The 
minimum requirements for plan approval shall include: 
a. ?Location and specifications for irrigation equipment; 
b. ?Design which promotes water conservation and efficient relationship of plant types to 
water demand; and 
c. ?Source of water for irrigation system. 
The planning and zoning commission shall give conceptual approval of the irrigation plan. 
The planning and growth management director, or his designee, shall perform an onsite 
inspection to insure the system has been installed to provide adequate coverage to all 
landscaped areas. 
(g) ?On- and off-site parking and vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation. Site plans shall 
satisfy on- and off-site vehicular and bicycle circulation, and parking requirements of section 54-
3-10.3 and article XV. Site plans shall include location, dimensions and typical construction 
specifications for: 
(1) ?Existing and proposed driveways, approaches and curb cuts; 
(2) ?Vehicular access points, accessways and common multi-modal access points with 
pavement markings or other improvements to achieve safe internal circulation without 
conflict among modes of travel; 
(3) ?Existing and proposed vehicle and bicycle off-street parking spaces, loading, unloading 
and service area space requirements; 
a. ?Number of employees and number and type of vehicles owned by the establishment; 
and 
b. ?Any combined off-street parking facilities shall be submitted with an agreement 
specifying the nature of the arrangement, its anticipated duration, and signatures of all 
concerned property owners. 
(4) ?Other vehicular use areas; 
(5) ?Any bicycle ways as well as pedestrian ways and other pedestrian use areas; 
(6) ?Typical cross-sections, by type of improvement; 
(7) ?Traffic control devices; 
(8) ?Proposed parking surface material, pavement markings, and other related improvements; 
and 
(9) ?Dedicated easements including cross easements, indicating their purpose, design, 
location, alignment, dimensions, and maintenance responsibilities. 
(h) ?Housing. Site plans shall include the following information: 
(1) ?If the project includes residential development, provide a breakdown of the proposed 
residential units by type of unit (such as single-family, duplex, townhouse, mobile home). 
(2) ?Assess the potential of the proposed development to meet local or regional housing 
needs. In particular, indicate any measures taken to provide low and moderate income 
housing. Where affordable housing is proposed include price or rental range by structure 
type. 
(3) ?Describe hurricane evacuation considerations that acknowledge the current evacuation 
and emergency operations plans, how project residents will be informed about these plans, 
and any developer responsibilities identified in such plans. 
(i) ?Special considerations. 
(1) ?Describe the relationship of the proposed development to city land use plans, objectives 
and policies. Also, indicate relationship to existing or proposed public facilities plans (such 
as wastewater treatment, transportation). Identify any conflicts. 
(2) ?Indicate any relationship of the project to special zoning districts (such as airport noise 
and hazard zones, solid or liquid waste treatment or disposal areas). 
(3) ?If the project fronts a shoreline, indicate measures to dedicate, voluntarily public access to 
the shoreline, such as easements or rights-of-way; and illustrate any structure that may 
impede movement along the shoreline below the mean high water line, and demonstrate 
measures being taken to mitigate any such impediment. 
(4) ?Indicate any special facilities that will be provided to accommodate bus ridership, i.e., bus 
stop, bus access lane, or other similar facilities. 
(5) ?Describe any special design features that will be utilized to reduce energy consumption. 
Further, describe any measures that will be taken to utilize solar energy or other alternative 
energy sources. 
(6) ?If the building is to be elevated, indicate by square footage the uses for the area between 
the bottom floor and the grade. 
(7) ?Indicate the size and nature of private and public recreation facilities provided on the site. 
(8) ?Provide proof of coordination with applicable local, regional, state and federal agencies 
(including Florida Department of Environmental Resources and Army Corps of Engineers) 
that will be involved in the project. 
(9) ?Provide evidence that any necessary permit, lease or other permission from the Florida 
Department of Environmental Protection has been obtained for any activity that will impact 
submerged land. 
(10) ?Provide evidence that any necessary permit or waiver from the St. Johns River Water 
Management District or the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, as 
appropriate, has been obtained for any activity that will impact wetlands. 
(j) ?Construction management plan and inspection schedule. In cases where the proposed 
development contains two or more phases and/or the project's proposed construction schedule 
is anticipated to exceed a period of one year, the applicant shall be required to submit a 
construction management plan and inspection schedule as part of the site plan. 
(1) ?Content of construction management plan and inspection schedule. The construction 
management plan shall specify the following: 
a. ?The timing and phasing of construction activities, including specific benchmarks for 
the completion of structures accommodating the principal use(s); 
b. ?A schedule of inspections which complies with the city's adopted building codes, 
including a program of improvements anticipated to be completed prior to each 
scheduled inspection; 
c. ?The building permit shall not be valid for a period exceeding two years and no single 
phase of development shall extend for a period longer than two years; 
d. ?The schedule shall acknowledge in writing that a new building permit must be 
obtained whenever: 
1. ?Construction is not commenced within six months (180 days) from the time the 
permit was released; 
2. ?Construction activity is dormant for a period of six months or more; 
3. ?The developer fails to call for and achieve approved inspections within planned 
180-day intervals as shall be evidenced in the construction schedule; and 
4. ?A new phase of a phased development is commenced. 
e. ?The applicant shall acknowledge in writing that the applicant shall bear the burden of 
demonstrating that the construction activity is consistent with the site plan and has 
occurred in a timely manner consistent with the approved construction management 
plan and inspection schedule. The applicant shall further acknowledge that upon 
failure to meet the inspection schedule, the building permit shall expire. A new 
building permit shall be required in order to undertake construction activity on a site 
where a building permit has expired. 
(2) ?Timing of adjustments to the construction management plan and schedule. A building 
permit holder shall bear the burden of keeping a construction management plan current. 
Any event which may cause a delay in the permittee's compliance with the terms of a 
construction management plan and schedule shall brought to the attention of the planning 
and growth management director. Any change in the construction schedule shall be 
approved by the planning and zoning commission. The burden shall be on the applicant to 
successfully negotiate and effectuate an adjustment to the construction management plan 
and schedule prior to a lapse in any scheduled inspection. Such lapse shall be defined as 
a failure to complete improvements consistent with the agreed upon construction and 
inspection schedule. 


Sec. 54-4-18.5. - Staff support, records, and considerations. 
(a) ?Staff support. The site plan review process as herein established shall be conducted by 
representatives from city departments responsible for reviewing land development proposals. The 
planning and growth management director shall be responsible for managing the site plan review 
process and shall coordinate with the following staff as appropriate in review of site plans: 
• ?City engineer; 
• ?Police chief; 
• ?Building official; 
• ?Planning official; 
• ?Fire official; 
• ?Any other staff designated by the city manager. 
(b) ?Records. The planning and growth management director shall keep a record of site plan review 
findings, decisions and recommendations, which shall be a public record and shall be maintained in 
the planning and growth management department. The site plan review process for administrative 
and major site plans shall be carried out as described in sections 54-4-18.2 and 54-4-18.3. 
(c) ?Considerations in the site plan review process. In implementing site plan review procedures, the 
director of planning and growth management and city staff involved in the process shall have the 
authority to consider the following: 
(1) ?Whether an application and/or a plan is consistent with applicable goals, objectives, policies, 
standards and proposals in the comprehensive plan. 
(2) ?Whether all public facilities and services necessary to serve the proposed use shall be 
available concurrent with the actual impact of the use in question. 
(3) ?Whether the established level of service of public facilities necessary to serve the development 
or phase thereof shall be adversely impacted by the proposed use or activity. 
(4) ?Whether the proposed development satisfies the site plan review criteria as well as all other 
applicable requirements of the land development regulations, and other applicable local, state, 
and/or federal laws and administrative rules. 


Sec. 54-4-18.6. - Approval, disapproval and appeal procedure. 
(a) ?Approval procedure. Upon the approval of such site plan as herein provided, a building permit may 
be issued by the building official if construction plans have been found to meet all building code 
requirements. No building permit shall be issued until the building official has received demonstrated 
evidence that all conditions of site plan approval have been satisfied. 
(b) ?Appeals of site plan action. Any applicant for site plan approval, or any other aggrieved person 
having an interest therein, may file an appeal pursuant to section 54-1-2.2(d) and section 54-1-
2.4(g). 
(c) ?Timing of the release of building permits. An applicant for a building permit may be granted such 
permit, if the applicant signs an affidavit acknowledging that the applicant has been put on notice by 
the city, that any construction is undertaken at the applicant's risk and such applicant shall hold the 
city harmless for any damage incurred should the terms of approval be altered or nullified by the city 
council or the court. 
(d) ?Written decision required for site plan denial. If the director of planning and growth management, 
planning and zoning commission or the city council denies a site plan approval, it shall specify the 
reasons said plan was denied with specific reference to those sections of the applicable city 
ordinances on which said denial was based. No reasons other than those so stated shall be 
presented to the entity hearing and ruling on an appeal to a site plan decision of the director of 
planning and growth management, the planning and zoning commission, or the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-14-07, § 3, 12-10-2014) 


Sec. 54-4-18.7. - Expiration, transferability and extension. 
    The site plan approval shall expire 12 months after final approval, if construction has not been 
started as evidenced by steady and continuous progress, including the pouring of footings by said 
termination date. Notwithstanding, if a phased schedule for construction is approved by the city as part of 
the site plan approval process, such schedule shall become the standard for determining site plan 
expiration. Where a building permit expires the city may require revisions to the site plan to achieve 
compliance with the most current land development regulation and other applicable laws and ordinances. 
    Site plan approval shall run with the land. In the event the property receiving site plan approval shall 
be sold, transferred, leased, or the ownership thereof changes in any way whatsoever, the site plan 
approval shall be transferable; however, the site plan's expiration shall still occur 12 months from the 
original date of the site plan approval. 
    The planning and growth management director may extend site plan approval for 12 months upon 
finding that the applicant has demonstrated "reasonable cause" for the extension. The burden of proof in 
justifying "reasonable cause" shall rest with the applicant. Thirty days prior to the site plan expiration date, 
the applicant shall file an application requesting an extension with the planning and growth management 
department. Failure to file the required application for extension on a timely basis or failure to perform any 
construction on the approved site plan during the previous six months shall be considered an 
abandonment of the site plan. After an abandonment of the site plan, any application shall be treated as a 
new application. Phased site plans are subject to the same requirements for each phase. 


ARTICLE XIX. - SUBDIVISION 


Sec. 54-4-19.1. - Applicability. 
(a) ?Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to assist implementation of the City of Sebastian 
Comprehensive Plan by establishing procedures and standards for the development and subdivision 
of real estate within the City of Sebastian, in an effort to, among other things: 
(1) ?Provide proper legal description, identification, installation of monuments and recording of real 
estate boundaries; 
(2) ?Aid in the coordination of land development in the City of Sebastian in accordance with orderly 
physical patterns; 
(3) ?Discourage haphazard, premature uneconomic or scattered land development; 
(4) ?Provide safe and convenient traffic control; 
(5) ?Encourage development of an economically stable and healthful community; 
(6) ?Develop adequate utilities; 
(7) ?Prevent periodic and seasonal flooding by providing protective flood control and drainage 
facilities; 
(8) ?Protect environmentally sensitive areas. 
(9) ?Provide for management and/or protection of water resources; provide public open spaces for 
recreation; 
(10) ?Require the installation of adequate and necessary physical improvements, and provide that 
the purchaser of land in a subdivision has access to necessary improvements of lasting quality. 
(11) ?Avoid impacts and costs resulting from haphazard subdivision of land and the lack of authority 
to require installation by the applicant of adequate and necessary physical improvements; and 
(12) ?Require development equipped with lasting improvements in keeping with the topography and 
other site conditions. 
(13) ?Encourage aesthetically acceptable development. 
(14) ?Protect privacy. 
(b) ?Conformance required. No subdivision of a tract of land anywhere in the incorporated area of the 
City of Sebastian shall be created except in conformance with this ordinance. No subdivision shall be 
platted or recorded and no lot shall be sold from such plat nor shall any building permit be issued 
unless the subdivision meets all the applicable laws of the State of Florida and has been approved in 
accordance with the requirements of the City of Sebastian as herein established. 
(c) ?Lot splits and subdivisions. All future divisions of land within the corporate limits of the City of 
Sebastian shall be classified as either a "lot split" or "subdivision" as defined herein, and shall be 
subject to the regulations of this code as they apply. 
(1) ?Lot split. Any division of a lot or tract in a platted subdivision into two parcels that abut an 
accepted street right-of-way and does not require any off-site improvements to any roads, 
drainage system or utilities and conforms to the improvements, design, and construction 
standards of this article and chapter III, Performance Criteria, as may be applicable. Any tract of 
land that is divided as a lot split can only be further divided as a subdivision. 
(2) ?Major subdivision. Any subdivision not classified as a lot split. 
(d) ?Adjustments. After consideration and recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, the 
city council may authorize adjustments from this chapter when in its opinion undue hardship may 
result from strict compliance. In granting any adjustment, the city council shall prescribe only 
conditions that they deem necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, the 
council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in 
the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable 
effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic, the public health, safety and convenience conditions 
in the subdivision and in the vicinity thereof. A fee schedule may be established by resolution of the 
city council. 
(e) ?Recording of plats and lot splits. No final plat of any subdivision or lot split shall be recorded in the 
Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Indian River County until the subdivision or other subject 
change shall have been duly approved by the city in the manner prescribed herein. Any such plat or 
lot split or other record of change in land configuration must clearly display a written certification 
demonstrating city approval prior to being duly recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court 
of Indian River County. If any unapproved plat is recorded, the city council will request that it be 
stricken from the records. 
(f) ?Unlawful sale or transfer of property. It shall be unlawful for anyone who is the owner or agent of the 
owner of any land in the City of Sebastian to transfer, sell, agree to sell, convey, or negotiate to sell 
such land by reference to, exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision of such land without 
having recorded an approved subdivision plat as required herein. If such unlawful use is made of a 
plat before it is properly approved and recorded, the owner or agent of the owner of such land shall 
be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in section 775.082. 
(g) ?Building permits subject to final plat approval and recording. No building permit, except for those 
related to amenities, shall be issued nor shall any city services be rendered until a final plat for such 
impacted land has been approved and recorded pursuant to requirements herein stipulated. 
(h) ?Creation of subdivision by joint owners of land. Where it may subsequently become evident that a 
subdivision is being created by the recording of deeds by metes and bounds description of tracts of 
land, the city may, at its discretion, require all the owners involved to jointly file a plat of the 
subdivision being so created or require all owners of record to jointly conform to the applicable 
provisions of this article as are requisite for the issuance of building permits or the furnishing of any 
city service. 
(i) ?Effect on previously platted subdivisions. This article shall not apply to any land forming a part of a 
subdivision created and recorded prior to adoption of this ordinance, but it shall apply to any re-
subdividing of each prior subdivision and any new subdivision. 
(j) ?Effect on active subdivision development. Developments that have received preliminary plat 
approval prior to adoption of these regulations and are recorded within 180 days following adoption 
of this code shall be exempt from the requirements for subdivision approval as stated herein. Such 
developments not having received preliminary plat approval shall be subject to the regulations as 
stated herein. 
(k) ?Relationship of deeds, covenants, and other private restrictions to the regulations for the subdivision 
of land. It is not intended by the provisions of these regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any 
way, impair or interfere with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant, or private 
agreement, except that where this article imposes higher standards than imposed by such deeds, 
covenants, or private agreements, then the provisions of this article shall apply. The city shall not be 
responsible for enforcement of such deeds, covenants, or agreements. 
(l) ?Disapproval of plan. Upon disapproval of any plan, the city council shall indicate those sections, 
subsections, and/or paragraphs of this article with which the plan does not comply. 


Sec. 54-4-19.2. - Administration. 
(a) ?Staff administrative review responsibility. The planning and growth management department and 
other designees acting under the direction of the city manager shall administer the provisions of this 
ordinance. 
(b) ?General responsibility of planning and zoning commission and mandated compliance with 
comprehensive plan and land development code. Prior to the approval of any proposed subdivision, 
the area to be subdivided shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission to be 
consistent and in compliance with the comprehensive plan and land development code applicable to 
the land and use under consideration. 
(c) ?Burden of proof and other applicant responsibilities. The burden of proof of all applications, plans, 
plats, reports, tests, compliances, dedications, existence of agreements, liens, mortgages, surety, 
and other pertinent documents and instruments shall rest with and be the responsibility of the 
applicant or his duly authorized agent as prescribed in these regulations. 
(d) ?Hold harmless provision. The applicant shall furnish to the city a waiver, release and hold harmless 
from all liability and responsibility including provisions for indemnification for any and all damages or 
losses caused directly or indirectly by the breakdown, collapse or failure to any buildings, 
installations or structures constructed or installed in connection with the applicable development or 
project. 
(e) ?Decisions by city council and appeals to administrative decisions. The city council shall render all 
final decisions on preliminary subdivision plans and final plats after considering recommendations of 
the planning and zoning commission and the report of the planning and growth management 
director. Similarly the city council shall hear all appeals of administrative decisions regarding 
subdivision of land as well as decisions of the planning and zoning commission on subdivision of 
single lots. Land development regulations and interpretations or decisions of the city staff or the 
planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
    Administrative procedures for filing requests for adjustments shall be as established in section 54-
4.19.1(d). In rendering decisions on such requests, the city council shall base the decision on criteria 
cited herein in section 54-4.19.1(d). 
(f) ?Appeals of city council action. Any applicant, person, firm or corporation claiming to be injured or 
aggrieved by a final action of the city council may present to the Circuit Court of Indian River County 
a petition for a writ of certiorari to review such final action as provided by the Florida appellant rules. 
Such petition shall be presented to such court within 30 days after the date of such final action by the 
city council. The recommendations and decisions of staff as well as boards, commissions and 
committees shall not be deemed to be a part of this final action of the city council. 
(g) ?Enforcement. The city council or any aggrieved person may have recourse to any remedies in law 
and equity that may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including 
injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person violating the provisions of this article and any rules 
and regulations adopted herein, and the court shall upon proof of the violation of the article have the 
duty to forthwith issue those temporary and permanent injunctions that are necessary to prevent the 
violation of this article. The city council in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate 
action or proceedings to prevent a violation or attempted violation, to restrain, correct or abate such 
violation, or to prevent any act which would constitute a violation. 


Sec. 54-4-19.3. - Lot split procedures. 
(a) ?Application. Application for a lot split shall be in a form prescribed by the planning and growth 
management department. The application shall contain the following: 
(1) ?A legal description and survey of the lot to be divided; 
(2) ?A legal description of the two parcels to be created; 
(3) ?A legal description and dedication of any easements for the new parcels; 
(4) ?A unity of title, in a form approved by the city attorney, unifying adjacent parcels and lots if the 
division of the original lot results in a nonconforming parcel; 
(b) ?Review procedures. The planning and growth management director and the city engineer shall 
review all applications for a lot split to ensure conformance with this code, the comprehensive plan, 
and the City of Sebastian Code of Ordinances. The lot split may not result in the creation of a 
nonconforming lot. All lots created by a lot split shall have area, frontage, width, and depth required 
by the zoning district in which said lots are located and shall be reviewed to assure that the lots 
continue to conform to the requirements of this article XIX, Subdivision. 
(c) ?Approval. Upon determination that the request for a lot split is consistent with this code, the 
comprehensive plan, and the code of ordinances, the planning and growth management department 
shall approve the application. 
(d) ?Recording. Upon approval of the lot split, the applicant shall record the legal description of the lots 
created, any unity of title and any dedication of easement with the clerk of the circuit court. 


Sec. 54-4-19.4. - Exemptions. 
(a) ?Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(1) ?Lot creation. Creation of equal or larger building sites from lots of record. 
a. ?The combination or recombination of all or a portion of previously created parcels of record 
where the newly created or residual parcels comply with all applicable zoning district 
dimensional criteria or, where applicable, the regulations governing nonconformities. 
b. ?The combination or recombination of all or a portion of previously platted parcels of record 
are exempt where none of the newly created or residual parcels contain less area, width, 
or depth than the smallest of the original parcels of record being combined and no streets 
of any kind or public easements are created, changed or extinguished. 
(2) ?Boundary settlements. Any conveyance between adjoining landowners if: 
a. ?The purpose of the conveyance is to adjust or settle the common boundary line between 
adjoining landowners; 
b. ?The deed of conveyance or other legal instrument states such purpose and is recorded in 
the Official Records of Indian River County; and 
c. ?The resulting parcel(s) conform to the applicable zoning district dimensional criteria. 
(3) ?Conveyance to government. Any division of land for the purpose of conveying land to any 
federal, state or local government entity or agency or public utility, provided such conveyance is 
accepted by the grantee by an instrument recorded in the Public Records of Indian River 
County. 
(4) ?Division by order of court. Any division of land by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5) ?Corrective instrument. Any conveyance for the purpose of correcting an error made in the 
language used in an original conveyance. 


Sec. 54-4-19.5. - Major subdivision procedures. 
(a) ?Required pre-application procedures. Prior to making application for preliminary plat approval, the 
applicant for subdivision approval shall meet with the planning and growth management department 
and appropriate city staff to discuss, informally, preliminary concepts and sketches of the proposed 
subdivision and their relationship to these regulations. This procedure is mandatory and is intended 
to provide an opportunity for the applicant to receive staff assistance and advice prior to expending 
funds for preparing a preliminary plat. 
    Applicants for a subdivision that is part of a planned unit development (PUD) should reference 
section 54-4-20.2, Conceptual development plan, required for PUD districts. These procedures provide 
an opportunity for the applicant to become thoroughly familiar with the subdivision requirements and 
adopted comprehensive plan policies and land development regulations affecting the area in which the 
proposed subdivision lies. All applicants requiring a subdivision approval shall be subject to the following 
preliminary plat procedures: 
(b) ?Preliminary plat procedures. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to present the proposed 
subdivision in an exact and precise manner in order that it may be evaluated pursuant to this code. 
The preliminary plat shall be completed and approved prior to the application for approval of the 
design of the improvements required by this code. 
(1) ?Preparation of preliminary plat. The applicant shall retain the services of a civil engineer and/or 
land surveyor registered in Florida to prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. 
The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale no smaller than one inch 
equals 200 feet and shall include information as outlined below. Copies of all information shall 
be provided in an 8½ x 11-inch format— The precise number of copies to be determined by the 
planning and growth management department. 
a. ?Name of subdivision or identifying title which shall not duplicate or closely approximate the 
name of any other subdivision in the incorporated area of the city. 
b. ?North arrow graphic scale and date of preparation. The city engineer shall approve the 
scale, but in no case shall such scale be smaller than one inch equals 200 feet. 
c. ?Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner of record, mortgage holder 
or any other person having a legal equitable or beneficial interest in the land together with 
a statement from such owners or others having an interest in the land that they will join in 
the dedication of the proposed subdivision. 
d. ?The name, business address and registration number of the engineer and/or surveyor 
responsible for the plan, plat and supporting data. 
e. ?The names of adjacent subdivisions, if any, and plat book and page reference, together 
with the names of owners of record having an interest in such adjacent acreage. 
f. ?A contour map showing ground elevations at intervals of not more than one foot, based on 
the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey datum, of the area to be subdivided and of 
a perimeter strip at least 50 feet and up to 150 feet in width around the area as required by 
the city engineer. Topographical conditions on the subject subdivision including all the 
existing watercourses, drainage ditches and bodies of water, marshes and other 
significant, natural or manmade features. 
g. ?The name, alignment, and width of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way 
or easements, adjacent to or within 300 feet of the tract including name, right-of-way width, 
street or pavement width and established center line elevation. Existing streets shall be 
dimensioned to the tract boundary. 
h. ?All existing and proposed property lines, easements and rights-of-way, their purpose, their 
effect on the property to be subdivided, and the proposed layout of lots and blocks. 
i. ?Access points to collector and arterial streets showing their compliance to the access 
requirements established by this ordinance. 
j. ?All existing drainage district facilities and their ultimate right-of-way requirements as they 
affect the property to be subdivided. 
k. ?Utilities such as telephone, power, water, sewer, gas, etc., on or adjacent to the tract 
including existing or proposed water treatment plants and sewerage treatment plants. The 
preliminary plat shall contain a statement that all utilities are available and have been 
coordinated with all required utilities. 
l. ?Sites proposed for parks, recreational areas and schools. 
m. ?The locations of all temporary structures or permanent structures having a temporary use. 
Permanent structures having a temporary use shall contain a statement outlining the 
temporary use. 
n. ?If the property to be subdivided borders upon any public waters, then the applicant shall 
establish the mean high water line and so delineate it on the plat. The applicant shall 
provide a plan for stabilizing the shoreline with natural vegetative cover or other 
environmentally sensitive manner acceptable to the Department of Environmental 
Regulation (DER) and the city. The zone of transition along the shoreline shall also be 
designated together with plans for preserving native indigenous plant communities within 
the zone of transition. 
o. ?Permanent reference monuments shall be shown and subsequently installed at all block 
corners, and at all points of reverse or compound curvature, and at all points of tangency 
occurring with block limiting lines. 
p. ?Block perimeter returns at block corners or other block line intersections shall be stated in 
terms of tangent distances of five-foot intervals, with a minimum tangent distance of 20 
feet. 
q. ?A vicinity sketch at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet, showing the 
location of the boundary lines and distance of the land proposed for subdivision in 
reference to other areas of the city. The section, township, and range of the site and the 
legal description of the site shall also be included. 
(2) ?Required supplemental information. The following information shall be submitted with the 
preliminary plat: 
a. ?Existing land use policy and proposed policy changes. Submit existing comprehensive plan 
designation and zoning classification of the property in question. Any proposed change in 
such classifications shall be made known to reviewing bodies by presenting proof 
indicating that of any required applications for attaining such policy changes have been 
submitted. 
b. ?On-site wastewater disposal data. When a public sewage disposal system is not available, 
the suitability of the soil to support on-site disposal shall be determined by the Florida State 
Board of Health and a report of its findings shall be submitted to all reviewing bodies. An 
adverse report by the Florida State Board of Health shall be deemed as sufficient grounds 
for disapproval of the proposed subdivision or portion thereof. Any subdivision being 
denied on such grounds shall not be reconsidered until the requirements of the Florida 
State Board of Health are met. 
c. ?Surface water management plan. A master stormwater management plan outlining the 
primary and secondary drainage facilities needed for the proper development of the 
subdivision shall be submitted as part of the subdivision application. The master surface 
water management plan for the subdivision shall comply with all applicable requirements of 
the surface water management performance criteria set forth in article XII. 
d. ?Traffic impact analysis. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional 
engineer and shall be used to determine the number of lanes and capacity of the street 
system proposed or affected by the development and the phasing of improvements. 
e. ?Required park land and/or facility improvements. 
f. ?Required potable water improvements. 
g. ?Required wastewater improvements. 
h. ?Erosion and sedimentation control improvements. 
i. ?Reference to required specifications. 
j. ?Schedule of multiple phases if appropriate. If the proposed subdivision is of such size that 
its development will be undertaken in increments, those increments and their order shall be 
indicated. Where increments of high elevations are undertaken before those of lower 
elevation, ultimate stormwater disposal courses in the lower increments must be 
concurrently developed. 
k. ?Amenities development plan. All amenities shall be depicted on the preliminary 
plat/preliminary development plan identifying the phases, if any, in which the amenities will 
be constructed. No building permits for lot development will be issued until the amenities 
are constructed in accordance with the amenities development plan. In lieu of the above, 
the city will issue building permits if the developer submits to the city a guarantee, as 
outlined below, to insure all amenities will be constructed. 
Additional guarantees. Guarantees in the amount equal to 110% of the sum of engineering 
and construction costs based on the applicant's engineer's estimate or contract bid prices. 
The guarantee shall be in one of the following forms: 
i. ?Cash deposit. 
ii. ?Personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit. 
iii. ?Surety bond (having a Best's rating of AAA). 
(3) ?Filing fee. Upon filing the preliminary plat with the planning and growth management 
department, the applicant shall submit a fee that shall be determined by the resolution of the city 
council, payable to the City of Sebastian. The fee is not reimbursable but is to help defray the 
cost of administering and processing the preliminary plat. 
(4) ?Review procedures. The planning and growth management department shall coordinate the 
review of the preliminary plat and supplemental information as to their completeness and 
specific conformance with this ordinance. The planning and growth management department 
shall inform the applicant's engineer or agent whether the plans and/or plat as submitted meet 
the general provisions of this ordinance. The timing of review procedures and requirements 
governing the number of documents to be submitted and related fees, shall be determined by 
resolution of the city council. 
a. ?When the staff finds that the preliminary plat and required data do not meet provisions of 
this ordinance, the applicant shall be so advised in writing as soon as practicable 
concerning what corrections or revisions are necessary to meet the provisions of this 
ordinance. Upon receipt of such findings, the applicant shall make the corrections or 
revisions and resubmit the preliminary plat and required data to the planning and growth 
management director for review of the amended plan. If the applicant chooses not to 
provide the corrections, revisions, or other information requested by staff, the department 
shall at the request of the applicant forward the application to the planning and zoning 
commission accompanied by the staff's comments, including documentation of unresolved 
issues. 
b. ?When the planning and growth management director and city engineer have completed 
staff review, written recommendations shall be submitted to the applicant and the 
subdivision application will be scheduled for the next step or steps in the review process. 
c. ?Subsequent to receiving a staff recommendation, the application shall be scheduled for the 
next available regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission. Prior to the 
planning and zoning commission's review, the applicant shall submit copies of the 
preliminary plat and required data to the planning and growth management department. 
The planning and zoning commission may consider the physical characteristics of the 
property, the availability of community services, traffic impact, economic impacts, 
appropriateness of the type and intensity of the proposed development, existing and future 
development, existing and future development patterns, land development code, 
relationship of the project to the city's capital improvements program, or other such factors 
as may relate to the comprehensive plan or elements thereof. The planning and zoning 
commission shall make a written recommendation to the city council on the development. 
d. ?Subsequent to receiving recommendation(s) from the staff, the planning and zoning 
commission and other reviewing entities, the application shall be scheduled for city council 
review. Prior to the city council's review the applicant shall submit the appropriate number 
of copies of the subdivision preliminary plat and required data. The applicant may tender 
changes to the application to correct deficiencies identified by the planning and zoning 
commission prior to forwarding the application to the city council. During its review, the city 
council shall consider the written recommendations of the city staff, the planning and 
zoning commission, any other reviewing agencies, and presentations from the public. The 
city council may approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and required data. When an 
application is disapproved, the city council shall state the reasons for disapproval and 
indicate what further actions, if any, by the applicant may be undertaken to secure the city 
council's approval. 
e. ?When a proposed development is a development of regional impact (DRI) as defined by 
section 380.06, F.S., the public hearing requirements for a DRI shall be determined by 
Florida Statutes. Copies of all plans, reports, maps and other documents required by the 
regional reviewing agency shall be submitted to the planning and growth management 
director if the proposed development is a DRI. 
f. ?Following city council's approval of the preliminary plat and required data, the applicant 
shall be authorized to proceed with the application for construction approval required by 
this ordinance. 
(c) ?Construction approval procedures. After the city council's approval of the preliminary plat, the 
applicant may apply to the city engineer for construction design approval. The city engineer shall 
review and approve the design of the required improvements. No construction shall be initiated until 
the required design improvements have been approved pursuant to this section. 
(1) ?Fee for construction approval. Upon filing application for construction approval, the applicant 
shall pay to the City of Sebastian a processing fee, the amount of which shall be determined by 
resolution of the city council in order to help defray the cost of processing. 
(2) ?Timing of required improvements design approval submission. Application for required 
improvements design approval shall occur within 12 months of the approval of the preliminary 
plat by the city council. Application for approval of subsequent phases, if any, shall occur within 
12 months of the issuance of a certification of completion of the previous phase. Failure to 
submit for construction approval within the specified amount of time shall require reapplication 
under the preliminary plat section of this article. The applicant may not apply for construction 
approval for any portion of the preliminary plat that is not to be constructed within the following 
18 months. 
Failure to make application for construction approval within the required time periods may result 
in the revocation of a preliminary plat unless the applicant has applied for an extension from the 
city council prior to the lapse. The request for the extension must be made in writing and filed 
with the planning and growth management department a minimum of 90 days prior to the 
expiration date. The applicant shall demonstrate good cause for the extension. The city council 
shall consider the request at a meeting and may extend the prescribed time period up to 12 
months if the city council finds that the applicant has progressed in good faith toward the 
implementation of the preliminary plat. 
(3) ?Contents of the application. Specification for all required improvements shall be submitted and 
subject to the standards set forth in section 54-4-19.10. 
(4) ?Review by staff. The planning and growth management department shall distribute copies of 
the application and supporting data to the city engineer and appropriate staff for review. 
(5) ?Approval. The city engineer must find that the proposed construction is in compliance with the 
approved preliminary plat and the requirements of section 54-4-19.10. The city engineer may 
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application for construction approval. Upon 
approval, the applicant may proceed with construction of the required improvements. 
Appeal of the city engineer's action shall be made to the planning and zoning commission. Such 
appeal shall be filed with the planning and growth management department within ten working 
days and the appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next planning and zoning commission 
meeting. 
(6) ?Unconstructed previously approved plats. The approval of the construction for plats approved 
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, which have not been constructed, shall follow the 
procedures in this section. 
(d) ?Subdivision final plat approval procedures. The following regulations apply to final plat approval 
procedures. Application for approval of a final plat shall be filed with the planning and growth 
management department. All required supplementary materials shall accompany the final plat, 
including certified as-built construction drawings, or the legal instruments demonstrating specific 
performance guarantees. No final plat shall be approved by the city council and no plat shall be 
recorded until the required improvements have been installed or performance guarantee posted 
pursuant to the requirements of this article. No such required improvements including streets, 
drainage and other required facilities shall be accepted and maintained by the city, unless and until 
the same, including the final plat, have been duly inspected and recommended for approval by the 
planning and growth management director and the city engineer. In addition, the city attorney shall 
review all performance guarantees and the legal content of all final plats. 
(1) ?Applicant's responsibilities. The applicant shall comply with the following procedures. 
a. ?Fee for final plat. Upon filing application for final plat approval, the applicant shall pay to the 
City of Sebastian a processing fee, the amount of which shall be determined by resolution 
of the city council. In addition, the applicant shall pay all fees associated with the city's 
surveyor review in accordance with the requirements of chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
b. ?Timing of final plat submission. Failure to submit the final plat within 18 months following 
approval of the preliminary plat shall require reapplication under the preliminary plat 
section of this article unless the city council grants specific extension of time. In phased 
subdivisions, time restriction shall be established at time of preliminary plat approval. The 
timing of planned unit development final plat submittal requirements shall control in case of 
conflict with provisions herein set forth. 
c. ?Required compliance. The final plat shall conform to the approved subdivision preliminary 
plat and approved construction permit, and shall meet the legal requirements of platting as 
defined by chapter 177, Florida Statutes, as amended, and shall consist of a fully executed 
correct plat map, meeting all state and city standards, final engineering drawings and 
auxiliary submittals, and all required legal instruments. Notwithstanding, the final plat shall 
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat that the applicant proposes to 
record. When an application is disapproved, the city council shall state the reasons for 
disapproval and indicate what further actions, if any, by the applicant may be undertaken to 
secure the city council's approval. 
d. ?Content of final plat. The final plat shall include one original to be drawn or printed on 24 x 
36-inch mylar or other approved material and two copies of the final plat and of all other 
required data. Copies of the final plat shall also be provided in an 8½ x 11-inch format. The 
final plat shall be prepared by a professional surveyor mapper (PSM) and is to be clearly 
and legibly drawn with black permanent drawing ink. The final plat shall be prepared in 
accordance with the provisions of chapter 177, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
1. ?Name of subdivision. The plat shall have a title or name acceptable to the city printed 
in bold lettering across the top of the sheet. When the plat is a new subdivision, the 
name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to the name of an 
existing subdivision. When the plan is an addition to a recorded subdivision, it shall 
carry the same name as the existing subdivision. 
2. ?Title block. The plat shall have a title block printed in bold legible letters containing the 
name of the subdivision; the name of the city, county and state; the section, township 
and range as applicable or if in a land grant, so stated; and if the plat is a replat, 
amendment or addition to an existing subdivision, it shall include the words "section," 
"unit," "replat," "amendment," or similar designation reflecting the same. 
3. ?Legal description. A full and legal description of the land within the plat shall be 
lettered or printed upon the plat. The description shall show the section, township and 
range in which the lands are situated or if a land grant, so stated, and must be so 
completed that from it, without reference to the map, the starting point can be 
determined and the boundaries run. 
4. ?Index sheet. If more than one sheet is required for the map, the plat shall contain an 
index sheet on page l, showing the entire subdivision on the sheet indexing the area 
shown on each succeeding sheet and each sheet shall contain an index delineating 
that portion of the subdivision shown on that sheet in relation to the entire subdivision. 
When more than one sheet must be used to accurately portray the land subdivided, 
each sheet shall show the particular number of that sheet and the total number of 
sheets included, as well as clearly labeled match lines to each sheet. 
5. ?Required survey data. The final plat shall fully comply with chapter 177, Florida 
Statutes, and shall show the length of all arcs together with central angles, radii, and 
points of curvature. Sufficient survey data shall be shown to positively describe the 
boundary of each lot, block, right-of-way, easement, building line and all other areas 
shown on the plat and all areas shall be within the boundary of the plat as shown in 
the description. The survey data contained on the plat shall also include: 
i. ?The scale, both stated and graphically illustrated, on each sheet. 
ii. ?A north arrow shall be drawn on every sheet, including showing any portion of the 
lands subdivided. The bearing or azimuth reference shall be clearly stated on the 
face or first page of the plat in the notes or legend. 
iii. ?The point of beginning shall be boldly shown together with the letters "P.O.B." in 
bold letters. 
iv. ?All intersecting street right-of-way lines shall be joined by the long chord of 
minimum radius of 25 feet and all dimensions shall be shown. 
v. ?All adjoining property shall be identified by a subdivision title, plat book and page 
or if unplatted, the land shall be so designated. 
vi. ?Permanent reference monuments (P.R.M.) shall be shown in the manner 
prescribed by chapter 177, Florida Statutes, as amended, and shall be installed 
prior to submission of the final plat. 
vii. ?There shall be reserved on each sheet of the plat a three-inch by five-inch space 
in the upper right-hand corner to be used by the clerk of the circuit court for 
recording information and each sheet shall reserve three inches on the left 
margin and a one-half-inch margin on all remaining sides. 
viii. ?The map shall mathematically close within 0.01 foot and shall be accurately tied 
to all township, range and section lines occurring within the subdivision by 
distance and bearing. In addition, the initial point in the description shall be 
accurately tied to the nearest quarter-section corner of section corner or 
government corner. 
ix. ?The cover sheet or first page of the plan shall show a vicinity sketch, showing the 
subdivision's location in reference to other areas of the city or abutting 
unincorporated areas. 
6. ?Lot and block identification. Each lot and block shall be numbered or lettered. All lots 
shall be numbered in each block by progressive numbers individually throughout the 
subdivision in a clockwise direction starting at the northwest corner of each block of 
the subdivision. Blocks in each incremental plat shall be lettered consecutively 
throughout a subdivision in a clockwise direction starting at the northwestern-most 
corner of the subdivision. 
7. ?Street names. The plat shall contain the name of each street shown on the plat. 
Proposed streets which are in alignment with other existing and named streets shall 
bear the same name of the existing street. In no case, except as indicated in the 
preceding sentence, shall the name of the proposed street, excluding a numerical 
system, duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, regardless of the 
use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court or similar suffix. 
8. ?Not-included parcels. "Not-included or "excepted" parcels must be marked "not part of 
this plat." Where a not-included parcel is completely surrounded by areas included 
within the plat, sufficient easements or rights-of-way shall be provided for access, 
utilities and drainage for the not-included parcel. No strip or parcel of land shall be 
reserved by the owner unless the same is sufficient in size and area to be of some 
particular use or service. The intended use for all reserved areas shall be shown on 
the plat in note form on the cover sheet. 
9. ?Rights-of-way and easements. All right-of-way and easement widths and dimensions 
shall be shown on a plat. The plat shall contain a statement that no buildings or any 
kind of construction or trees or shrubs shall be placed on easements. 
10. ?Restrictions, reservations and restrictive covenants. Restrictions pertaining to the 
type and use of water supply; type and use of sanitary facilities; use and benefits of 
water areas, canals and other open spaces, odd-shaped and substandard parcels; 
restrictions controlling building lines; establishment and maintenance of buffer strips 
and walls; and restrictions of similar nature shall require the establishment of 
restrictive covenants and such covenant shall be noted on the plat. Documents 
pertaining to restrictive covenants shall be submitted with the final plat. 
11. ?Private streets and related facilities. All streets and their related facilities designed to 
serve more than one property owner shall be dedicated to the public use. 
Notwithstanding, private streets shall be permitted within property under single 
ownership, a property owners' association or a condominium or cooperative 
association as defined by Florida law. Where private streets are permitted, ownership 
and maintenance association documents shall be submitted with the final plat and the 
dedication contained on the plat shall clearly dedicate the roads and maintenance 
responsibility to the association without recourse to the city or any other public 
agency. The rights-of-way and related facilities shall be identified as tracts for road 
purposes under specific ownership. 
12. ?Certification and approvals. The plat shall contain on the face or first page the 
following certifications and approvals, acknowledged as required by state law, all 
being in the form set forth by the city attorney. 
i. ?Dedications. The purpose of all reserved areas shown on the plat shall be defined 
in the dedication on the plat. All areas reserved for use by the residents of the 
subdivision as well as all areas reserved for public use, including but not limited 
to parks, rights-of-way for roads, streets or alleys, utility or drainage easements 
or right-of-way, together with all other area lands to be used by the public or 
subdivision residents shall be dedicated by the owner of the land at the time the 
plat is recorded. 
ii. ?Mortgagee's consent and approval. All mortgages, along with the mortgagee's 
consent and approval of the dedication, shall be required on all plats where 
mortgages encumber the land to be platted. The signature(s) of the mortgagee or 
mortgagees as the case may be, must be witnessed and the execution must be 
acknowledged in the same manner as mortgages are required to be witnessed 
and acknowledged. In case the mortgagee is a corporation, the consent and 
approval shall be signed in behalf of the corporation by the president or a vice-
president and the secretary or an assistant secretary, respectively, by and with 
the authority of the board of directors. 
iii. ?Certification of surveyor. The plat shall contain the signature, registration number 
and official seal of the land surveyor, certifying that the plat is a true and correct 
representation of the land surveyed under his responsible direction and 
supervision and that the survey data compiled and shown on the plat complies 
with all of the requirements of this ordinance and chapter 177, Florida Statutes, 
as amended. The certification shall also state that permanent reference 
monuments, "P.R.M.," have been set in compliance with this ordinance and 
chapter 177, Florida Statutes, as amended, and the permanent control points, 
"P.C.P.," will be set under the direction and supervision of the surveyor within 
one year from the date the plat was recorded. 
When required improvements have been completed prior to the recording of a 
plat, the certification shall state the PCPs have been set in compliance with the 
laws of the State of Florida and ordinances of the City of Sebastian. When plats 
are recorded and improvements are to be accomplished under security posted as 
provided for by this ordinance, the required improvements and surety shall 
include installation of PCPs. 
iv. ?City engineer. The plat shall contain an approval and signature block for the city 
engineer. 
v. ?City's surveyor. The plat shall contain an approval and signature block for the city 
surveyor. 
vi. ?City attorney. The plat shall contain a signature block for the city attorney 
indicating that the plat and all documents and sureties relating thereto have been 
reviewed and approved as to legal form and content. 
vii. ?Mayor and city clerk. Prior to filing by the clerk of circuit court, the plat shall 
contain an approval and signature block for the mayor and the acknowledgment 
and signature block of the city clerk. Upon adoption of a resolution approving the 
plat, the mayor shall execute the plat and the plat shall be presented to the clerk 
of the circuit court by the city clerk for recording. 
viii. ?Certification of title. A title certificate shall be contained on the face or first page 
of the plat. The title certification shall state: 
(a) ?That the lands as described and shown on the plat are in the name, and 
apparent record title is held by, the person, persons or organization 
executing the dedication; 
(b) ?That all taxes have been paid on said lands as required by section 197.192, 
Florida Statutes, as amended; 
(c) ?All mortgages on the land and indicate their official record book and page 
number. The title certification must be an opinion of an attorney at law 
licensed in Florida, or the certification of an abstractor or a title insurance 
company licensed in Florida. 
ix. ?Instrument prepared by. The name and address of the natural person who 
prepared the plat shall be contained on the plat as required by Florida Statutes, 
as amended. The name and address shall be in statement form consisting of the 
words, "this instrument was prepared by (name) (address) ." 
13. ?Existing or recorded streets. The plat shall show the name, location and width of all 
existing or recorded streets intersecting or contiguous to the boundary of the plat, 
accurately tied to the boundary of the plat by bearings and distances. 
e. ?Timing of improvements and/or posting of surety. In addition to the foregoing requirements 
and items to be shown on the face of the plat, the final plat, when submitted, shall be 
accompanied by a statement of the developer indicating whether the required 
improvements are to be constructed prior to the recording of the plat or after recording 
under guarantees posted with the city as provided for in this ordinance: 
1. ?Completion of improvements prior to issuance of building permit. When the 
improvements are to be completed prior to the recording of the plat, it shall be 
expressly understood that no building permits shall be issued for any structure on a lot 
wherein the final plat has not been approved and recorded in a manner prescribed in 
this ordinance. The approval to construct required improvements shall not be 
construed as authority for the sale of lots in reference thereto. 
2. ?Surety. When the required improvements are to be completed after recording under 
guarantees, as provided in this ordinance, the final plat upon submittal shall be 
accompanied by the following: 
A certified cost estimate shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer and shall 
include the cost of all required improvements and/or shall include contract bid for all 
work required to complete the required improvements. Such certified costs shall be 
subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
3. ?Additional guarantees. Guarantees in the amount equal to 110% of the sum of 
engineering and construction costs based on the applicant's engineer's estimate or 
contract bid prices. The guarantee shall be in one of the following forms: 
i. ?Cash deposit. 
ii. ?Personal bond with irrevocable letter of credit. 
iii. ?Surety bond (having a Best's rating of AAA). 
f. ?Time restriction on development. The applicant may not apply for final plat approval on any 
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he does not propose to record and develop 
within the following 12 months. Failure to make application for final plat approval of a 
development phase or for the issuance of a certificate of completion for a development 
phase on an approved preliminary plat within a period of 18 months from the date of 
approval of the preliminary plat may result in revocation of said preliminary plat unless the 
applicant applies for an extension from the city council prior to the lapse. The request for 
extension must be made in writing to the city council a minimum of 90 days prior the 
scheduled expiration of the preliminary plat. The applicant must demonstrate good cause 
for the extension. The city council shall consider the request at a meeting and may extend 
the prescribed time period up to 18 months if the applicant presents evidence which 
demonstrates that the applicant has progressed in good faith toward implementing the 
preliminary plat. 
g. ?Submission of final plat. Upon completion of the foregoing requirements, ten prints of the 
final plat and two reproducible mylars of the final plat shall be submitted to the city clerk 
and be accompanied by the following: 
1. ?A statement indicating whether the required improvements are to be constructed prior 
to recording of the plat or after recording of the plat. 
2. ?A check payable to the City of Sebastian for the city's surveyor review in accordance 
with requirements as established in chapter 177, Florida Statutes. 
3. ?A check made payable to the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Indian River County for 
recording the plat in the amount established by that office. 
4. ?A copy of the homeowner's association or condominium documents if applicable. 
Such documents shall indicate the maintenance responsibility for the required 
improvements and shall provide for the formation of a special taxing district to assume 
maintenance responsibility for the required improvements in the event of the 
dissolution of the condominium or homeowners' association. 
5. ?If the developer elects to construct the required improvements after recording the plat, 
the following shall be submitted: 
i. ?A contract, executed in triplicate, between the city and the applicant for the 
construction of required improvements in the form so titled. 
ii. ?Guarantees of 110% of the amount defined in this subsection 54-4-19.5.F(2). 
6. ?Supplementary material designated by the city, i.e., deeds, easements, etc., when 
access, drainage, or utility services cannot be accomplished through platted rights-of-
way deeds or easements to accomplish access, drainage or utility service. 
(2) ?Review by staff. The planning and growth management director, city engineer, city attorney, 
and the city's surveyor, as appropriate, shall examine the final plat as to its compliance with the 
Constitution and Statutes of the State of Florida and the ordinances of the City of Sebastian and 
shall, in writing, within a required time period, or at such other time as shall be determined by 
resolution of the city council, report their findings, recommendations, or approval to the 
applicant. Such action shall be specified in writing. 
a. ?If any deficiency exists, a reference shall be made to the specific article or section with 
which the final plat does not comply. The applicant upon written notice shall correct any 
such deficiency. 
b. ?If the final plat meets the provisions of this ordinance, complies with the Constitution and 
Statutes of the State of Florida and the ordinances of the City of Sebastian, the appropriate 
city staff as above cited shall recommend approval to the city council. 
c. ?No revisions to the final plat shall be allowed after it has received city council approval. 
(3) ?City council review procedure. 
a. ?Where required improvements constructed prior to recording. Upon submittal of the 
reproducible final plat, certification and approvals contained on the plat shall be current and 
the plat shall be checked as required by this article prior to presentation to the city council 
for approval. 
b. ?City council review procedure where performance guarantee posted. In the event the 
applicant elects to record the final plat prior to completion of the required improvements 
under performance guarantees as provided for in this section, the final plat shall be 
presented to the city council by the city attorney accompanied by appropriate legal 
instruments. 
c. ?Action. Action by the council shall be taken after receipt of the final plat and supporting data 
to the city unless the applicant requests delay. Following the city council's approval and 
acceptance of the required improvements (or the legal instruments comprising approved 
posting of requisite performance guarantees), the final plat shall be duly signed certifying 
that the development has met all requirements of this article. 
(4) ?Recording final plat. After the final plat has been approved and certified and all requirements 
are met, the city clerk shall submit the final plat to the clerk of the circuit court, who shall record 
only those final plats that have been approved in accordance with this ordinance. After the final 
plat has been recorded the city clerk shall provide the appropriate copies to the planning and 
growth management director and city engineer. 
(e) ?Schedule of development phases. The applicant may schedule proposed development phases 
within any proposed subdivision. The scheduled development phases shall have been specified on 
the approved preliminary plat and shall be of such a size and design and be scheduled so that all 
portions completed at any time can exist independently as a subdivision in complete conformity with 
the requirements of this ordinance. Any change in the schedule of phases must receive prior 
approval by the planning and zoning commission. If phased, the applicant shall have the option of 
requesting either final plat approval or the issuance of a certificate of completion on one or more of 
the development phases in conformity with all the procedures and requirements of this ordinance. 
(f) ?Final plat recording requirements. The final plats for subdivisions, within the incorporated area of the 
City of Sebastian, shall not be recorded until the developer has installed the required improvements 
or has guaranteed to the satisfaction of the city council that such improvements will be installed. 
(1) ?Completion of required improvements prior to final plat recording. In the event the applicant 
exercises the right to construct and complete required improvements prior to recording of the 
final plat, the city staff shall have the right of entry upon the property to be platted for the 
purpose of inspecting and reviewing the construction of the required improvements during the 
progress of such construction. The applicant shall coordinate the construction with the city 
engineer. When the required improvements are complete, the final plat along with the records 
and data as herein prescribed shall be submitted by the applicant to the planning and growth 
management department and shall be reviewed by city staff as provided for in this article. When 
all requirements of this ordinance have been complied with, the plat and a completion 
certificate, shall be presented for review and approval to the city council by the city engineer 
and planning and growth management director, no later than 30 days after receipt of the 
completion certificate. Upon such approval, the city clerk shall submit the final plat to the office 
of the clerk of the circuit court for recording. 
(2) ?Completion of required improvements after recording of plat. When the applicant desires to 
record the plat in lieu of prior construction of required improvements, the applicant shall file with 
the city surety documents guaranteeing that such improvements will be installed. All guarantees 
shall be incorporated in a bonded agreement for the construction of the required improvements 
in the form prescribed in the appendix of this ordinance. All agreements, guarantees and 
documents shall be subject to approval of the city attorney and city council. The guarantee shall 
be in one of the following forms unless an alternate irrevocable form is approved in writing by 
the city attorney and is approved by the city council. 
(3) ?Performance guarantees. A guarantee shall be required from the applicant who chooses not to 
install the required improvements prior to final plat approval providing guarantees to ensure the 
proper installation of required street, utility, and other improvements, in the event of default by 
the applicant. The guarantee shall be presented in one of the following forms: 
a. ?Cash deposit. The applicant shall deposit with the city or place in an escrowed bank 
account subject to the control of the city, cash in the full amount of 110% of engineering 
and construction costs for the installation and completion of the required improvements. 
The applicant shall be entitled to receive all interest earned on such deposit or account. In 
the event of default by the applicant or failure of the applicant to complete such 
improvements within the time required by this ordinance, the city, after 60 calendar days' 
written notice to the applicant, shall have the right to use such cash deposit or account to 
secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements; or 
b. ?Personal bond with letter of credit. The applicant may furnish to the city a personal bond 
secured by an unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit, in an amount equal to 110% 
percent of the total estimated cost of engineering and construction for the installation and 
completion of the required improvements. The expiration date of the letter of credit shall be 
at least three months following the date of certification of all improvements. 
The letter of credit shall be issued to the city by a State of Florida or federal banking 
institution. Such letter of credit shall be in the form approved by the city attorney. In the 
event of default by the applicant or failure of the applicant to complete such improvements 
within the time required by this ordinance, the city, after 60 calendar days' written notice to 
the applicant, shall have the right to use any funds resulting from drafts on the letter of 
credit to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements; or 
c. ?Surety bond. The applicant may furnish the city a surety bond obtained from a company 
having a Best's rating of AAA, guaranteeing that within the time required by this ordinance, 
all work required will be completed in full accordance with the plat and all conditions 
attached thereto, copies of which shall be attached to and constitute a part of the bonded 
agreement. Said bond shall be in the amount equal to 110% of the total estimated cost of 
engineering and construction for the installation and completion of all required 
improvements. In the event of default by the applicant or failure of the applicant to 
complete such improvements within the time required by this ordinance, the city, after 60 
calendar days' written notice to the applicant, shall call on the bond to ensure satisfactory 
completion of the required improvements. 


Sec. 54-4-19.6. - Administration of construction. 
(a) ?Construction management plan and inspection schedule. In cases where the proposed 
development contains two or more phases and/or the project's proposed construction schedule is 
anticipated to exceed a period of one year, the applicant shall be required to submit a construction 
management plan and inspection schedule as part of the site plan. 
(1) ?Content of construction management plan and inspection schedule. The construction 
management plan shall specify the following: 
a. ?The timing and phasing of construction activities, including specific benchmarks for the 
completion of structures accommodating the principal use(s); 
b. ?A schedule of inspections which complies with the city's adopted building codes, including 
a program of improvements anticipated to be completed prior to each scheduled 
inspection; 
c. ?The building permit shall not be valid for a period exceeding two years and no single phase 
of development shall extend for a period longer than two years; 
d. ?The schedule shall acknowledge in writing that a new building permit must be obtained 
whenever: 
1. ?Construction is not commenced within 180 days from the time the permit was 
released; 
2. ?Construction activity is dormant for a period of six months or more; 
3. ?The developer fails to call for and achieve approved inspections within planned 180-
day intervals as shall be evidenced in the construction schedule; and 
4. ?A new phase of a phased development is commenced. 
e. ?The applicant shall acknowledge in writing that the applicant shall bear the burden of 
demonstrating that the construction activity is consistent with the site plan and has 
occurred in a timely manner consistent with the approved construction management plan 
and inspection schedule. The applicant shall further acknowledge that upon failure to meet 
the inspection schedule, the building permit shall expire. A new building permit shall be 
required in order to undertake construction activity on a site where a building permit has 
expired. 
(2) ?Timing of adjustments to the construction management plan and schedule. A building permit 
holder shall bear the burden of keeping a construction management plan current. Any event 
which may cause a delay in the permittee's compliance with the terms of a construction 
management plan and schedule shall be brought to the attention of the planning and growth 
management director. Any change in the construction schedule shall be approved by the 
planning and zoning commission. 
The burden shall be on the applicant to successfully negotiate and effectuate an adjustment to 
the construction management plan and schedule prior to a lapse in any scheduled inspection. 
Such lapse shall be defined as a failure to complete improvements consistent with the agreed 
upon construction and inspection schedule. 
(b) ?Construction commencement. After approval of the construction permit, an applicant may construct 
the required improvements subject to obtaining all required permits. The city engineer shall be 
notified in advance of the date of commencement of such construction. 
(1) ?Surveillance by the city engineer. Construction shall be performed under the surveillance of, 
and shall at all times be subject to, review by the city engineer or other representative 
designated by the city manager. However, this in no way shall relieve the applicant and his 
engineer of the responsibility for close field coordination and final compliance with the approved 
plans, specifications and the requirements of this ordinance. 
(2) ?Construction administration by Florida registered engineer. The applicant shall employ a 
Florida registered engineer for complete administration of the construction of the required 
improvements. The applicant shall require progress reports and final certification of the 
construction of the required improvements from such engineer be filed with the city engineer. 
(3) ?Right to enter. The city engineer or his duly authorized representative shall have the right to 
enter upon the property for the purpose of inspecting the quality of materials and workmanship 
and reviewing the construction of required improvements during the progress of such 
construction. 
(4) ?Progress reports. The applicant's engineer shall submit construction progress reports at points 
of progress prescribed by the city engineer. The applicant's engineer shall coordinate joint 
reviews of the construction with the city engineer or other designated city staff. 
(5) ?Time to complete. The applicant shall have 18 months to complete all construction of the 
project or phase. 
(6) ?Stop work orders. The city engineer shall have authority to stop work upon failure of the 
applicant or his engineer to coordinate the construction of the required improvements 
prescribed by this article. 
(7) ?Final inspections. Upon completion of the required improvements the applicant's engineer shall 
give the city engineer not less than three working days' notice to make the final inspection of the 
required improvements, landscaping, and sign installations. The building director shall have the 
authority to withhold or deny approval of CO's relative to buildings and/or structures of a 
subdivision until the construction and installation of required improvements of that subdivision 
have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the land development code. 


Sec. 54-4-19.7. - Completion certificate. 
    The required improvements shall not be considered complete until a completion certificate along with 
the final project records, including "as built" drawings have been furnished to, reviewed and approved by 
the city engineer. The certificate shall be certified by the applicant's engineer stating that the required 
improvements were installed under his responsible direction and that the improvements conform to the 
approved construction plans and this ordinance. The applicant's engineer shall also furnish a copy of 
each of the construction plans on a high quality, durable reproducible material acceptable to the city 
engineer, showing the original design in comparison to the actual finished work and a copy of the 
measurements, tests and reports made on the work and material during the progress of the construction. 


Sec. 54-4-19.8. - Conditions for release of applicant from bond. 
    As a condition for the final release of the applicant from his bond, or for the release of any cash 
securities deposited with the city, the following must be furnished: 
(1) ?A statement from the applicant's engineer that all work has been completed in strict 
accordance with the approved development plan and appropriate specifications; 
(2) ?Evidence by reference to plat book and page that the approved final plat has been filed; 
(3) ?A statement from the city engineer that the work has been found to be in accordance with the 
general provisions of the development plan; 
(4) ?The submission by the applicant's engineer to the city engineer of a complete set of "as built" 
drawings together with operating manuals and parts' lists for any mechanical installations made; 
(5) ?A statement by the applicant's surveyor verifying completion of all required survey work and 
installation of all required P.R.M.s; and 
(6) ?A release from the contractor, engineer, surveyor or any other person or persons performing 
any service or furnishing any material for the subdivision that they will not file a lien on the 
subdivision for nonpayment of service or material charges. 


Sec. 54-4-19.9. - Time extensions for bonded improvements. 
    All required improvements for a project or each phase thereof shall be completed within 12 months 
from the date of approval of the design of the required improvements. Time extensions for demonstrated 
good cause may be granted by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning 
commission. The applicant shall present a written request for extension to the planning and growth 
management department. The city council shall consider the request at a meeting and may extend the 
prescribed time period for up to 12 months if the city council finds that the applicant has progressed in 
good faith toward the implementation of the preliminary plat. 


Sec. 54-4.19-10. - Acceptance and maintenance of required improvements. 
(a) ?Workmanship and material agreement. The applicant shall execute an agreement guaranteeing the 
required improvements against defect in workmanship and materials for one year after acceptance of 
such improvements by the city council. Said agreement shall be submitted to the city engineer along 
with the completion certificate and project records. 
(b) ?Procedure for accepting dedications. The dedication of public space, parks, streets, rights-of-way, 
easements or the like on the plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the dedication by the city. The 
applicant shall apply to the city engineer for acceptance of required improvements by the city council. 
The applicant's engineer shall furnish to the city engineer in writing a sealed and signed certificate 
stating that the required improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved plan 
and comply with this ordinance and all other applicable codes. Any recommendations for acceptance 
of the dedication shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. Action 
accepting any dedications shall occur only upon adoption of a resolution by the city council that shall 
accept the subject dedications at such time as all improvements meet or exceed the standards set 
forth by this ordinance 
    The city engineer shall receive notice in adequate time to arrange for inspection prior to the 
beginning of construction and at appropriate staged intervals thereafter. The planning and growth 
management director in consultation with the city engineer may require laboratory or field tests as well as 
staged inspections at the expense of the applicant when appropriate. Any failure of work or materials to 
conform with the plans and specifications or failure to notify the city in time for indicated inspections shall 
be cause for the city council to reject the facilities. 
(c) ?Recommendation. The city engineer upon satisfactory completion, receipt of the applicant's 
engineer's completion certificate, affidavits from all contractors and others who furnished goods and 
services for the required improvements acknowledging payment in full therefore, and receipt of the 
agreement, and a recommendation of approval of the planning and growth management director 
shall certify that the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this ordinance and shall 
recommend to the city council the acceptance of the dedications and, when applicable, the 
maintenance of the required improvements. 
(d) ?Acceptance by the city council. Upon recommendations by the planning and growth management 
director and city engineer, the city council, by resolution, shall approve the subdivision, the 
dedications on the plat and the maintenance of responsibilities of the required improvements. 
(e) ?Bonds. The required bonds will be reverted to maintenance bonds for one year to guarantee 
performance of accepted improvements. 
(f) ?Applicant's failure to complete required improvements. 
(1) ?Premature recording of plats (or failure of applicant to complete required improvements). When 
a plat has been recorded and the applicant fails to complete the required improvements as 
required by this ordinance, the city council shall complete the required improvements under the 
guarantees provided by the applicant. In such case, the city council shall direct the planning and 
growth management director to call upon the guarantees to secure satisfactory completion of 
the required improvements. Legal notice of such action shall be deemed to have been duly 
served upon posting via certified mail return receipt requested. Upon the completion of 
construction of the required improvements, the city engineer shall report to the city council and 
the city council shall accept by resolution the dedications and maintenance responsibility as 
indicated on the plat. In such cases, the remaining guarantees posted by the applicant shall be 
retained for a period of one year after completion in lieu of the agreement. Any defects 
occurring during this period shall be repaired using funds remaining in the guarantee. 
(2) ?In cases where plat has not been recorded. Where an applicant has elected to install the 
required improvements prior to approval of and prior to recording of the plat and fails to 
complete such improvements within the time limitations of this ordinance, all approvals of the 
subdivision shall be null and void and the land shall revert to its original state. No reference 
shall be made to the plat with respect to the sale of lots or issuance of building permits, unless 
and until the plat has been resubmitted with all of the supplementary material and approvals as 
herein prescribed have been granted. 


Sec. 54-4-19.11. - Required improvements and design criteria. 
(a) ?General design requirements. The following tangible improvements are required in conjunction with 
the development of a subdivision within the City of Sebastian. Improvements shall be constructed to 
conform to the requirements and specifications of the City of Sebastian and the applicable laws of 
Indian River County and the State of Florida: 
(1) ?Streets; 
(2) ?Easements; 
(3) ?Utility systems; 
(4) ?Eosion control provisions; 
(5) ?Surface water management system according to article XII; 
(6) ?Sreet signs and traffic control markings and signs; 
(7) ?Permanent reference monuments; 
(8) ?Rights-of-way; 
(9) ?Tree and vegetation protection. 
    Each subdivision shall contain the following improvements designed and constructed to conform to 
the requirements and specifications in the land development regulations of Indian River County and the 
State of Florida if required in the zoning district or other land development regulations applicable to the 
subdivision: 
1. ?Bikeways; 
2. ?Sidewalks; 
3. ?Alleys; 
4. ?Buffering facilities and areas; 
5. ?Fire hydrants; 
6. ?Parks and recreational areas and facilities; 
7. ?Beach access structures and areas, where applicable; 
8. ?Curbing; 
9. ?Street lights; 
10. ?Reserved; 
11. ?Bridges and culverts when necessary; 
12. ?Filling and drainage as necessary; 
13. ?Traffic control devices as necessary; 
14. ?Header curbs; 
15. ?Native vegetation preserve areas; 
16. ?Environmentally sensitive land preserve areas; 
17. ?Emergency access; 
18. ?Transportation system improvements (off-site and one-site); 
19. ?Marginal and limited access easements; and 
20. ?Other provisions as may be required by land development regulations. 
    A Florida registered professional engineer shall be employed to design all required improvements 
including streets, drainage structures, bridges, bulkheads, and water and sewer facilities. 
The following latest editions of FDOT manuals shall serve as guides for design: 
Drainage Manual 
Standard Specifications for Road & Bridge Construction 
Roadway & Traffic Design Standards. 
Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design and Construction and Maintenance for Streets 
and Highways 
Highway Capacity Manual 
Manual of Trip Generation ITE 
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (FHWA) 
Guide for Design of Pavement Structures AASHTO 
    The design of required improvements shall be accomplished in such a manner that they shall be 
equal to or exceed those outlined in this section. Design data, such as calculations and analysis, shall be 
submitted along with the development plans covering important features affecting design and 
construction. 
    The required improvements shall be completed prior to recording the plat in the manner prescribed in 
this ordinance or the applicant shall submit to the city a guarantee in one of the forms prescribed by this 
ordinance to assure the installation of the required improvements. 
(b) ?Block, lots and buffers. 
(1) ?Blocks. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a. ?Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use 
contemplated. 
b. ?Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions. 
c. ?Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian 
traffic. 
d. ?Most advantageous use of topography and preservation of mature trees and other material 
features wherever possible. 
1. ?Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length between intersecting streets. 
Greater lengths may be recommended for approval by the planning and growth 
management director, the city engineer, and the planning and zoning commission 
where special topographical conditions exist. 
(2) ?Lots. All lots shall have frontage on a street that has a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet. All lots 
shall have area, frontage, width and depth required by the zoning district in which said lots are 
located. The minimum width of a lot fronting on the inside of curvature of a street or cul-de-sac 
shall be measured from a parallel line running through the midpoint of a perpendicular line 
extending from the midpoint of the front lot line to the point at which it intersects the rear lot line. 
Notwithstanding, lots developed under an approved planned unit development plans shall be 
regulated by lot dimension requirements stipulated in the approved planned unit development 
site plan. When a subdivision is proposed upon land with existing structures that are to be 
retained, lots are to be designed so as not to cause said existing structures to become 
nonconforming with respect to building area or lot size. Access points to single-family lots shall 
be at least 30 feet from the right-of-way line of the nearest intersecting street and at least 175 
feet from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersection of a collector or high density street with 
another collector or higher classification street. Access to any lot from an arterial or collector is 
prohibited, subdivision will be designed to provide access to lots by use of local or marginal 
access streets or approved driveways (nonresidential subdivision only). Flag lots shall be 
expressly prohibited. The entire parent tract being subdivided shall be placed in lots, streets, 
and other usable tracts so that remnants and other landlocked areas shall not be created. No lot 
shall be divided by a municipal boundary. 
a. ?Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots or through lots shall be avoided except where 
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to 
overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Where double frontage lots 
are developed they shall be buffered as required by this ordinance. The required front yard 
shall be provided on each street on double frontage or through lots. 
b. ?Corner lots. Corner lots shall have a width equal to the width required by the land 
development code for internal lots, plus the difference between the required front yard 
setback and required side yard setback. 
(3) ?Buffers, including berms, fences and landscaping. Screening such as fences, berms and other 
landscaping shall be required between incompatible land uses. 
a. ?Screening shall be required on lot lines that border collector or arterial streets. The plat and 
planned improvements shall comply with the screening and buffer performance criteria of 
article XIV. Masonry walls or suitable alternatives shall be provided when noise from 
adjacent streets is or is judged to be a potential future problem. Berms or suitable 
screening may be required between lots, especially commercial, industrial, or offices, and 
adjacent incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses. Along collector or arterial 
roads suitable screening may be used instead of a masonry fence if noise from the road 
will not adversely affect the proposed use. 
b. ?Buffer zones, either open space or specially vegetated, may be required between adjacent 
incompatible or potentially incompatible land uses especially where problems with building 
heights, noise, or scenic impairment might be a problem. Where a buffer screen of 
decorative masonry, plant materials, fences, berms are required, or where desired by the 
applicant and approved by the city, such walls, vegetative screens, or fences shall be set 
back at least one foot from the right-of-way and shall be so constructed that pilasters or 
fence terminal anchor posts shall be installed at the corners of each lot in such manner that 
each property owner might maintain his own section or provisions shall be made to have 
them maintained by a community association or other appropriate private entity. 
(c) ?Utilities. 
(1) ?Easements. Easements shall be located on the interior side of the front property line, centered 
on the rear or side lot lines, or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
a. ?Utility easements. Easements six feet wide along each side of each lot shall be provided 
where necessary to accommodate all required utilities across lots and where possible shall 
be centered on lot lines with convenient access for maintenance. Utility easements ten feet 
wide shall be provided for underground utilities across that portion of the lot adjacent to a 
street. Utility easements seven and one-half feet wide along the rear property of each lot 
shall also be provided. Additional utility easements may be required by the city when, in the 
opinion of the planning and growth management director in consultation with the city 
engineer, such easements are necessary for continuity of utility service between 
developments and where necessary for maintenance and service. 
b. ?Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall be provided where necessary at a width 
adequate to accommodate the drainage facilities. A minimum of 15 feet shall be provided 
for underground storm drainage installations. Where canals or ditches are permitted and in 
compliance with this code, the width shall be adequate to accommodate drainage facilities 
plus 20 feet on one side for maintenance purposes. The city engineer may recommend 
drainage easements shall be provided to facilitate drainage of surface waters from 
contributory areas. When a subdivision is traversed by or includes canals, watercourses, 
lakes, streams, drainage ways or channels, there shall be provided with a drainage 
easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and 
of such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for maintenance purposes. 
The city engineer may recommend that an easement be located on both sides in cases 
where the city deems an easement on only one side inadequate. Easements to access 
retention basin and side lot swales shall be provided as specified in article XII, Surface 
Water Management. 
(2) ?Utilities. New subdivisions shall be required to install underground utilities, including franchised 
utilities, power and light, telephone and telegraph, water, sewer, cable television, wiring to street 
lights and gas. 
a. ?Coordination of easements. Easements shall be coordinated with requisite utility authorities 
and shall be provided as prescribed by this ordinance for the installation of underground 
utilities or relocating existing facilities in conformance with the respective utility authority's 
rules and regulations. 
b. ?Waivers. The city council may waive the requirement for underground installation if the 
service to the adjacent area is overhead and it does not appear that further development in 
adjacent areas with underground utilities is possible. Any new service which is allowed by 
the waiver herein to be supplied by overhead utilities shall be connected to a service panel 
that is convertible for underground utility service at a future date. 
c. ?Applicant responsibility for underground installations. The applicant shall make necessary 
cost and other arrangements for such underground installations with each of the persons, 
firms or corporations furnishing utility service involved. 
d. ?Construction in easements. Utilities shall be constructed in easements as prescribed by 
this article. 
e. ?Utility installation. After the subgrade for a street has been completed, the remainder of the 
street right-of-way has been graded and before any road or street construction material is 
applied, all underground work for the water mains, sanitary sewers, gas mains, telephone, 
electrical power conduits, cable television and any other utilities with appurtenances and 
branches for surface connections shall be completely installed throughout the width of the 
street to the sidewalk area or provisions made so that the roadway or right-of-way will not 
be disturbed for utilities installations or service connections. All underground improvements 
so installed for the purpose of future service connections shall be properly capped and 
backfilled and their locations identified. 
(d) ?Environmental considerations. All performance standards of article XI, Environmental Protection, 
shall be satisfied, including but not limited to: preservation of natural resources; preservation of 
wetlands; species of special concern; soil erosion, sedimentation control; and shoreline protection; 
protection of groundwater aquifer recharge; preservation of wildlife habitats and protection of upland 
vegetative communities and endangered or threatened flora and fauna; land use and soil 
compatibility; and floodplain protection. 
(1) ?Fill. The subdivision shall be graded and, where necessary, filled to comply with the surface 
water management requirements prescribed in article XII, Surface Water Management, of this 
code. The fill shall be free of muck, peat, clay, unstable soils, organic matter such as logs, 
stumps, trees, clippings and cuttings and any form of junk, rubbish, trash, liquid or solid wastes, 
any form of debris that is subject to consolidation, disintegration, erosion or encourages the 
presence of insects, termites, or vermin. The city engineer shall: 1) determine and approve the 
type of fill to be installed within the rights-of-way; 2) shall require soil tests of the backfill and the 
underlying material, and 3) shall require the development's project engineer to certify the type of 
material and method of placement. The applicant shall bear the costs of all such tests and 
certifications. 
(2) ?Soils. The plan shall show the location and results of test borings of the subsurface condition of 
the tract to be developed. The tests shall be the type performed by the soil conservation service 
including percolation characteristics and detailed soils data. When non-pervious soils (hard pan 
or other impervious soils) or unstable (peat, muck, etc.) are encountered the plan shall reflect a 
satisfactory design to cope with such conditions. If the soil analysis reflects that the area 
contains hard pan or other impervious soils or contains peat, muck or other unstable materials, 
the city engineer shall require such additional design and construction as are necessary to 
assure proper drainage and development of the area. The number of tests and their location 
shall be mutually determined by the applicant's engineer and the city engineer and shall be 
recorded as to location and result on the construction plans. All plans and improvements shall 
be in compliance with article XI, Environmental Protection. 
(3) ?Erosion control. Seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or other acceptable methods shall be 
performed as required to prevent undue erosion during all construction activities. Erosion, 
sedimentation control and shoreline protection measures stipulated in article XI, Environmental 
Protection, shall be carried out as applicable. The applicant shall be required to keep 
accumulations of sand and earth out of the curb, gutter, swales, and drainage ditches. 
Temporary siltation basins may be required during construction. The applicant shall provide 
maintenance for the two-year period of the road guarantee and for each lot until final inspection 
is passed. 
(4) ?Land clearing, grubbing, and excavation. Land clearing, grubbing, excavation, and fill approvals 
as required by the city shall be obtained from the building department prior to commencement 
of clearing, grading or filling work. Similarly, all requisite permits from the county, state, 
SJRWMD, or the federal government shall be obtained and presented to the city prior to 
commencement of any clearing, filling, excavation, or grubbing. 
The subdivision shall be graded and, where necessary, filled to comply with the surface water 
management requirements of article XII. Applicants shall be required to clear all rights-of-way 
and to plan and construct all grades, for streets, alleys, lots and other areas, in a manner which 
is consistent and compatible with the land development code including, but not limited to, the 
tree protection regulations. Similarly, all such plans and construction activities shall be 
consistent with surface water management requirements of article XII. 
In the interest of preserving existing trees and other natural beauty, the planning and growth 
management director in consultation with the city engineer and other designated staff shall 
determine that applicable provisions of the tree protection regulations are met and the city 
administrative officials may vary the requirements of this section where aesthetic and 
environmental conditions will be enhanced but will not adversely affect proper drainage within 
the area. 
(5) ?Shoreline protection. Seawalls, bulkheads, piers and docks installed along the shoreline shall 
be installed under permit issued by the building official. Bulkheads shall not be constructed 
below the mean high water line unless permitted by the controlling federal or state agency. Any 
such plans and improvements shall comply with all environmental performance criteria of article 
XI, including but not limited to, preservation of wetlands; and other environmentally sensitive 
areas; soil erosion, sedimentation control, and shoreline protection; preservation of wildlife 
habitats and other related performance criteria. No development order approval shall occur until 
appropriate federal and state permits are issued. 
(e) ?Central water system and fire protection. The design of the entire system shall be engineered in 
concert with the Indian River County Utilities Department, shall be approved by the Indian River 
County Utilities Department, and shall meet all applicable specifications, including state regulations. 
The design and installation of a central water system shall comply with the city's adopted 
comprehensive plan and shall conform to the accepted standards for municipal water supply and fire 
protection systems as prescribed by the "National Fire Codes" and the "Fire Protection Handbook" 
published by the National Fire Prevention Association as exists or may hereafter be amended: 
(f) ?Central wastewater system. Central wastewater collection, wastewater treatment and disposal 
systems shall comply with the standards of and be approved by the Indian River County Utilities 
Department and shall meet concurrency management criteria of article IX. 
(g) ?Storm water management. All subdivisions shall have an adequate comprehensive stormwater 
management system compliant with article XII, Surface Water Management, including necessary 
ditches, canals, swales, percolation areas, berms, dikes, piers, detention ponds, storm sewers, drain 
inlets, manholes, headwalls, end walls, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be required 
in all subdivisions for the positive drainage of stormwater. In addition, storm water treatment facilities 
shall be required in the subdivision to control storm water runoff quality by providing for on-site 
percolation and/or retention or other appropriate treatment technique for storm water. Such 
requirements shall be compliant with the surface water management provisions of article XII as well 
as the environmental performance criteria of article XI. The design data of the drainage system shall 
be submitted along with the construction plans in a report form prepared by the applicant's engineer 
indicating the method of control of storm and ground water pursuant to criteria established in article 
XII. 
(h) ?Dedication of lands for parks and recreation. All residential development shall provide an equitable 
dedication of land for public park purposes and/or fees in lieu thereof pursuant to the standards 
stated below and shall comply with concurrency management provisions of article IX, Concurrency 
Management. The standards provided herein are stipulated to implement policies within the parks 
and recreation element. The standards shall apply to all residential applications for subdivision 
approval. No property shall be assessed twice for respective subdivision plat applications unless a 
rezoning subsequently increases the density permitted on a parcel(s) of land. 
(1) ?Requirements. As a condition of development, the applicant shall dedicate land to the City of 
Sebastian, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination thereof, at the option of the city for park 
and recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula described in 
this section. 
(2) ?General standard. Four acres of property for each 1,000 persons residing in the city [shall] be 
devoted for park and recreational purposes. To determine park and recreational land to be 
dedicated within the service area of proposed developments, analysis shall consider available 
facilities inventoried in the City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan: Data Inventory and Analysis. 
Prior to dedicating such land, the applicant shall provide the city with an environmental audit 
performed by a registered engineer evidencing that the property does not contain any 
contaminated or hazardous materials defined by law. 
(3) ?Fees in lieu of land dedication. If it is demonstrated by the applicant to the satisfaction of the 
city council that no park or recreation facility can be located in whole or part within the proposed 
development to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or if 
the proposed development shall consist of 50 dwelling units or less, the applicant may, in lieu of 
dedicating land, pay a fee equal to the fair market value of the land which would have been 
required to be dedicated. 
(4) ?Use of money. The money collected shall be paid to the City of Sebastian and placed in a 
reserve account within a special fund. The monies and accrued interest from fees paid for any 
given development shall be used solely for acquisition of parkland or facilities reasonably 
related to serving said development. 
(5) ?Determination of fair market value. Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, 
the value of the property shall be determined by the value per acre assigned by the Indian River 
County Property Appraiser on the most recent tax roll or the sale price at the most recent sale of 
the property, whichever is greater. 
(6) ?Technical standards for determining dedication requirement. 
a. ?Dedication formula. The following formula shall be used: 
Average Number of Persons per Dwelling Unit x 4 Acres per 1,000 Persons = Acreage 
Requirement per Dwelling Unit. 
Example for a single-family dwelling unit: 
University of Florida Shimberg Center, 1996 Assessment of Affordable Housing in City 
of Sebastian: 2.50 Persons/Unit x 4 Acres Per 1,000 Persons = 0.01Acres/Unit 
b. ?Land dedication or fee. The city council shall determine whether to accept land dedication 
or require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, after consideration of the following: 
1. ?Topography, vegetation, hydrology, access and location of land in the development 
available for dedication; 
2. ?Size shall be five acres or larger with a shape and natural features adaptive to passive 
or active recreation. 
3. ?Availability of potential alternate park lands and location of previously acquired park 
property; and 
4. ?Consistency with the comprehensive plan. 
c. ?Credit for private recreational space. The city council may grant full or partial credit for 
private recreational space pursuant to the standards established herein. Such credit shall 
be applied against the total dedication requirements for parks and recreation pursuant to 
this code. These guidelines and standards are established in order to ensure that private 
recreational spaces provide an appropriate range of recreational opportunities for residents 
of proposed developments: 
1. ?The yards, setbacks, and other open areas required by the land development code 
and building codes shall not be included in the computation of private recreational 
space. 
2. ?The private ownership and maintenance is adequately provided by recorded written 
agreement, conveyance, or restrictions. 
3. ?The use of the private recreational space is restricted for park and recreational 
purposes by recorded covenant which runs with the land in favor of the future owner's 
property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city 
council. 
4. ?The proposed private recreational space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and 
recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, 
topography, vegetation, hydrology, access and location. 
5. ?Environmental preserves which have boardwalks, nature trails, water access, or other 
usable recreational features, may count for up to ten percent of the required 
dedication. 
(i) ?Transportation systems. 
(1) ?Access. Separation between access points on all state highways shall be in accordance with 
the FDOT access classification system and Standards Rules 14-96 and 14-97 FAC. 
(2) ?Dedication. All streets shall be either dedicated to the public or dedicated to and maintained by 
the home owners association. Roads deemed necessary to provide access to adjacent 
properties shall be dedicated to the public, or continuation of existing dedicated streets shall be 
dedicated to the public. 
a. ?General design criteria. Ingress, egress, and access management shall comply with the 
below cited general design criteria: 
1. ?In order to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress to private property 
and the maximum safety with the least interference to the traffic flow on public streets, 
the city shall regulate the number and location of driveways. Driveway design is 
specified in design section. 
2. ?Street stubs to adjoining undeveloped areas shall be provided when required to give 
access to such areas or to provide for proper traffic circulation. Street stubs in excess 
of 250 feet shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround. 
3. ?Improvements shall provide lanes for acceleration, deceleration, storage, turning 
movements, bypassing, median modifications, other design features to channel traffic 
or render necessary drainage or utility modifications which meet best management 
principles and practices for purposes of protecting the safe and efficient operation of 
traffic circulation and utility systems. 
(a) ?Every lot or parcel shall be served from a publicly dedicated local street; 
however, an applicant may retain as private a local street if the following 
conditions are met: (1) Public right-of-way is not required in order to serve 
adjacent development that is existing or projected; (2) A permanent access 
easement is granted for service and emergency vehicles and for maintenance of 
public and semi-public utilities; and (3) A reciprocal easement for ingress and 
egress is granted all residents of the development. 
(b) ?All subdivisions, as defined in section 54-4-19.1(c), shall be designed with at 
least two public means of ingress and egress to provide public access to the 
subdivision from arterial or collector streets. An adjustment in the number of 
required public means of ingress and egress under this paragraph may be 
authorized pursuant to section 54-4-19.1(d). Each public means of ingress and 
egress to a subdivision shall intersect an arterial or collector street different from 
the arterial or collector street intersected by any other required public means of 
ingress and egress to the subdivision. If it is not possible for the required number 
of public means of ingress and egress to a subdivision to intersect different 
arterial or collector streets, the public means of ingress and egress may intersect 
the same arterial or collector street; however, the points of intersection must be 
located a minimum of 1,000 feet apart. If an adjustment is authorized pursuant to 
section 54-4-19.1(d) such that only one public means of ingress and egress is 
required under this paragraph, the subdivision shall be designed to provide at 
least one additional means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles. All 
such means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles must be 
recommended for approval by the planning and growth management director, the 
city engineer, and the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city 
council. Wherever possible, all subdivision access roads shall be located at 
existing median openings. If a subdivision access road is not located at an 
existing median opening, the applicant's paving plan shall provide for 
construction of a median opening, where permitted, or shall provide for the 
modification of existing openings, where required, at no cost to the city. The 
design of subdivision access roads shall comply with the requirements of the 
jurisdiction of the highway in which the median is located. 
b. ?Specific access design. Minimum dimensions between the edge of intersections to the 
edge of points of access (driveways) to lots developed within a subdivision shall be located 
as follows: 
The subdivision shall be designed to provide access to the lots by the use of local streets. 
A secondary means of access shall also be provided to all subdivisions for use by 
emergency vehicles. Local street connections to collector streets shall be a minimum of 
660 feet apart and collector street connections to arterial streets shall be a minimum of 
1,320 feet apart. Where access is desired along collector or arterial streets, it shall be 
provided by means of a marginal access road. The first point of access to the marginal 
access (frontage) road from collector and arterial streets shall be a minimum of 330 feet 
from intersection right-of-way lines as shown on the Comprehensive Plan Future Traffic 
Circulation Map Series, with intermittent points at median opening locations being a 
minimum of 660 feet from intersecting right-of-way lines, unless otherwise approved by the 
city engineer. Access spacing of lesser lengths may be granted if requested by the 
applicant and recommended for approval by the planning and growth management 
director, the city engineer, and the planning and zoning commission and approved by the 
city council. Lots shall access local street network. Driveways on collector or arterial streets 
will be discouraged. 
c. ?Nonresidential driveways and internal circulation. 
1. ?Vehicular circulation must be completely contained within the property and vehicles 
located within one portion of the development must have access to all other portions 
without using the adjacent street system. 
2. ?Acceptable plans must illustrate that proper consideration has been given to the 
surrounding street plan, traffic volumes, proposed street improvements, vehicular 
street capacities, pedestrian movements, and safety. 
3. ?No driveway shall be constructed in the radius return of an intersection. 
d. ?Service drives. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a limited access highway right-
of-way, or arterial street, the city council may require a service drive or suitable provisions 
for future service drives approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at 
a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in 
residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. 
Distances involving right-of-way shall also be determined with due regard for the 
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(3) ?Alleys. Alleys may be required along rear lot lines of commercial and industrial subdivisions. 
When provided alleys shall be paved 18 feet wide in a minimum 20-foot wide right-of-way for 
commercial and industrial use, all having appropriate radii for the use intended. Alley 
intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided and dead end alleys are 
prohibited. Fire lanes shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet. 
(4) ?Streets. All streets and related facilities required to serve the proposed subdivision shall be 
constructed and paved by the applicant pursuant to specifications herein stipulated. The 
construction shall consist of, but not be limited to, street grading, subgrading stabilization, base 
preparation and surface course along with drainage as required under this article. All roadway 
improvements shall comply with concurrency management provisions of article IX, Concurrency 
Management. 
a. ?Street layout. The proposed subdivision street layout shall be coordinated with 
transportation element in the comprehensive plan as adopted or as may hereinafter be 
amended, and with the street system of the surrounding area. Consideration shall be given 
to existing and planned streets, relation to topographical conditions, to public convenience, 
safety and their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such 
streets. All roads and streets shall intersect ;minus; 5 angle of 90 unless circumstances 
acceptable to the city indicate a need for a lesser angle of intersection. All local or minor 
collectors providing access to residential developments with mean lot frontage of 125 feet 
or less or nonresidential development with mean lot frontage of 225 feet or less shall 
provide sidewalks. 
b. ?Costs of paving streets. The city shall pay no part of the cost of paving streets in any 
undeveloped subdivision. Where access streets to a subdivision are not adequately paved 
to handle the anticipated traffic, arrangements for paving the access streets should be 
made with the city prior to acceptance of the final plat by the developer. All paving installed 
in and adjacent to these subdivisions shall be at the entire cost of the applicant and shall 
be pursuant to the sections of this article. 
c. ?Streets adjoining unsubdivided land. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, 
any needed new streets shall be recommended by the planning and growth management 
director in consultation with the city engineer, and the planning and zoning commission. 
After receiving the said recommendations, the city council shall act on the 
recommendations thereby determining which street installations shall be required to serve 
the abutting unsubdivided land. The recommendations and the action by city council shall 
address whether the said streets shall be designed as collector streets and whether the 
streets shall be carried to the boundary of the tract proposed to be subdivided. Local 
streets, when extended to the boundary of the tract, shall be designed in a manner that will 
discourage through traffic. 
d. ?Curvilinear street design. The use of curvilinear design in street layouts is encouraged to 
promote aesthetically pleasing appearance and to prevent the use of grid design in order to 
discourage through traffic. 
e. ?Impact of future traffic circulation map series. The new subdivision shall provide for the 
incorporation and compatible development of present and future streets as generally 
delineated on the future traffic circulation map series adopted by the city council under the 
comprehensive plan ordinance, when such present or future streets are affected by the 
proposed subdivision. 
Notwithstanding, where the planning and growth management director in consultation with 
the city engineer and/or the planning and zoning commission recommend, and the city 
council determines that there is a need for incorporating a new or realigned major 
thoroughfare based on characteristics of specific development proposals as well as 
changed conditions since the adoption of the comprehensive plan, the city shall require 
subdivision applicants to conform to the newly prescribed road improvement. 
f. ?Traffic analysis. A subdivision preliminary plat shall include preparation of a traffic impact 
analysis pursuant to article IX, Concurrency Management, if the proposed subdivision is 
projected to generate a traffic flow above the threshold. The traffic impact analysis shall be 
prepared by a professional engineer and shall be used to determine the number of lanes, 
capacity of street systems proposed or effected by the development, off-site impacts and 
the phasing of improvements. Traffic impact study shall be prepared in accordance with 
section 952.07 of Indian River County Code. 
g. ?Street right-of-way characteristics. Street improvements shall be designed in a manner 
compatible with design characteristics of the city's future traffic circulation system of the 
city comprehensive plan and the city's minimum right-of-way standards as cited below: 
The city shall preserve existing rights-of-way and shall enforce standards requiring 
dedication of roadways for which the need is generated by new development. These 
design parameters may be adjusted based on projected traffic carrying capacities of 
specific developments and application of accepted principles and practices of traffic 
engineering and design of facilities. Prior to acceptance by the city, the city engineer shall 
recommend the specific design features for approval. 
? 
ROW width shall be increased by at least ten feet on each side of any arterial or major 
collector road for a minimum distance of 200 feet from its intersection with another arterial 
or major collector road or street pursuant to proper intersection design. All arterial and 
collector roads shall have a minimum of 12 feet travel lane width. Local streets may have a 
minimum of ten feet travel lane. 
Str
eet 
Clas
sific
atio
n 
Min
imu
m 
Rig
hts-
of-
Wa
y 
Art
eria
l 
roa
dw
ays: 
The
se 
roa
dw
ays 
mo
ve 
traf
fic 
to, 
fro
m 
and 
thr
oug
h 
the 
cou
nty. 
140 
feet 
Coll
ect
or 
stre
ets 

Maj
or 
coll
ect
or 
stre
ets: 
The
se 
stre
ets 
ser
ve 
to 
coll
ect 
hea
vy 
vol
um
es 
of 
traf
fic 
fro
m 
loc
al 
stre
ets 
and 
dev
elo
ped 
are
as 
and 
dist
ribu
te 
the 
traf
fic 
to 
art
eria
l 
roa
dw
ays. 
140 
feet 
Min
or 
coll
ect
or 
stre
ets: 
The
se 
stre
ets 
ser
ve 
to 
coll
ect 
hea
vy 
vol
um
es 
of 
traf
fic 
fro
m 
loc
al 
stre
ets 
and 
dev
elo
ped 
are
as 
and 
dist
irbu
te 
the 
traf
fic 
to 
art
eria
l 
roa
dw
ays. 
60 
feet 
Loc
al 
stre
ets: 
The
se 
stre
ets 
pro
vid
e 
acc
ess 
to 
resi
den
tial 
dev
elo
pm
ent 
and 
dist
ribu
te 
traf
fic 
to 
coll
ect
or 
and 
art
eria
l 
stre
ets 
wh
ere 
co
mm
erci
al 
dev
elo
pm
ent 
and 
maj
or 
60 
feet 
(if 
ser
ved 
by 
swa
les)  
50 
feet 
(if 
ser
ved 
by 
cur
b 
and 
gut
ter) 
 
? 
h. ?Dead end streets (cul-de-sacs). Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except when 
designed as a cul-de-sac. Such streets shall not exceed the length of 600 feet in length 
except where natural geographic barriers exist necessitating a greater length approved by 
the city engineer. When constructed with a curb and gutter, cul-de-sacs shall have 50 feet 
of right-of-way approach to a 90-foot diameter turnaround circle. When constructed with 
swale drainage, cul-de-sacs shall have 60 feet of right-of-way approach to a one hundred-
foot diameter turnaround circle or 50 feet of right-of-way with a dedicated easement ten 
feet wide on each side. 
Width of surface course of pavement shall be 20 feet on the approach and 60 feet diameter 
for the turnaround. Approach and turnaround shall be constructed in accordance with this 
ordinance. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, an adequate turnaround within the 
proposed right-of-way shall be required. When one or more temporary turnarounds are 
shown, the following note shall be included on the plat. 
"The area on this plat designated as "temporary turnaround" will be constructed and 
used as other streets on the subdivision until [name(s) of street(s)] is/are extended to 
[name(s) of street(s)] at which time the land in the temporary turnaround area will be 
abandoned for street purposes and will revert to adjoining lot owners in accordance 
with specific provisions in their respective deeds." 
i. ?Construction in muck areas. The design of streets proposed in excessive muck areas shall 
be considered on an individual basis. A Florida registered engineer shall certify all plans 
submitted for construction in such areas. Prior to issuing a permit for such construction, the 
city engineer shall approve the engineered plan as submitted by the applicant. 
j. ?Street grades. Street grades shall be determined in relation to the drainage installations for 
the subdivision. Street grades shall not exceed three percent unless adequate protection 
from erosion is provided or be less than three-tenths of one percent for swale sections or 
two-tenths of one percent for guttered sections unless otherwise recommended for 
approval by the planning and growth management director, the city engineer, and the 
planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. Road grades shall be 
shown on the development plans by the direction, percent of gradient and with centerline 
lineal distances between control points. 
k. ?Intersection of streets. Street jogs or centerline offsets between any local street with 
another local street or road less than 150 feet are prohibited. 
l. ?Marginal access streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing limited access 
highway, freeway or arterial street, a marginal access street shall be required to afford 
separation of through and local traffic. 
m. ?Local streets. Local streets shall be so laid out that use by through traffic shall be 
discouraged. 
n. ?Railroads on or abutting subdivisions. When a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad 
right-of-way, the planning and growth management director and/or the city engineer shall 
review the plans and recommend the purpose, location, design, length and specifications 
for any needed rights-of-way, easements, or street improvements. The planning and 
zoning commission shall review the said recommendations and make a recommendation 
to the city council for specific action. After reviewing all recommendations by city staff and 
the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall render a final decision regarding 
the needed rights-of-way, easements, and/or street improvements, including their purpose, 
location, design, length and specifications. The city council may require such 
improvements approximately parallel to and on each side of the railroad right-of-way at a 
distance suitable for appropriate use of any nearby property for recreation or buffer 
purposes in residential districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate 
districts. 
o. ?Street names. Extensions of existing streets shall bear the same name of the existing 
street. In no case shall the name of a proposed new street, which is not part of an existing 
facility, duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names. The naming of new 
streets shall be coordinated with the Indian River County Sheriff's 911 Emergency 
Dispatch Center. 
p. ?Alignment, intersections, and radii. 
1. ?Alignment. The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provisions for 
the continuation of the existing or platted streets into adjoining areas or their proper 
projection where adjoining land is not subdivided insofar as they may be deemed 
necessary by the city council for public requirement. The street and alley arrangement 
shall be such as not to cause a hardship to owners of adjoining property when they 
plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. 
2. ?Intersections. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right 
angles. No street right-of-way shall intersect another at an angle of less than ;pm;15 
of 90 degrees unless special provision is made in the design of the intersection. 
Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be 
prohibited unless special provision is made in the design of the intersection. All 
intersections shall be designed to provide adequate stopping and sight distance in 
accordance with the current edition of AASHTO Standards. The intersection of any 
two local roads or streets with a major collector or arterial shall be separated by a 
minimum distance of 660 feet from center line to center line. 
3. ?Accel/decel lanes. The following location and design criteria shall apply to 
intersections. Acceleration, deceleration, and/or turning lanes shall be provided by the 
applicant at intersections of arterial or collector routes if projected traffic entering the 
site equals or exceeds 30 vehicles in the peak hour turning left, or 75 vehicles in the 
peak hour for right turn movements. For projects with significant truck traffic (over five 
percent of anticipated projected traffic volume), passenger car equivalents (PCE) at 
the rate of one truck equals three PCE shall be used in determining the application of 
the above acceleration and/or deceleration lane requirements. For purposes of this 
section, any vehicle with three or more axles shall be considered a truck. 
4. ?Radii. The point of curvature of any local street shall not be closer than 100 feet to the 
point of intersection. When the centerline of a local street deflects by more than ten 
degrees, it shall be curved with a radius adequate to assure safe sight distance and 
driver comfort, but never less than a minimum centerline radius of 100 feet. Property 
lines at street intersections shall have 25 feet or greater radius and street pavement 
radii shall be a minimum of 30 feet. 
q. ?Street side swales. Typical sections for street right-of-way shall comply with "Manual of 
Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and 
Highways", and shall: 
1. ?Have a side slope no steeper than three to one within the applicable clear zone. 
2. ?Be designed to accumulate and carry water pursuant to stormwater and flood 
protection plan in a manner in accordance with article XII, Surface Water 
Management. 
3. ?Be sodded in right-of-way along full frontage of development. 
4. ?Provide proper drainage structures 
r. ?Standards for roadway section construction. A properly prepared subgrade and an 
approved road base and wearing surface shall be provided for all streets. 
1. ?The construction methods and all materials used in the improvements required by this 
article shall comply with applicable specifications of the city and those methods and 
materials prescribed by: 1) the current Florida Department of Transportation 
Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 2) the American 
Waterworks Association for Water Improvements Construction; 3) the Water 
Environment Federation for Wastewater Facilities Construction; 4) the Florida 
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP); Indian River County Utilities; and the 
St. Johns River Water Management District. 
2. ?During construction, the applicant's engineer shall make such measurements, field 
tests and laboratory tests or cause them to be made to certify that the work and 
materials conform with the approved development plans and the provisions of this 
ordinance. The city engineer or other representative designated by the city council 
may require tests and measurements which are deemed necessary and which shall 
be performed at the expense of the applicant or his engineer. 
3. ?The road for arterial streets and commercial or industrial streets shall be a minimum of 
seven inches compacted limerock, or cemented coquina shale as per FDOT 
Standards for road construction. All other street bases shall be six inches. All base 
construction shall be compacted to 98% density and extend six inches beyond edge 
of pavement. 
4. ?All surfaces shall be one and one/half inches type S-3 asphalt for local roads. 
Commercial streets, major collectors and arterials shall be one and one-half inches S-
1 and one inch S-3, or two and one-half inches S-3, two lifts. 
5. ?Pavement crown shall be one-fourth inch/foot (.02%) cross slope or greater with no 
inverted crowns permitted. 
6. ?Subgrades for arterial streets and commercial or industrial streets shall be 12 inches 
compacted thickness extended 12 inches beyond base and 75 feet FBV or 40 LBR 
compacted to 98% T-180. All other streets shall be nine inches compacted thickness, 
extended 12 inches beyond edge of pavement with 60 FBV or 40 LBR compacted to 
98% T-180. 
7. ?If not specified, the FDOT manual shall prevail. 
8. ?The city engineer shall review and approve of the design and construction of streets. 
After subgrading streets, there shall be given one course penetration treatment of 
emulsified asphalt and local aggregate to the full width of the street and an additional 
course to the middle 22 feet of said street, all to the specifications and requirements 
for review and approval of the city engineer. 
s. ?Sidewalks and bicycle paths. The project developer shall be responsible for provision of a 
bike path along the project site frontage on all right-of-way or easements designated. 
Sidewalks shall be constructed on one or both sides of all collector and arterial streets. 
Bicycle path shall be constructed on both sides of all arterial streets. They may be 
constructed concurrent with road construction or deferred and guaranteed by the posting of 
surety. A required sidewalk may be waived as determined by the city engineer when 
bicycle paths provide adequate pedestrian circulation. 
Where provided, sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide. Sidewalk sub-base shall 
be 95% compacted density. They shall be constructed of concrete having a compressive 
strength of 2,500 pounds per square inch at 28 days. The fiber mesh concrete thickness 
shall be six nches across driveways. In commercial areas, thickness shall be six inches. In 
other areas, thickness shall be four inches. The cross slope shall be one-quarter inch per 
foot. Bicycle paths shall be eight feet wide and shall be constructed in accordance with the 
current FDOT Bicycle Facilities Planning and Design Manual. If not specified, the FDOT 
manual shall prevail. 
t. ?Bridges and bridge culverts. Where a subdivision is traversed by or develops canals, 
watercourses, lakes, streams, waterways or channels, bridges or culverts shall be provided 
as necessary to facilitate the proposed street system. The bridge or culvert requirement is 
subject to the agency having jurisdiction over above enumerated facilities. Bridges shall be 
designed pursuant to current State Department of Transportation practices and 
specifications and shall include planning for utility systems installation. Low maintenance 
materials shall be used. The bridge design loading shall be in accordance with anticipated 
loads. Bridge or culvert shall include sidewalk as indicated by road requirements above. 
Barrier between walkway and traffic is required per FDOT safety standards. 
u. ?Median strips. Median strips that are part of a dedicated or deeded right-of-way may only 
be used for a public purpose under the auspices of the city or a public utility. Where an 
applicant desires or is required to beautify a median strip in a subdivision, the applicant 
may do so by placing grass, shrubs, and/or approved ground cover within the median strip 
in accordance with article XIV, Landscaping. The homeowner association shall be 
responsible for maintenance. 
v. ?Subdivision entranceways. Subdivision entranceways consisting of wall, fences, gates, 
rock piles or the like are not permitted within the median strip or other areas in a dedicated 
or deeded right-of-way. Entranceways, if divided, shall be divided by a raised or 
landscaped median strip and shall be not less than two lanes each 12 or more feet wide. 
Decorative entranceways shall be constructed upon plots of land adjacent to the right-of-
way in compliance with the land development code and building codes and placed so as 
not to constitute a traffic hazard. A guard house located so as not to create a traffic hazard 
may be constructed at the entrance to a development having private streets. 
Where an applicant is specifically permitted by the city to construct decorative entrances, 
structures, or landscaping within the right-of-way of any street, the applicant or community 
homeowners' association shall provide an adequate bond to guarantee maintenance for a 
specified period and to provide for removal for such structures and for landscaping at the 
end of such period on order by the city for cause. The city shall not accept any liability or 
responsibility for maintenance for decorative entrances, structures, or landscaping in 
rights-of-way. Such improvements shall be designed in such a manner so as to not 
obstruct desirable visibility or restrict turning movements. 
w. ?Private roads. No new private streets shall be created unless the applicant establishes a 
road maintenance agreement, or other means satisfactory to the city attorney, to provide 
for proper maintenance. The parties to such agreement shall be responsible for 
construction, maintenance and control of such roadways. 
(j) ?Permanent survey monuments . Permanent reference monuments and all other survey markers are 
to be installed as per Florida Statutes chapter 177. 
(k) ?Commercial and industrial subdivisions. Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall comply with all 
of the requirements of this ordinance, except that local streets shall be designed according to the 
arterial street typical section contained in these regulations. 
(l) ?Mobile home subdivisions. New and the expansion of existing mobile home developments shall 
comply with all of the requirements of the land development code and the Code of Ordinances of the 
City of Sebastian. Mobile home developments shall be classified as either rental trailer parks for use 
as temporary and/or transient residence purposes with single entity ownership or as permanent 
residence areas with individual ownership of contiguous lots in a condominium or cooperative 
association. The "association" shall function with unified control as a single-ownership entity. Mobile 
home developments are intended to provide planned space for occupancy of prefabricated, 
detached, transportable, single-family dwelling units containing all utility and sanitary conveniences, 
including electrical and plumbing connections, which may be attached to approved permanent utility 
systems. To retain mobility, the undercarriage shall remain attached to the mobile home unit. 
    Subdivisions shall provide a common structure that is easily accessible to all residents and shall 
meet the following provisions: 
(1) ?Storm shelters must be constructed to withstand a 120-mile per hour wind load utilizing chapter 
12 of the Standard Building Code for engineering standards. 
(2) ?Storm shelters must be provided to 20% of the proposed total number of residents of the 
mobile home subdivision. The proposed total number of the residents shall be determined 
utilizing two residents per single-family lot. 
(3) ?Storm shelters must be designed to provide a minimum of 20 square feet of net floor area per 
resident. Floor areas shall not include bathrooms, corridors, or other areas that cannot be used 
for temporarily lodging of a resident in case of an emergency. Storm shelters may be utilized as 
community buildings, but should be designed with minimal glass exposure. 


Sec. 54-4-19.12. - Street identification and traffic control. 
(a) ?Street identification signs. Street name signs shall be erected at all street intersections. Street name 
signs shall carry the street name approved on the subdivision plat as well as the approved street 
number if practical. Street identification signs shall be in conformance with the Manual on Uniform 
Traffic Control Devices. 
(b) ?Traffic control devices. The following traffic control devices regulations shall apply to all 
development including subdivisions. The applicant shall install all required traffic control devices 
based on design requirements, including but not limited to, traffic signals, information and warning 
signs, acceleration or deceleration lanes, lane delineators, and other necessary traffic control 
devices on all roads within and interfacing with the subdivision and impacted by the subdivision 
development. Markings and signing shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(c) ?Street lighting. The following street lighting regulations shall apply to subdivisions. The applicant 
shall install and be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of street lights in 
accordance with this article and the street lights, poles, fixed equipment, and any and all fixtures and 
equipment germane to the subdivision development will be installed at no cost to the city. The city 
shall pay only energy costs associated with the operation of the street lights installed in accordance 
with this article within subdivisions located within the city. 
(1) ?Location of street lighting. Street lights shall be installed at each street intersection, at mid-
block locations where the distance between intersections exceeds 1,000 feet, and at the end of 
each cul-de-sac exceeding 500 feet. Such lights shall be required on interior streets and may be 
required on alleys, boundary streets, and access paths if the city council finds that the 
anticipated frequency of usage makes such requirement reasonable for public safety and 
welfare. Wherever, in the opinion of the city engineer, a dangerous condition is created by sharp 
curves or irregularities in street alignment, additional lights shall be required. The street lights 
and mounting poles shall be a type approved by the city engineer and shall be wired for 
underground service except where overhead service is permitted. 
(2) ?Special assessments or taxing district. The applicant shall place deed restrictions covering the 
property to be developed which state that the owners of property within the subdivision are 
subject to assessment by the city under a legally constituted improvement or special taxing 
district or by a property owners' association or a condominium or cooperative association as 
defined by Florida law for the cost of maintenance and operation of such street lights. Upon 
completion of the development, street lights shall be owned, operated and maintained 
separately or jointly by a property owners' association, or a condominium or cooperative 
association as defined by Florida law, and the public utility furnishing the electrical service. 


ARTICLE XX. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 


Sec. 54-4-20.1. - General regulations for planned unit development (PUD). 
    The following regulations shall be applicable to all Planned Unit Development Districts: 
(a) ?Purpose and intent of planned unit development. The purpose and intent of the PUD district is 
to: 
(1) ?Achieve innovative and creative design and a high level of amenities within residential and 
nonresidential developments; 
(2) ?Promote efficient use of land by facilitating more cost effective and environmentally 
sensitive site planning, including the arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land 
use and facilities; 
(3) ?Stimulate opportunities for varied housing types; 
(4) ?Conserve and protect the natural environment including wetlands, natural habitat, 
drainage corridors, flood prone lands, and other environmentally sensitive lands; 
(5) ?Provide for more useable and suitably located open space and recreation facilities and 
other public and common facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional 
land development procedures; and 
(6) ?Achieve harmonious building and site designs. 
Although the PUD provides opportunities for unique concepts, a planned unit development 
(PUD) district shall comply with the community character as promoted by the city council and 
shall be designed to limit impacts of the development internally within the confines of the PUD 
through compliance with the regulations established in the comprehensive plan and as 
stipulated in the land development code. 
(b) ?Size and dimension regulations. Within all planned unit development districts the location, size, 
dimensions, and design of yards, building setbacks, points of vehicular access, parking areas, 
building characteristics, and all other planned site improvements shall provide for: 
• ?Safe and convenient internal vehicular circulation, including access and sufficient area for 
effective delivery of emergency services such as fire protection; 
• ?Buildings with safe entry and exit from the front and the rear of respective buildings; and 
• ?Convenient, well-landscaped, and designed pedestrian ways and open space systems. 
All PUD zoned properties shall comply with the specific size and dimension standards in section 
54-2-5.11-14 as well as the following size and dimension criteria that shall be applicable 
throughout the PUD district: 
(1) ?Maximum density/intensity and size and dimension criteria. The density and intensity of 
development within PUD districts shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan future 
land use map designations. The density and intensity expressed in comprehensive plan is 
the maximum density/intensity that can be achieved. However, the maximum 
density/intensity is not guaranteed by right. Maximum gross residential densities shall be 
construed to represent the maximum allowable units which may be constructed on the 
gross land area, determined by dividing the "maximum allowable units" by the "gross land 
area" (i.e., dwelling units/gross land area). Gross land area shall be construed to represent 
all land under common ownership proposed for residential development. 
Density designations shall be restricted or reduced for the following circumstances: 
• ?Waters of the city shall not be included as gross land area. 
• ?No development shall be permitted within jurisdictional lands and waters of the state or 
federal government, except in cases where agencies having jurisdiction determine 
that development rights exist. Reference section 54-2-5.10(b). 
In reviewing applications/site plans for development of particular building sites, approval of 
the specific density/intensity and size and dimension requirements shall be based on the 
following: 
a. ?Privacy. The building setback shall maintain privacy within residential dwelling units on 
and off site. These setbacks shall take into consideration the location and size of 
windows and their relation to public and semipublic areas, streets, other on- or off-site 
residential and nonresidential developments, windows and available as well as 
proposed screening. 
b. ?Light and air. The building setbacks shall provide adequate light and air, taking into 
consideration the relationship between window size and the provision of light and air. 
c. ?Mitigate potential adverse on- or off-site impacts. Size and dimension requirements 
imposed on new residential or nonresidential development shall be directed toward 
mitigating potential on- or off-site adverse impacts on land uses that are less intense 
than the use proposed within the planned unit development. 
d. ?Density/intensity, building configuration and open space. The arrangement and 
orientation of structures, open space, landscaping, and pedestrian and vehicular 
circulation shall: 
1. ?Generate a functional and an aesthetically pleasing environment for user groups; 
2. ?Protect neighborhood cohesiveness and stability of residential characters; 
3. ?Ensure compatible transitions in land use density and intensity; 
4. ?Protect environmentally sensitive areas, particularly wetlands and floodplains; 
5. ?Minimize impacts of flood hazards to development; 
6. ?Require that all applicable land development code regulations are satisfied 
including, but not limited to, performance criteria of chapter III and article XVIII, 
Site Plan Review Procedures; 
7. ?Ensure that the number of units proposed is suitable for the site and that the site 
plan incorporates design features that are consistent with the requirements of the 
land development code. 
The maximum intensity stipulated for nonresidential activities is stated in terms of 
floor area ratio (FAR). (Reference sections 54-2-5.12, 13.) The city shall reserve 
the power to mandate changes in the site plan as well as mandate reductions in 
the density and/or intensity of development proposed by an applicant/developer if 
the city finds that the proposed site plan does not satisfy provisions of the 
comprehensive plan and the land development code. (See FAR illustration in 
section 54-2-5.10(b).) 
(2) ?Setbacks. Minimum setbacks shall be stipulated for typical lots proposed in the conceptual 
development plan. The preliminary development plan shall provide detailed information on 
all setbacks for each respective lot. The city shall retain the authority to mandate minimum 
setbacks during site plan review based on specific site plan considerations and consistent 
with sound application of urban design principles and practices. Consideration shall be 
directed toward provision of usable open space, privacy, fenestration (i.e., roof line, 
placement and design of windows and doors), access to light and air, preservation of 
natural vegetation, landscaping, pedestrian and vehicular access, surface water 
management, pedestrian plazas, and other similar attributes of urban design which impact 
lot configuration, building layout and arrangement of open spaces. 
(c) ?Subdivision improvements and urban design amenities. In addition to requirements of article 
XIX, Subdivision, of this code, all urban design amenities such as signage, open space 
systems, pedestrian walkways, and street furniture shall reflect accepted principles and 
practices of urban design, including streetscape amenities which promote a harmonious and 
aesthetic environment for pedestrians and other user groups within the proposed development. 
This requirement shall be enforced in order to implement the purpose and intent of the PUD. To 
this end, development plans shall incorporate: 
(1) ?A city approved drainage system. The developer shall consider the relative advantages 
and disadvantages of curb and gutters, french drains, retention/detention, swales and other 
similar drainage system components and submit the proposed system to the city engineer 
for review. The city engineer shall make recommendations to the planning and zoning 
commission. After considering staff recommendations, the planning and zoning 
commission shall recommend appropriate action to the city council. After considering all 
recommendation, the city council shall make a final decision regarding the drainage system 
or combination of systems most appropriate for surface water management. The following 
factors shall be considered: 
a. ?Natural environmental conditions of the site; 
b. ?Existing and proposed future hydrological conditions of the site, including existing and 
proposed site elevations, amounts and rates of water run-off, water quality, and other 
related factors; 
c. ?Available drainage improvements on and off site; 
d. ?Intensity of proposed use, potential barriers to movement, and impacts of the drainage 
system alternatives on pedestrian and traffic circulation, aesthetics of the project and 
impacts on the surrounding area; and 
e. ?Potential contaminants or pollutants generated by land uses, motor vehicles, or other 
sources of pollutants and contaminants. 
(2) ?Sidewalks complying with subdivision code and improvements to enhance pedestrian 
movement. Sidewalks shall be planned and installed consistent with subdivision 
requirements. The sidewalks shall link vehicle use areas including parking areas with all 
principal buildings. The pedestrian circulation system shall include marked pedestrian 
crossings in order to separate vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(3) ?Open space and landscape furniture. Open space and landscape furniture, including open 
plazas, walkways, functional and aesthetic paving material, street benches, waste disposal 
receptacles, and sidewalk plantings may be used to promote the project's urban design 
and aesthetics. 
(4) ?Other subdivision improvements. All other subdivision improvements and project 
amenities shall be consistent with a unified urban design. 
(5) ?Loading docks. Loading docks are prohibited on interior streets. Required loading docks 
shall be located at the rear of all principal structures. Parking for trucks and all other 
company owned or controlled vehicles shall be located at the rear of all principal 
structures. 
(6) ?Storage areas. If the planning and zoning commission determines that a demonstrated 
necessity exists for outside storage or display due to the impracticality and 
unreasonableness of enclosure of such services, storage and display areas, in such case 
such service, storage and display areas or yards shall be screened by a continuous fence 
or wall by landscaping and berm system so as to provide a 90% opaque screen with a 
minimum height of five to eight feet, unless the same is demonstrated by the applicant to 
the planning and zoning commission's satisfaction to be impractical and unreasonable. 
(d) ?PUD requirements continuing. The requirements of article XX shall be continuing and 
enforceable against any PUD approved pursuant to this article. The requirements shall run with 
the land and shall be enforceable regardless of transition in ownership. Article XX shall be 
enforceable against open space, green space, landscape, and tree protection requirements, 
either existing or as hereinafter may be adopted. The respective uses shall be allowed only after 
a finding that the use complies with the appropriate conditional use criteria and all other 
applicable provisions of this code. The city council shall determine if such conditions and 
provisions are satisfied after first considering the recommendations of the planning and zoning 
commission. 


Sec. 54-4-20.2. - PUD zoning and conceptual development plan approval. 
(a) ?General procedures for conceptual development plan submittal and approval. Petitions for PUD 
zoning shall be submitted and processed as zoning amendments generally and in accordance with 
the following special procedures: 
(1) ?Pre-application conference. Prior to submitting a formal application for PUD zoning, the 
petitioner is required to confer with the city and other county, state or regional agencies having 
jurisdiction or permitting responsibilities impacting the proposed development. The petitioner is 
also required to submit a tentative land use sketch plan for review at the conference, and to 
obtain information on any projected plans, programs or other matters that may affect the 
proposed planned community. This pre-application conference should address, but not be 
limited to, such matters as: 
a. ?The proposed relationship between the anticipated project and surrounding uses, and the 
effect of the proposed development on the City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan Goals, 
Objectives, and Policies as well as other stated planning and development objectives of 
the city. Prior to receiving any PUD zoning district classification, the applicant must apply 
for and receive a planned unit development comprehensive plan future land use map 
designation for the subject property. 
b. ?The adequacy of existing and proposed streets, utilities, and other public facilities to serve 
the development. The applicant shall be required to submit narrative and graphic 
information that addresses concurrency management issues pursuant to article IX, 
Concurrency Management, of the land development code. 
c. ?The nature, design, and appropriateness of the proposed land use arrangement for the size 
and configuration of property involved. 
(2) ?Initial filing. Before a PUD shall be approved, an application for the PUD zoning and conceptual 
plan approval shall be filed with the requisite fee to the planning and growth management 
department. Such application shall contain the following materials or data in sufficient quantities 
for necessary referrals and records: 
a. ?Evidence that the proposed PUD district land uses, including the proposed density and/or 
intensity comply with the land uses, density and intensity allowable pursuant to the specific 
comprehensive plan future land use map designation for the subject property. The 
applicant must seek a comprehensive plan future land use map amendment if the 
proposed land uses, density or intensity proposed within the PUD are inconsistent with the 
comprehensive plan future land use map designation for the subject property. Such 
application may be filed concurrently with the application for the PUD district zoning; 
however, no action shall be binding on the PUD zoning petition until the necessary 
amendment to the comprehensive plan future land use map has been duly approved by 
the city and the State of Florida. 
b. ?A proposed conceptual development plan as prescribed in section 54-4-20.2(b) herein. 
c. ?Such other materials as the petitioner may feel is applicable to and in support of the PUD 
zoning. 
d. ?Any additional information as may be required by the planning and zoning commission or 
the city council at the time of any public hearing. 
(3) ?Fee for PUD zoning review. The minimum fee for filing said application shall be established by 
resolution of the city council. 
(4) ?Ownership requirements for application. A PUD zoning application shall be filed in the name or 
names of the record owner(s) of the property included in the PUD. However, the application 
may be filed by an applicant with an equitable interest in the property, or by an attorney or agent 
for the owner. All applications shall include a verified statement showing each and every 
individual person having a legal equitable and/or beneficial ownership interest in the property 
upon which the application for site plan approval is sought, except corporations, in which case 
the name and address of the corporation and principal executive officers will be sufficient. 
All land included for the purpose of development within a PUD district shall be owned or under 
the control of the petitioner for such zoning designation, whether that petitioner be an individual, 
partnership or corporation, or a group of individuals, partnerships or corporations. The petitioner 
shall present firm evidence of the unified control of the entire area within the proposed planned 
unit development and shall stipulate that, if the petitioner proceeds with the proposed 
development, the petitioner shall: 
a. ?Do so in accord with the officially approved conceptual PUD plan for the development, and 
such other conditions or modifications as may be attached to the PUD approval. 
b. ?Submit as part of the final development plan, agreements, covenants, contracts, deed 
restrictions, or sureties acceptable to the city council for completion of the undertaking in 
accordance with the adopted conceptual PUD plan. The same shall guarantee that the 
applicant/owner shall provide for the continuing operation and maintenance of all areas, 
functions, and facilities that are not to be dedicated. 
c. ?Bind the proposed development, including successors in title, to any commitments made 
under a and b preceding. 
(5) ?Review procedures for PUD zoning. Each applicant for PUD zoning shall submit a conceptual 
development plan for approval by the city council. The review process shall be carried out 
pursuant to this article. If the conceptual development plan and pud zoning are approved, the 
applicant shall submit a preliminary development plan for review by the planning and growth 
management department. 
a. ?Staff review. Ten copies of the conceptual development plan shall be submitted to the 
planning and growth management department for review by appropriate city staff and other 
professional consultants as deemed appropriate. 
b. ?Criteria for review. The staff review shall address the following criteria: 
1. ?Compliance with the City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan. 
2. ?Conformance with applicable ordinances. 
3. ?Land use compatibility. 
4. ?Adequate public facilities. 
5. ?Natural environment. 
6. ?Economic effects. 
7. ?Orderly development. 
8. ?Public interest. 
9. ?Other matters. Any other matters which the city may deem appropriate or that would 
be of particular relevance to the planning and zoning commission and/or the city 
council. 
c. ?Review by planning and zoning commission and city council. The planning and zoning 
commission shall hold a public hearing on each PUD zoning and conceptual development 
plan. The planning and zoning commission shall submit a written report and 
recommendation concerning the proposed changes of zoning and conceptual development 
plan to the city council for official action. 
1. ?Considerations by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning 
commission shall consider all aspects of the conceptual development plan necessary 
to meet the intent and requirements of this article and the comprehensive plan. The 
planning and zoning commission shall also consider the recommendations and 
comments in the planning and growth management director's report. The planning 
and zoning commission shall evaluate the conceptual development plan as defined in 
section 54-4-20.2(b). 
The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing and recommend to 
the city council based on whether the conceptual development plan is consistent with 
comprehensive plan and whether the conceptual development plan generally 
complies with development plan review considerations and performance criteria of 
article XVIII. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the development is 
consistent with the comprehensive plan. Furthermore, through the conceptual 
development plan the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development can 
and shall comply with all provisions of the land development code. The 
applicant/developer is not required to satisfy all regulations governing site plan 
approval at this stage of the review process. However, the applicant/developer must 
demonstrate through the conceptual development plan that the proposed 
development can reasonably be anticipated to satisfy site plan review requirements, 
including all performance criteria within the time frames mutually agreed upon. 
2. ?Action by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission 
shall recommend approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or denial of the 
rezoning request and conceptual development plan. The planning and growth 
management director shall prepare a written report of the planning and zoning 
commission's action, including the action, any condition stipulated by the commission, 
and, if the commission recommends denial, the report shall clearly state the reasons 
for denial and cite provisions of the code which support the decision of the 
commission. The report describing the planning and zoning commission's 
recommendation shall be in writing and forwarded to the city council. 
3. ?Consideration by city council. The city council shall consider the recommendations 
and comments of the planning and zoning commission and the planning and growth 
management director. The city council may make such investigations as may be 
deemed reasonably necessary to ensure conformity with the intent and requirements 
of this article. 
4. ?Action by the city council. The city council shall hold a public hearing and approve, 
approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the conceptual development plan, or 
may refer the plan to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. In 
making its decision, the city council shall consider all aspects of the conceptual 
development plan necessary to meet the intent and requirements of this article and 
the comprehensive plan. 
5. ?Conditions. In approving a conceptual development plan, the city council may 
establish such conditions and may require such modifications as shall ensure 
compliance with the PUD district standards and regulations and further, the city 
council may waive or modify subdivision, site plan or other zoning requirements 
otherwise applicable to the development when such waiver or conflict is not in conflict 
with the city's comprehensive plan or the intent and purpose of the land development 
code. 
6. ?Application for rezoning. In the event that a conceptual development plan shall be 
disapproved by the city council, the application for rezoning shall thereby be deemed 
to be denied. In the event that the city council shall approve, or approve with 
modifications or conditions, a conceptual development plan, the city council shall 
thereupon grant with conditions the rezoning application accompanying said plan. 
7. ?Additional information. Prior to, or in addition to, approval of a conceptual 
development plan, and upon a determination that additional information is necessary 
for proper review of a planned unit development project, the city council may require 
the submission of additional information by the applicant. The review of such 
additional information shall follow the procedures applicable to the review of the 
conceptual development plan. 
8. ?Amendments of conceptual development plans. Once a conceptual development plan 
has been approved, and there is cause for amendment of the same, or any portion 
thereof, such amendment shall be processed in a like manner as the original 
submission. However, there shall be no requirement to file an amended rezoning 
application unless the proposed amendment would so dictate. 
9. ?Prescribed time limit for development. The city council may approve a planned unit 
development application subject to a prescribed time limit of not more than 18 months 
for the submission and approval of a preliminary development plan. Upon the failure 
of the developer to meet this requirement, the conceptual plan becomes void. 
The prescribed time limit for the submission approval of a preliminary development 
plan may be extended by the city council for good cause if the developer presents 
evidence within the one and one-half year period which demonstrates that the 
developer has progressed in good faith toward implementing the conceptual 
development plan. The developer shall apply for the extension at least 90 days before 
the conceptual plan approval becomes void. 
(b) ?Required form and content of conceptual development plan. An official application for PUD zoning 
shall be accompanied by a conceptual development plan that includes as a minimum, the following: 
(1) ?Vicinity map. A vicinity map drawn to a minimum scale of one inch = 200 feet which clearly 
shows the site in relationship to its surroundings, and an aerial photograph made within the last 
four years at a scale of at least one inch = 200 feet showing all property within 1,000 feet of the 
project boundaries is required. 
(2) ?Property boundaries. A certified survey delineating the location and dimensions of all boundary 
lines of the development, and of any contiguous lands, including those separated only by a 
street, canal, or similar feature, in which the developer or property owner presently has any 
legal interest. 
(3) ?Existing conditions. The approximate location, nature, and extent of all existing easements, 
streets, buildings, land uses, historic sites, zoning, tree groupings, environmentally sensitive 
areas, wetlands, watercourses, and general U.S. Coast and Geodetic sheet topographic 
contours on the site; the location of areas within the A, AE, and VE Zones as delineated on the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the City 
of Sebastian; the names of the property owners of record and existing zoning and land uses for 
all property within 300 feet of the perimeter of the PUD; and the approximate location and width 
of all existing or platted streets, drainage ways, utilities, exceptional land characteristics, and 
similar features contiguous to the site. 
(4) ?Future land use map designations and existing zoning. The boundaries of underlying future 
land use map designations and existing zoning districts. 
(5) ?Development plan. 
a. ?Legal description. A legal description of the land comprising the PUD project. 
b. ?Proof of ownership. Legal instruments acceptable to the city attorney that clearly indicate 
persons having a legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the subject property. Where 
ownership resides with a publicly held corporation whose stock is traded on a nationally 
recognized stock exchange, the name and address of the corporation and all of its principal 
executive officers will be sufficient. The documentation shall also include an affirmation that 
no other persons have claims or interests (known to the applicant, developer, or owners) 
which might affect their right to develop the entire PUD project as proposed. 
c. ?Land use. The total project acreage, approximate location of each land use and proposed 
intensity, acreage by each proposed land use, dwelling unit types, general types of 
nonresidential uses, open spaces, recreational facilities, and other proposed uses. The 
quantitative land use data shall be illustrated in a table that clearly depicts the total number 
of acres allocated to each active land use, conservation uses, water bodies, recreation 
areas, and other similar allocation. The table shall also depict total acres. The percent of 
land area allocated to each category of land shall equal 100%. 
d. ?Circulation. Circulation facilities plan showing approximate locations and types of all access 
points and major streets. 
e. ?Conceptual drainage plan. A conceptual drainage plan designed by a Florida registered 
professional engineer. 
f. ?Location and densities of proposed residential activities. General location and proposed 
densities for each dwelling unit type and approximate number of dwelling units by type. 
g. ?Location and square footage of proposed nonresidential activities. Approximate location 
and square footage of each nonresidential land use by general type, e.g., offices, 
neighborhood commercial, industrial, etc., together with description of general 
characteristics of proposed building and/or facility improvements. 
(6) ?Written material. 
a. ?Planning objectives. A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the PUD through 
the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a 
description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the 
assumptions and choices made by the applicant. The statement shall include a proviso that 
provisions of the comprehensive plan and land development code shall be satisfied. 
b. ?Development schedule. A proposed binding development schedule indicating the 
approximate starting and completion dates for the entire project and any phases thereof, 
together with appropriate identification and conceptual description of such phases. 
c. ?Environmental impact statement. A statement explaining the positive and negative 
environmental impacts of the proposed development on: a) environmentally fragile lands 
including any lands designated "Conservation" on the official zoning map, as well as any 
other wetlands, native habitats, flood plain, and any other significant natural features; b) 
natural vegetation, including general tree removal estimates; c) impact of proposed grading 
plan and drainage system improvements; and d) other significant natural features of site. 
d. ?Public facility impact statement. A statement identifying the estimated impact of the 
proposed development on public facilities including: a) quantity of wastewater generated; 
b) quantity of potable water required; c) description of recreation facilities proposed; d) 
estimated number of school age children expected within the development; e) estimated 
property tax and/or sales tax revenue generated by the project by phase; and f) any other 
positive or negative significant public facility impact. 
e. ?Additional information. Any other additional material and information as the planning and 
growth management director, planning and zoning commission or city council may 
reasonably require. 


Sec. 54-4-20.3. - Planned unit development (PUD) preliminary development plan and preliminary plat 
review. 
(a) ?General procedures for preliminary PUD development plan and preliminary plat submittal and 
approval. The granting of a rezoning to a planned unit development (PUD) and the approval of its 
accompanying conceptual development plan by the city council shall constitute authority for the 
applicant to submit a preliminary development plan. The preliminary development plan shall be filed, 
processed and reviewed pursuant to this section. The preliminary PUD plan shall include a 
development plan and a preliminary plat in accordance with article XIX. 
(1) ?Filing preliminary development plan. No preliminary development plan shall be filed unless it 
has been prepared on the basis of a duly approved conceptual development plan. The 
preliminary development plan shall be submitted within the requisite time limit, as established at 
conceptual development plan approval or as may be extended by city council action. 
(2) ?Fee for preliminary development plan review. The minimum fee for filing said application shall 
be established by resolution of the city council. 
(3) ?Ownership requirements for application. The ownership requirements for filing a preliminary 
development plan shall be the same as for filing the conceptual development plan as herein set 
forth. 
(4) ?Review procedures for preliminary development plan. Each applicant for a PUD shall submit a 
preliminary development plan for review by city officials. The review process shall be carried out 
pursuant to this article. If the preliminary development plan is approved, the applicant shall 
submit a final plat for review by city officials. 
a. ?Staff review. Ten copies of the preliminary development plan shall be submitted to the 
planning and growth management department for review by appropriate city staff and other 
professional consultants as deemed appropriate. 
b. ?Criteria for review. The staff review shall address the following criteria: 
1. ?Compliance with subdivision regulations. 
2. ?Compliance with zoning regulations. 
3. ?Compliance with the comprehensive plan. 
4. ?Compliance with the conceptual development plan. 
c. ?Review by planning and zoning commission and city council. The planning and zoning 
commission shall hold a public hearing on each preliminary development plan. If approved 
by the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall also review the plan and 
approve said plan prior to submission of any final development plan. 
1. ?Considerations by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning 
commission shall consider all aspects of the preliminary development plan necessary 
to meet the intent and requirements of this article and the comprehensive plan. The 
planning and zoning commission shall also consider the recommendations and 
comments of the staff. The planning and zoning commission shall recommend to the 
city council whether the development plan and preliminary plat comply with the 
conceptual development plan, the comprehensive plan, and the land development 
code, as well as performance criteria of chapter III, articles IX through XVI. The 
burden of proof shall reside with the applicant/developer to demonstrate compliance. 
2. ?Action by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission 
shall recommend approval, approval with modifications or conditions, or disapproval. 
The recommendation and reasons for the planning and zoning commission action 
shall be in writing and forwarded to the city council. 
3. ?Consideration by city council. The city council shall consider the recommendations 
and comments of the planning and zoning commission and staff. The city council may 
make such investigations as may be deemed reasonably necessary to ensure 
conformity with the intent and requirements of this article. 
4. ?Action by the city council. The city council shall hold a public hearing and shall 
approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the preliminary 
development plan, or may refer the plat to the planning and zoning commission for 
further consideration. In making its decision, the city council shall consider all aspects 
of the preliminary development plan necessary to meet the intent and requirements of 
this article and the comprehensive plan. 
5. ?Conditions. In approving a preliminary development plan, the city council may 
establish such conditions and may require such modifications as shall assure 
compliance with the planned unit development standards and regulations. 
6. ?Requests for additional information. Prior to, or in addition to, approval of a preliminary 
development plan, and upon a determination that additional information is necessary 
for proper review of a planned unit development project, the city council may require 
the submission of additional information by the applicant. The review of such 
additional information shall follow the procedures applicable to the review of the 
preliminary development plan. 
7. ?Amendments of preliminary development plans. Once a preliminary development plan 
has been approved, and there is cause for amendment of the same, or any portion 
thereof, such amendment shall be processed in a like manner as the original 
submission. However, there shall be no requirement to file an amended conceptual 
development plan, unless the proposed amendment would so dictate. 
8. ?Prescribed time limit for development. The city council shall approve a preliminary 
development plan application subject to a prescribed time limit of not more than 18 
months for the submission and approval of a final PUD plan. If the preliminary 
development plan has not been implemented within the required time period, the 
preliminary development plan becomes void. If the developer cannot meet this 
requirement, the developer may request an extension of the preliminary development 
plan. The request for such an extension shall be made no later than 90 days before 
the preliminary development plan becomes void. The prescribed time limit for the 
submission and approval of the final PUD plan may be extended by the city council, 
for good cause if the developer presents evidence within the eighteen month period 
which demonstrates that the developer has progressed in good faith toward 
implementing the preliminary development plan. 
9. ?Changes in preliminary development plan. If a final PUD plan is submitted which 
includes changes from the approved preliminary development plan, the planning and 
growth management director shall review the plan to determine the effect of the PUD 
and consistency with applicable ordinances and make a recommendation to the 
planning and zoning commission. The planning and growth management director may 
approve minor site plan modifications as provided for in article XVIII. The planning and 
growth management director may request that the planning and zoning commission 
determine whether any changes are of such significance that the preliminary 
development plan should be re-submitted to the planning and zoning commission for 
review and approval by the city council. In any case of doubt, the revised preliminary 
development plan shall be re-submitted for a recommendation by the planning and 
zoning commission and approval of the city council. 
(b) ?Required form and content for preliminary development plan and preliminary plat. A preliminary 
development plan shall be submitted along with all of the material included in the approved 
conceptual development plan. No permit for construction of subdivision improvements shall be 
issued until the preliminary plat and development plan have been duly approved. The preliminary 
development plan shall include the conceptual plan together with the following: 
(1) ?Written material. 
a. ?Development schedule. A development schedule indicating the approximate date when 
construction of the PUD or stages of the PUD can be expected to begin and be completed. 
b. ?Quantitative data. 
1. ?Total number of dwelling units by type. 
2. ?Total parcel size. 
3. ?Proposed lot or building site coverage by buildings and structure. 
4. ?Proposed lot or building coverage by impervious surfaces, other than buildings and 
structures. 
5. ?Gross and net residential density. 
6. ?Proposed amount of open space. 
7. ?Proposed amount of public lands including all dedicated rights-of-way, easements, 
and other lands dedicated for public facilities and services. 
8. ?Internal circulation plan depicting all proposed streets, alleys and ingress/egress 
locations. 
c. ?Updated environmental impact statement and environmental survey. A statement 
explaining any additional information that may have been gathered or calculated since the 
approval of the conceptual development plan concerning any positive or negative 
environmental impacts that may be associated with the development. This statement shall 
include all environmental information that may be submitted as part of the development of 
regional impact (DRI) review process, as applicable. The updated environmental impact 
statement shall also include an environmental survey showing the existing and proposed 
site conditions, including contours at two-foot intervals; watercourses; areas within the 
coastal high hazard area; floodplains; wetlands; or environmentally sensitive wetlands; 
waters of the state, survey of wetlands, and/or transitional wetlands under the jurisdiction 
of the state or federal government; native habitats; other unique natural features; areas of 
environmental concern; historic features; and trees and vegetative cover shown in a tree 
survey. The environmental survey shall identify trees on the site, drainage, and the various 
aesthetic characteristics of the subject site and of adjacent areas, and shall identify those 
portions of the area deemed to be of critical environmental sensitivity. The planning and 
zoning commission may grant a waiver to the tree survey requirement upon 
recommendation by the planning and growth management director. In such case, an aerial 
photograph denoting the tree canopy shall be submitted in lieu of the tree survey. 
d. ?Updated public facility impact statement, including a concurrency management plan. A 
statement identifying any additional data or information that may have been gathered or 
calculated since the approval of the conceptual development plan, concerning impacts of 
the development on public facilities including strategy for meeting article IX concurrency 
management system requirements for each of the following: 
(a) ?Method and design for accommodating anticipated wastewater to be generated by 
the development; 
(b) ?Planned recreation and open space improvements; 
(c) ?Method and design improvements required to supply anticipated potable water 
needs; 
(d) ?System design for stormwater management projected improvements; 
(e) ?Traffic generation and traffic assignments together with proposed improvements to 
accommodate projected trips while maintaining adopted level of service standards; 
(f) ?Planned methods for accommodating projected solid waste generation; 
(g) ?Estimated number of school age children expected within the development and plans 
for accommodating their educational needs; 
(h) ?Estimated property tax and/or sales tax revenue generated by the project by phase; 
and 
(i) ?Any other positive or negative public facility impact. The statement shall also include 
all public facilities impact information that may be submitted as part of a development 
of regional impact (DRI) review process, as may be applicable. 
e. ?DRI information. If any planned unit development qualifies as a development of regional 
impact (DRI), as defined in chapter 380, F.S., such projects shall include all data submitted 
as part of the required Application for development approval (ADA). If the applicant is 
within 80% of the state's established DRI threshold, or if land ownership patterns in the 
vicinity of the site indicate DRI potential, the city shall require that the applicant obtain a 
binding letter from the state department of community affairs. In such case the city shall not 
grant a development order or site plan approval until the applicant has demonstrated 
through a binding letter that the project is not a DRI. 
f. ?Archeological and historic resource information. The location and nature of archeological 
sites and historic buildings that are located within the proposed PUD, and the intended use 
of each shall be included graphically on the preliminary plat. 
g. ?Additional information. Any other additional information or material, including a traffic 
impact analysis, which the city staff, planning and zoning commission or city council may 
reasonably require. 
(2) ?Graphic element of preliminary development plan. 
a. ?Plat. If the project involves the subdivision of land, then a preliminary plat, prepared by a 
Florida registered engineer shall be submitted. The preliminary plat shall be submitted in 
accordance with the provisions of the subdivision regulations. The surface water 
management plan meeting criteria of article XII, as well as other infrastructure components, 
including roadway improvements, water and wastewater facilities, and other scheduled 
infrastructure improvements shall be prepared by a Florida registered engineer. The 
preliminary plat shall include maps, data and written statements necessary to show at least 
the following: 
1. ?Proposed name of the PUD, title of map, name of city, and description of section, 
township and range. 
2. ?Name and address of record owners, applicant, and person preparing preliminary 
development plan. 
3. ?The locations and names of abutting subdivisions and the names of owners of record 
of adjacent acreage. 
4. ?Date, north arrow and graphic scale. 
5. ?Legal description and survey of the proposed PUD boundaries made and certified by 
the Florida registered land surveyor. 
6. ?Proposed lot or building site lines with dimensions, setbacks, and landscaped yards. 
Location and floor area size of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and 
other improvements. Designation of all dwelling unit types and number of units. Net 
residential density calculations. Plans for nonresidential uses shall include the square 
footage allocated to each respective use. 
7. ?Location, name and dimensions of all existing and proposed dedicated public lands 
and private parks and recreational areas and the conditions of such dedication. 
8. ?The width and location of any street or right-of-way shown upon the comprehensive 
plan within the PUD and the proposed width, location and grade of all streets 
proposed public or private, proposed on- or off-site by the applicant. Where private 
streets and roadways are proposed or where common areas are proposed legal 
instruments running with the land shall be provided which ensure perpetual 
maintenance. Include projected trips, trip assignments to roadway network, existing 
and projected levels of service on impacted linkages, and proposed traffic 
improvements, including new facilities, additional lanes, signalization improvements, 
acceleration/deceleration lanes, and related system enhancements. The support 
material must comply with concurrency management provisions of article IX. 
9. ?Location of closest available public water supply system and proposed preliminary 
design for water service improvements, including existing and proposed level of 
service, general location of facility improvements, and schematic drawings. The final 
construction drawing shall not be required prior to preliminary plan approval, but shall 
be required prior to commencement of the installation of such improvements. The 
support material must comply with concurrency management provisions of article IX. 
10. ?Area in square feet of each lot or building site, to be indicated in a rectangle within 
each lot or building site. 
11. ?Typical cross-sections of proposed streets, sidewalks, canals and ditches and other 
proposed improvements. 
12. ?Location of proposed wastewater collection system and proposed preliminary design 
of wastewater collection improvements, including proposed location of improvements, 
existing and proposed level of service, and schematic drawings. Final construction 
drawings shall not be required prior to preliminary development plan approval, but 
shall be required prior to commencing the installation of such facilities. The support 
material must comply with concurrency management provisions of article IX. 
13. ?Location of proposed improvements for collecting and discharging surface drainage 
and the preliminary design of such facilities, including the existing and proposed level 
of service, and schematic drawings. Final construction drawings shall not be required 
prior to preliminary development plan approval, but shall be submitted prior to 
commencing the installation of such facilities. The drainage plans shall comply with all 
provisions of article XII, Surface Water Management, as well as article IX, 
Concurrency Management. 
14. ?Location and preliminary design of proposed bridges or culverts which may be 
required, including the type of facility and general level of service as well as schematic 
drawings. Final construction drawings shall not be required prior to preliminary 
development plan approval, but shall be required prior to commencing the installation 
of such improvements. 
15. ?Proposed locations and preliminary designs for sidewalks, curbs, storm drainage 
facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, and flow facilities. 
16. ?Location and width of proposed permanent utility easements. The easements shall 
provide satisfactory access to existing rights-of-way or other open space shown upon 
the preliminary PUD plat. Permanent drainage easements shall also be shown. 
17. ?Where the preliminary PUD plat covers only a part of contiguous land owned by the 
applicant, a master phasing plan shall also be required unless the application certifies 
that the remaining real property shall be developed independently of the proposed 
PUD plat. 
18. ?The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD plat, including material and 
techniques used, such as landscape, fences and walls for screening and buffering. 
19. ?Location of wetlands and/or environmentally sensitive areas located within the site. 
Discuss any endangered wildlife habitats or vegetative communities, wellfield, aquifer 
recharge areas, wetlands that will be impacted by construction of stormwater runoff. 
b. ?Site plan. If the project requires site plan approval, a site plan shall be submitted. The site 
plan shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of article XVIII, Site Plan Review 
Procedures. The surface water management plan meeting criteria of article XII, as well as 
other infrastructure components, including roadway improvements, water and wastewater 
facilities, and other scheduled infrastructure improvements shall be prepared by a Florida 
registered engineer. The site plan shall include maps, data and written statements 
necessary. 
c. ?General appearance. Graphic presentation of the general features of proposed structures, 
excluding single-family detached dwellings, including: 
1. ?Floor plans and square footage of all multifamily and nonresidential buildings or 
structures; and 
2. ?Elevations, sections and/or perspectives as necessary to indicate the basic 
architectural intent, the height of buildings and structures, and the general window and 
door arrangements. 
d. ?Dedication or reservations of land for public use. The location and size, in acres or square 
feet, of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as open spaces, public parks, 
recreational areas, school sites, and similar public uses. The narrative shall demonstrate 
compliance with concurrency management requirements of article IX. 
e. ?Vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation and parking. The existing and proposed 
circulation system of arterial, collector, and local streets including off-street parking areas, 
service areas, loading areas, and major points of access to public rights-of-way (including 
major points of ingress and egress to the development). Notations of proposed ownership 
— public or private — shall be included where appropriate. The existing and proposed 
pedestrian and bicycle circulation system, including its interrelationship with the vehicular 
circulation system indicating proposed treatments of points of conflict. 
f. ?Open space and landscape plan. A general landscape and grading plan indicating the 
proposed modifications in the topography and ground cover together with a plan for design 
of open space systems and landscaping. The landscape plan shall comply with open 
space, landscape and tree preservation requirements of this article and other applicable 
provisions of this code, especially article XIV. 
g. ?Information concerning adjacent lands. Information on adjacent areas sufficient to indicate 
the relations between the proposed development and the adjoining areas, including: 
1. ?Land ownership within 300 feet of the exterior boundary of the property. 
2. ?Existing land use and designation on the comprehensive plan future land use map. 
3. ?Zoning classification. 
4. ?Circulation system. 
5. ?Density. 
6. ?Public facilities. 
7. ?Unique natural features. 
h. ?Additional information. Any additional graphic information required by the planning and 
zoning commission that is necessary to evaluate the character and impact of the proposed 
PUD. 


Sec. 54-4-20.4. - Subdivision construction approval. 
    Upon approval of the preliminary development plan for a subdivision, the developer may apply to the 
city engineer for approval of the construction drawings of the proposed subdivision. The procedures shall 
be the same as outlined in article XIX, Subdivisions. 


Sec. 54-4-20.5. - General procedure for final development plan review. 
(a) ?General procedure for final development plan submittal and approval. 
(1) ?Final development plan for a site plan. Upon completion of a site plan, the developer shall 
submit an as-built drawing of the site plan certifying that the site has been constructed in 
conformance with the approved preliminary development plan. The planning and growth 
management director shall review the final development plan and if the final development plan 
is in substantial conformity with the preliminary development plan as described in (4) below, the 
planning and growth management director shall approve the final development plan. 
(2) ?Final development plan for a plat. Upon completion of the construction of the subdivision, the 
developer shall submit a final plat and as-built drawings certifying that the subdivision has been 
constructed in compliance with the preliminary development plan. The final plat shall be 
compliant with section 54-4-19.5(c) through (f). The final development plan must be prepared in 
accordance with the approved preliminary development plan and shall not be considered 
approved by the city council and shall not be recorded in the records of Indian River County 
until it has been approved in a manner prescribed pursuant to section 54-4-19.5(c) through (f). 
A final plat may be prepared and submitted for the entire planned unit development at one time, 
or for the approved development stages on an individual basis. 
(3) ?Review final development plan. The review procedures for the final development plan shall be 
the same as the review procedures established for a final plan in section 54-4-19.5(c) through 
(f). If the final site plan includes any proposed changes, the final site plan shall be reviewed 
pursuant to procedures established for site plan review in article XVIII. 
(4) ?Substantial conformity with preliminary development plan required. The final development plan 
shall be in substantial conformity with the approved preliminary development plan. In achieving 
substantial conformity, no change authorized by this Subsection may cause any of the following: 
a. ?A change in the use or character of the planned unit development; 
b. ?An increase in overall coverage of structures; 
c. ?An increase in the intensity of use, or the density; 
d. ?An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities; 
e. ?A reduction in approved open space; 
f. ?A reduction in required pavement widths; or 
g. ?A violation of a specific requirement or condition of the land development code. 
Changes, erasures, modifications, additions or revisions shall not be made to a final plat after 
the city council approval has been given, unless the final plat is resubmitted for approval, except 
as required by law for clarification. 
All changes in use, re-arrangement of lots and blocks, changes in the provision of common 
open spaces, and other changes except those listed in the paragraph above, may be allowed at 
the discretion of the city council. Such amendments may be made only if they are shown to be 
required by: 1) changes in conditions that have occurred since the preliminary development 
plan was approved; or 2) by changes in adopted city policy 
(5) ?Failure to comply with approved final development plan. Failure to comply with the 
requirements of the approved PUD, any conditions imposed in its approval, including time 
conditions, shall constitute a violation of this article. Upon finding by the city council that the 
developer has failed to comply with the conditions of any staging plans or prescribed time limits, 
the approval of the PUD shall be automatically terminated. Prior to continuing with the planned 
unit development, the developer shall reapply to the city council for approval to continue. The 
city council may authorize the petitioner to continue under the terms of the PUD and site plan 
approval or may require the developer to re-submit the application in conformance with any step 
outlined in the procedure for preliminary development plan or final plat approval. No subsequent 
plan or re-approval shall effect an increase in the overall project density, intensity or change in 
use as established in the site plan. 
(6) ?Occupancy and use of premises. Prior to the use or occupancy of any portion of the planned 
unit development project, the developer must satisfy all the provisions of the final development 
plan stipulated herein, and obtain all necessary permits and a certificate of occupancy. 


Sec. 54-4-20.6. - Ownership of open space and landscaped areas. 
    All open space required by this chapter shall be either private, reserved for common use, or 
dedicated to the public. All required open space shall be reserved as such through appropriate deed 
restrictions that cannot be removed without the consent of the city council. Private open space shall be 
owned in fee simple title as part of a lot or parcel in private ownership. The use of private open space 
shall be reserved and limited through appropriate deed restrictions. The deed restriction shall require the 
property owner to maintain the private open space in perpetuity. 
    All open space reserved for common use shall ultimately be owned in fee simple by an organization 
of property owners within the PUD plat. The organization shall be established by the applicant, and all 
organizational documents, including, but not limited to, article of incorporation, bylaws and restrictive 
deed covenants, shall be submitted to the city attorney for approval prior to recording in the public records 
of the county and filing with the secretary of state. The organization shall be responsible for the 
maintenance of all common open spaces. The organization shall be empowered to assess reasonable 
maintenance fees upon the owners of real property within the PUD plat for the maintenance of the 
common open space. 
(a) ?All open space reserved for common use shall be conveyed to the organization prior to or at 
the time when two-thirds of all the dwelling units of the PUD plat under development have been 
sold. Conveyance shall be by a general warranty deed in fee simple absolute, acceptable to the 
city attorney. The deed shall include a deed restriction providing for the perpetual maintenance 
of the common open space by the organization. 
(b) ?The organization may offer to convey the common open space to the city at no cost. If the city 
accepts the offer, then the conveyance shall be of general warranty deed in fee simple absolute, 
acceptable to the city attorney. Upon acceptance, the open space shall be available for use by 
the general public. The city shall not accept a conveyance of common open space unless 
arrangements acceptable to it are made for the continued maintenance of the open space, 
which arrangements may include maintenance by the city. 
(c) ?Open space dedicated to the public shall be open to the general public. 
(d) ?All landscaped yards shall be owned in fee simple as part of an approved lot or parcel, and the 
landscaped yards shall be reserved and controlled through appropriate deed restriction. The 
deed restrictions shall require the property owner to maintain the landscaping in perpetuity. 


Sec. 54-4-20.7. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    In the event of a noncompliance with this article, the planning and growth management director, or a 
designated representative, shall have the authority to suspend construction activity and revoke any 
building permit issued under this article, and to take all actions necessary to halt construction until such 
time as the provisions herein are complied with. In the event legal action is necessary, and costs are 
incurred by the city in forcing compliance, these expenses shall be borne by the developer or parties 
violating the terms of this article. 


ARTICLE XXI. - PERFORMANCE OVERLAY DISTRICTS 


Sec. 54-4-21.1. - Intent. 
    The intent of this section is to describe certain Performance Overlay zones used to impose special 
development restrictions on identified areas. The location of Performance Overlay zones is established by 
the City of Sebastian based on the need for special protective measures in that area. The underlying uses 
in the area, as determined in chapter II of this code, remain undisturbed by the creation of the 
Performance Overlay zone. The Performance Overlay zone merely imposes additional or different 
development standards than those that would otherwise apply. 


Sec. 54-4-21.2. - Purpose. 
    The overall purpose of these regulations is to: 
(a) ?Promote an attractive and inviting corridor; 
(b) ?Provide for a sufficient amount of attractive and well-maintained landscaping to complement 
buildings and structures within the corridor; 
(c) ?Encourage development of attractive buildings within the corridor; 
(d) ?Ensure unobtrusive and orderly signage that averts a garish and visually cluttered appearance 
along the corridor; 
(e) ?Encourage creative designs and buildings of quality; 
(f) ?Foster creative approaches that result in buildings of enduring character through use of quality 
design and building materials; and 
(g) ?Make the Overlay Districts consistent with their vision statements. 


Sec. 54-4-21.3. - Special regulations and exemptions. 
(a) ?Exemptions. Within the Performance Overlay Districts, the following exemptions shall apply: 
(1) ?Single-family development and redevelopment shall be exempt from all Performance Overlay 
District special development regulations. 
(2) ?Industrial and storage buildings located within an industrial district shall be exempted from 
foundation planting landscaping requirements and architectural/building requirements only if no 
building facades abut a residentially zoned area or front on public or platted roads. All industrial 
buildings shall satisfy the color requirements. 
(3) ?Electrical substations and similar public or quasi-public facilities that prohibit access by the 
public onto the site may be exempted from architectural/building requirements, if the exempted 
building(s) and equipment will be visually screened from adjacent properties and roadways. 
(b) ?Uses. With the following exceptions, uses within the Performance Overlay Districts shall be as 
specified in article V of this code. 
(1) ?Outdoor displays. No outdoor displays shall be permitted unless approved by the planning and 
zoning commission pursuant to section 54-3.10.2(d). 
(2) ?Uses with vehicle and service bays. Uses involving vehicle and service bays that are oriented 
perpendicular to CR 512 are allowed only if a Type "B" buffer with a four-foot high opaque 
feature is provided along the site's CR 512 frontage. 
(3) ?Underground utilities services required. Where new utilities services (e.g. electrical, phone, 
cable) are provided to project sites, such service shall be installed underground. 
(4) ?Connection to pedestrian systems. Projects fronting on roads with existing or planned/required 
sidewalks and/or bikeways shall provide a pedestrian path from the project to the existing or 
future sidewalk and/or bikeway. Said pedestrian path shall have a minimum width of five feet, 
shall consist of a rigid surface meeting Florida Accessibility Code requirements, and may 
include properly marked areas that cross parking lots and driveways. 


Sec. 54-4-21.4. - Plan approval. 
    In the Performance Overlay Districts, development and redevelopment requiring administrative, 
minor modification or site plan approval and exterior renovations shall comply with the districts plan 
requirements. The area of development for such projects shall be the area of the site containing buildings, 
additions, structures, facilities or improvements proposed by the applicant or required to serve those 
items proposed by the applicant. 


Sec. 54-4-21.5. - Supplementary requirements for site plan submittal and review. 
(a) ?Preliminary review of site plans. Preliminary staff review of site plans is mandatory, including review 
of landscaping and tree preservation plans, architectural plans, lighting plans, and color and exterior 
finish samples. 
(b) ?Site plan review. The drawings listed below are to be submitted in a minimum 24-inch by 36-inch 
format, and are to be the largest scale, which will fit on a 24-inch by 36-inch format. In addition to 
normal site plan review submittal requirements, the following are to be submitted at the time of site 
plan review: 
(1) ?Site plan. This plan shall indicate setbacks and all site development as required by the site plan 
ordinance, and shall depict: building orientation; locations of signage, location of service areas, 
dumpsters, loading zones, mechanical equipment, and any other "visually offensive elements" 
as described in these requirements, including locations and specifications of screening devices. 
(2) ?Tree plan. This plan shall indicate location, diameter at breast height (dbh) four and one-half 
feet above grade, and species of all trees six-inch caliper (measured at dbh) and larger. 
(3) ?Landscape plan. The landscape plan may be incorporated into the site plan. It shall include 
calculations demonstrating compliance with article XIV and the special landscaping 
requirements as established within each district. 
(4) ?Building floor plans. This plan shall depict general location of entries and exits, restrooms, and 
general uses. 
(5) ?Roof plan. This plan shall indicate roof type, slope, and any offensive elements (as described in 
these requirements) and descriptions of screening devices. 
(6) ?Building elevations. This plan shall include all exterior-building elevations, including all items 
affecting the appearance of the building, including roof design, complete description of exterior 
building materials, exterior building colors, all loading zones, mechanical and electrical 
equipment locations and their required screening devices, and signs attached to buildings. 
(7) ?Certifications. The plan shall include certifications from the project architect or engineer that 
proposed roof plans and elevation plans satisfy the Overlay Districts architectural/building 
standards. 
(8) ?Other requirements. Prior to site plan release, applicants shall submit to planning and growth 
management department three sets of the following and shall obtain planning staff approval of 
each component: 
a. ?Site lighting plan. The site lighting plan may be incorporated into the site plan. It must 
indicate the site lighting plan, as well as a light fixture schedule with cut sheets (written 
specifications and pictorial representation including photometric chart) for all site lighting 
fixtures. This includes any site lighting fixtures attached to buildings. 
b. ?Sign elevations (minimum scale: three-quarters inch equals one foot). These are to be 
detailed drawings of building and site signage including all items affecting the appearance 
of signs, including but not limited to: dimensions, area in square feet, complete description 
of finish materials and their colors, color samples (minimum size three inches by five 
inches, using Pantone Matching System ® numbers with color number on back of each 
sample) and method of illumination. This is required for all outdoor signs except those 
which cannot be determined because the occupancy of the space is not known. Any signs 
not reviewed at site plan review time for this reason must be reviewed under these 
requirements prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
c. ?Building color samples (minimum sample sizes: three by five inches): Exterior and exterior 
signage color samples shall be submitted. 
d. ?Certification. Certification from the project architect or engineer that the proposed site and 
exterior building lighting, proposed signage, and proposed building and signage colors 
satisfy the Overlay District's lighting, signage and color standards. 
(c) ?Approval for change of exterior design required. Changes to the exterior of any structure in the 
Overlay Districts shall require review and approval by the planning and growth management 
department. Such changes shall include, but not be limited to, colors, building materials, roof finishes 
and signage. Routine maintenance and replacement of materials which do not affect the approved 
exterior design shall be exempt from such review and approval. 


Sec. 54-4-21.6. - Waivers. 
    As part of an application for development, a request may be made for a waiver of any of the 
provisions of this article. The request shall be heard by the planning and zoning commission in 
determining if any such provision be waived, modified or applied as written. The planning and zoning 
commission shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing on the requested waiver. The criterion for granting a waiver 
or modification of any of the provisions of this article is whether the strict interpretation of the 
requirements of this article places an inordinate burden on the property owner as defined by Florida 
Statutes. The waiver procedure herein is the exclusive remedy to the application of the provisions of this 
article and is to be utilized in lieu of an application for a variance. 
    Historic buildings. The planning and zoning commission may waive the requirements of the 
performance overlay districts for the purpose of preserving a historic building. 


DIVISION A. - RIVERFRONT OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.1 - Intent. 
    This Riverfront Overlay District is designed to encourage development and redevelopment within the 
Riverfront District that includes promotion of traditional building types with arcades, balconies, and 
porches. Additionally, the intent of the district is to create a sense of place and promote social interaction 
on the streets of the Riverfront District and encourage durable construction that is harmonious with the 
architectural heritage known as the "Old Florida Fishing Village" of Sebastian. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.2. - Boundaries. 
(a) ?Established: A special Performance Overlay District is hereby established to be known as the "Old 
Florida Fishing Village" Riverfront District. 
(b) ?Boundaries: The Riverfront District shall include that portion of the City of Sebastian located east of 
the Florida East Coast Railroad to and including the Indian River, north to the city limits and south to 
the south city limits located approximately at the south section line of Section 6, Township 31S, 
Range 39E. 
(c) ?Riverfront District requirements: All development in the Riverfront District shall comply with the 
requirements of this article. The standards and requirements set forth below shall apply to new 
development, conversion in use from residential to commercial, and to building exterior refinishing. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.3. - General. 
(a) ?Scope: The design of all structures in the Riverfront District shall comply with the requirements of 
this code. This pertains to any building, group of buildings, site development, alterations affecting 
building's exterior, parking lots, and vehicular use areas. Compliance with the provisions in this code 
shall be reviewed by the growth management department, planning and zoning commission and the 
city council as appropriate. Precedence shall not be set by any project or variances approved by the 
growth management department, planning and zoning commission, city council, or the board of 
adjustment. 
(b) ?Approval for change of exterior design required: Any exterior change of any structure in the 
Riverfront District shall require review by the growth management department. Such changes shall 
include, but not be limited to, colors, building materials, roof finishes, and signage. Changes to the 
architectural features or style, landscaping, or signs shall be approved by the growth management 
director. Modifications to the site plan shall be approved in compliance with the site plan modification 
process in article X. Routine maintenance and replacement of materials which does not affect the 
approved exterior design shall be exempt from this paragraph. 
(c) ?Prohibited architectural styles: The following are not considered to be consistent with the "Old 
Florida Fishing Village" architectural style nor appropriate for the Riverfront District and are 
prohibited: 
(1) ?Corporate signature or commercial prototype architecture, unless such is consistent with all 
requirements of this code. Examples of such include, but are not limited to, flat roofed 
convenience stores and gas stations. 
(2) ?Buildings which are of symbolic design for reasons of advertising and buildings which are not 
compatible to the atmosphere of Riverfront District. Examples of such include "A frame" style 
roofs, garishly colored roofs, translucent architectural elements, and the like. Symbols attached 
to buildings will not be allowed unless they are secondary in appearance to the building and 
landscape, and are an aesthetic asset to the building project and neighborhood. 
(3) ?Any kitsch architecture (pretentious bad taste) which does not resemble a typical structure. 
Examples of such include, but are not limited to, structures that resemble an exaggerated plant, 
fish, edible food, or other such items such as giant oranges, ice cream cones, dinosaurs. 
(4) ?Any architecture having a historical reference that is so unique and different from current 
design philosophy of an "Old Florida Fishing Village" that such reference is inconsistent and/or 
incompatible with surrounding structures. Examples of such include, but are not limited to, 
igloos, domes or geodesic domes, Quonset style structures, teepees, log cabins, medieval 
castle, caves. 
(5) ?Styles that are not in the "Old Florida Fishing Village" theme. Art Deco style is prohibited. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.4. - Special provisions. 
(a) ?Provisions: The "uses" below must follow all criteria set forth in this code. The following are added 
criteria for each specific "use": 
(1) ?Residentially designated properties. The following materials are approved for use in 
residentially designated areas: fiberglass or asphalt shingle-style roofing for sloped roofs and 
visible roof structures, and textured plywood as a finish product. Rooftop screening devices 
shall not be required for attic ventilators or plumbing roof vents on residentially designated 
properties. However, roof ventilators, roof vents, and the like shall be located where they will be 
least visible from roadways. 
(2) ?Commercial centers and out-parcels. The materials, exterior finishes, signage and colors of 
shopping centers and structures developed on shopping center outparcels shall be compatible 
and harmonious with each other as determined by which structures are developed first. This 
requirement may be waived by the planning and zoning commission if: 
a. ?The initial shopping center or outparcel was built prior to the enactment of the Riverfront 
District special regulations; and 
b. ?It is determined by the planning and growth management department that enforcement of 
this requirement would conflict with the intent of these Riverfront District special 
requirements. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.5. - Design criteria. 
(a) ?General design criteria: 
(1) ?Buildings with facades fronting on more than one street should have equal design 
considerations and consistent detailing on all street frontages. 
(2) ?Porches on the front building facade are encouraged. 
(3) ?Wood picket fences, wrought iron fences or landscape buffers are encouraged along the front 
property line, on corner lots and along the side property line. Arbors and trellises are permitted 
in the front yard. Except for arbors and trellises, the minimum height of fences shall be three 
feet and the maximum height shall be four feet. The maximum height for arbors and trellises 
shall be ten feet. Above fences, architectural features of up to 12 inches shall be allowed. Such 
features shall be spaced a minimum of ten feet apart. Chain link fences are not permitted in the 
front yards. Walls are discouraged. All walls shall be constructed of brick or other decorative 
materials and shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(4) ?If a building facade is 100 feet or more in width measured parallel to the nearest body of water, 
an open vista of at least ten feet in width and eight feet in height shall be required within the 
building's facade to allow a visual corridor from the public right-of-way to the adjacent body of 
water. 
(b) ?General items which are prohibited: 
(1) ?Flat, blank, unarticulated, or massive facades are prohibited on front facades. Facades located 
within view of a roadway are to incorporate architectural elements providing breaks in the 
planes of exterior walls and/or roofs. Facades located within view of roadway are to be 
designed to lessen the appearance of excessive bulk (this is especially important for large-scale 
commercial structures). Facades can be divided by use of: proportional expression of structure, 
openings, arcades, canopies, fenestration, changes of the building, and the like. (Stepping or 
sloping of a parapet wall in conjunction with a low sloped roof is prohibited.) Flat, blank, 
unarticulated, or massive facades will be permitted on the sides and rear of a building where 
"Blank Facade Foundation Planting" is utilized (see landscape section for requirements). 
(2) ?The following materials or systems for siding are prohibited as a finish and/or exposed product: 
corrugated or ribbed panels, smooth finish concrete block (standard concrete masonry units), 
precast concrete tee systems, plywood or textured plywood (except vertical board and batten). 
Plywood will be allowed for soffit material. 
(3) ?Any canopy (such as for a gas station, car wash, or drive-through facility) that is wholly or 
partially within 75 feet of a thoroughfare plan road right-of-way shall meet the following 
requirements concerning maximum fascia height (This pertains to all fascia on the above 
described canopy including any canopy fascia that continues beyond the 75-foot limit.): 
Roo
f 
Slo
pe 
Dist
anc
e 
Ma
xim
um 
Fas
cia 
Hei
ght 
Les
s 
tha
n 
10 
feet 
8 
inc
hes 
10 
to 
20 
feet 
12 
inc
hes 
Gre
ate
r 
tha
n 
20 
feet 
16 
inc
hes 
 
(4) ?Plastic or metal is prohibited as a finish material for walls or trim. Plastic is prohibited as a finish 
material for sloped roofs, visible roof structures, and fascias. Although prohibited in general, 
certain metal and plastic construction products may be approved by the planning and zoning 
commission, upon a written request and product sample submitted by the applicant. The 
planning and zoning commission may approve use of the material if the following criteria are 
satisfied: 
i. ?The product shall appear authentic from the closest distance that it will be viewed by the 
general public. 
ii. ?The product shall be substantial. Thin and flimsy imitations are unacceptable. 
iii. ?The product shall hold up as well as the product it is imitating. That is, it must be fabricated 
in such a way that it will retain its original shape, appearance, and color, as well as the 
product it is imitating. 
iv. ?The product's color shall resemble the color of the product it is imitating. 
(5) ?Any exposed masonry in a stack bond is prohibited. 
(6) ?Lighting that follows the form of the building, parts of the building, or building elements is 
prohibited. 
(7) ?Neon lighting, fiber optics, or similar system trim where the neon tube, fiber optics or similar 
system is visible is prohibited (This restriction includes site signage) 
(8) ?Backlit transparent architectural elements, backlit architectural elements, as well as illuminated 
or backlit awnings and roof elements are prohibited. This does not prohibit the use of glass 
blocks or the use of an illuminated sign attached to a building. 
(9) ?Facades that appear to be primarily awnings are prohibited. An awning shall not run 
continuously for more than 30% percent of the length of any single facade. Placement of awning 
segments shall relate to building features (e.g. doorways and windows), where possible. Awning 
segments shall not exceed 25% of the length of any single facade. 
(10) ?"Drive-up" windows or "amusement loud speakers" located on a building facade that faces a 
residential use are prohibited. They shall not be located on a building facade that faces Indian 
River Drive except for special events as permitted by the city council. 
(11) ?Accessory structures, including sheds, out-buildings, dumpster enclosures, and screening 
structures, shall match the style, finish, and color of the site's main building. Metal utility sheds 
and temporary car canopies are prohibited. 
(c) ?Roofs and parapets: 
(1) ?Slope roofs: Gable, hip, and shed style roofs shall have a slope no less than 5:12 (rise:run) and 
not greater than 10:12 (rise:run). Mansard style roofs with a slope greater than 10:12 (rise:run) 
are prohibited. Generous eaves on sloped roofs are encouraged. Any roof with a slope less 
than 5:12 (rise:run) ("low sloped roof") shall not be visible from a roadway. Low sloped roofs 
must be screened with a visible roof structure or parapet wall. Sheds, porches and balcony 
roofs shall have a slope no less than 3:12 (rise:run). 
(2) ?Visible roof structures: Visible roof structures shall be of such height, bulk, and mass, so as to 
appear structural, even where the design is non-structural. Visible roof structures shall have a 
minimum vertical rise of six feet (not including fascia). Visible roof structures shall have a slope 
no less than 5:12 and not greater than 10:12 (rise:run). Mansard style visible roof structures 
with a slope greater than 10:12 (rise:run) are prohibited. Where visible roof structures are 
utilized in a building design, they shall be continuous around all sides of the structure, except 
where incorporated with a parapet wall or other architectural element (this does not allow 
"stuck-on" roofs). Any facade that is not visible from a roadway will not require a continuous 
visible roof structure on that facade. Any building with less than 3,500 square feet of enclosed 
space and utilizing a low sloped roof must have a visible roof structure on all facades which are 
visible from a roadway. 
(3) ?The following roof styles are prohibited. "A-frame," bowstring, dome, gambrel, non-symmetrical 
gable or hip (different slope on each side of ridge), quonset, and polynesian. Gable or hip roof 
with up to a 10:12 (rise:run) maximum pitch with a "skirted" or "flared" lower portion at a 3:12 
(rise:run) minimum pitch is allowed. 
(4) ?The ridge or plane of a roof (or visible roof structure), that runs parallel (or slightly parallel) with 
a roadway shall not run continuous for more than 100 feet without offsetting or jogging the roof 
ridge or plane a minimum of 16 inches with dormer windows or other architectural feature that 
breaks up the roof. Low sloped roofs are excluded from this requirement. 
(5) ?Roofing on sloped roofs and visible roof structures shall be limited to the following systems: 
a. ?Cedar shingles or shakes, slate, clay tile, or cement tile. 
b. ?Steel, copper, and factory painted aluminum standing seam roofing. 
c. ?5-V crimp roof. 
d. ?Galvanized metal or copper shingles of Victorian or diamond shape or pattern. 
e. ?Three dimensional fiberglass or asphalt shingle. 
Architectural standing seam roofs shall be limited to the following systems: flat metal panels 
with narrow raised seams running 12 to 20 inches apart, which are secured with continuous 
seam covers or mechanically seamed. Light and natural colors, as well as mill finish metal roofs 
are encouraged. Mixing panel colors is prohibited and all building roofs shall be of one color. 
(6) ?Roofing materials are prohibited for use as a finish material on parapets or any surface with a 
slope greater than 10:12 (rise:run), up to and including vertical surfaces. This pertains only to 
those surfaces visible from adjacent property, exclusive of access drives or roadways. This 
does not exclude the use of metal fascia six inches or less in height. This does not exclude the 
use of typical metal flashing, wall cap, drip edge, and the like. This does not exclude the use of 
roofing materials as a screening device, as long as it does not function as a building's parapet. 
This does not exclude the use of cedar shingles or shakes as a wall materiel used below the 
roof line. 
(7) ?Plastic or metal roof panels or systems, corrugated or ribbed roof panels, hot mopped systems, 
built-up, gravel, torched on, foam or fluid applied, roll or membrane roofing, and the like are 
prohibited on any roof which is visible from any roadway and/or residentially designated area. 
This does not exclude the use of architectural standing seam metal roofing or galvanized 5-V 
crimp metal roofing. 
(8) ?Partial parapet walls are not permitted. If a parapet wall is used on a building, then a parapet 
wall of the same style and material is to be continuous around all sides of the structure, except 
where incorporated with a visible roof structure or other architectural element. Introduction of 
any visible roof structure shall not appear "fake". Any facade that is not visible from a roadway 
will not require a continuous parapet wall on that facade. Stepping or sloping of a parapet wall in 
conjunction with a low sloped roof is prohibited. 
(d) ?Site: 
(1) ?All telephones, vending machines, or any facility dispensing merchandise or a service on 
private property, shall be confined to a space built into the building or buildings, or enclosed in a 
separate structure compatible with the main building's architecture. These areas are to be 
designed with the safety of the user in mind. Public phones and ATMs should have 24-hour 
access. 
(2) ?No advertising will be allowed on any exposed amenity or facility such as benches and trash 
containers. 
(3) ?When feasible, existing specimen trees should be preserved in place or relocated on site. Use 
of tree wells, as well as adaptation and variations of siting in order to conserve native 
vegetation, is encouraged. 
(4) ?The use of thematic and decorative site lighting is encouraged. Low lights of a modest scale 
can be used along with feature lighting that emphasizes plants, trees, entrances, and exits. 
Light bollards are encouraged along pedestrian paths. The color of the light sources (lamp) 
should be consistent throughout the project. Color of site lighting luminaries, poles, and the like 
shall be limited to dark bronze, black, or dark green (decorative fixtures attached to buildings 
are exempt from the fixture color requirement). 
Lighting is not to be used as a form of advertising or in a manner that draws considerably more 
attention to the building or grounds at night than in the day. Site lighting shall be designed to 
direct light into the property. Lighting shall avoid any annoyance to the neighbors from 
brightness or glare. 
(5) ?Roadway style luminaries (fixtures) such as cobra heads, Nema heads, and the like are 
prohibited. Wall pads and flood light luminaries are prohibited where the light source would be 
visible from a roadway, parking area and/or residentially designated area. High intensity 
discharge (e.g. high pressure sodium, metal halide, mercury vapor, tungsten halogen) lighting 
fixtures mounted on buildings and poles higher than 18 feet above the parking lot grade, and 
under canopies, shall be directed perpendicular to the ground. Other than decorative and low 
level/low height lighting, no light source or lens shall project above or below a fixture, box, 
shield, or canopy. 
(e) ?Screening devices: 
(1) ?"Visually offensive elements," whether freestanding, mounted on roofs, or located anywhere on 
a structure shall be concealed from view on all sides. Individual screens, building elements, or 
appropriate landscaping, are to be used to completely screen the offensive elements from view 
from adjacent roads, properties, and parking areas. Parapet walls, visible roof structures, 
individual screens, or building elements shall be used to completely screen roof mounted, 
visually offensive elements from view from any point around the entire building perimeter. 
Screening devices shall relate to the building's style of architecture and materials. All screening 
devices shall be designed so that no part of the offensive element extends beyond the top of the 
screen, measured vertically. Rooftop screening devices shall not be required for plumbing roof 
vents which are less than four inches in diameter and less than 12 inches above roof 
penetration. These roof vents are to be located where they will be least visible from roadways. 
(2) ?"Nuisance elements" shall be visually screened from adjacent roadways and/or residentially 
designated areas with solid walls in addition to any required landscaping. Loading dock 
buffering shall meet standards of the landscape ordinance (article XIV). All other walls shall be a 
minimum of six feet in height. All dumpster and trash container areas shall be completely 
screened on all sides. A noise abatement enclosure shall be used on HVAC equipment. 
(3) ?Individual screens and walls shall relate to the building's style of architecture and materials. A 
durable material such as reinforced concrete masonry units is recommended with an 
architecturally compatible finish. Wood fences as a screening device are encouraged. 
(4) ?Chain link fencing, with or without slats, is prohibited as a screening device for screening 
visually offensive elements and nuisance elements. Where chain link or similar fencing is 
allowed to be used (e.g., around storm water ponds), such fencing shall be green or black and 
shall be located and landscaped so as to visually screen the fencing from public view. 
(f) ?Building walls. The exterior walls of the principal building shall be constructed of any of the following 
materials and in the following specified manner. All materials shall be used over the entire building or 
as continuous horizontal blends only. No panelizing shall be permitted or other simulations. 
(1) ?Stucco with a "float finish," smooth or coarse, machine spray, dash and troweled. 
(2) ?Wood clapboard five inches to the weather. 
(3) ?Wood shingles seven inches to the weather. 
(4) ?Wood board or batten board of a board width from eight to 18 inches. 
(5) ?Wood shiplap siding smooth face seven inches to the weather. 
(6) ?Coral, keystone or tabby. 
(7) ?Ashlar pattern, flush sawn finish. 
(8) ?Split face block. 
(g) ?Arcades and porches: Arcades, balconies, or porches shall be constructed of materials either of 
wood or conform to the construction of the principal building. 
(h) ?Garden walls: The garden walls of the principal building shall be constructed of either wood, 
wrought iron, or PVC lattice, or shall conform to the construction materials of the principal building, 
including stone, brick, and stucco. Chain link fence concealed by landscaping may be used along the 
side and rear of the property. No simulations shall be permitted. 
(i) ?Accessory buildings: Accessory structures, including sheds, out-buildings, dumpster enclosures, and 
screening structures, shall match the style, finish, and color of the site's main building. Metal utility 
sheds and temporary car canopies are prohibited. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.6. - Colors. 
(a) ?Intent. The intent is to use colors that complement the adopted "Old Florida Fishing Village" theme. 
Bright and garish colors, as a means of attracting attention to a business are not characteristic of the 
Riverfront District and are not compatible with this code's objectives. 
(1) ?Whites, earthtones, and subdued greys are encouraged. These colors can be described as 
being "softer", "older", "subdued", and "antique looking". 
(2) ?Fluorescent and bright colors are prohibited. 
(b) ?Color standards. All buildings and accessory structures within the Riverfront Overlay District shall be 
limited to the colors listed in the Overlay Districts master color list. 
(c) ?Roof colors (requirements for roofs that are visible from a roadway): Metal roof colors shall consist 
of natural mill finish, white, light neutral colors in the warm range, and a limited number of earth-tone 
colors. Mixing or alternating colors of metal panels is prohibited. For remaining roofs, the following 
shall dictate: Other than natural variations in color or color blends within a tile, the mixing or 
alternating of roof color, in the same roof material is prohibited. Colors and color blends shall not be 
contrary to the intent of this code. Color for roofing which is glazed, slurry coated, or artificially 
colored on the surface by any other means shall be limited to the same colors as approved for metal 
roofs. 
(d) ?Natural finish materials: The color requirements listed above shall not apply to the colors of true 
natural finish materials such as brick, stone, terra cotta, concrete roof tiles, slate, integrally colored 
concrete masonry units, copper, and wood finishes. Colors commonly found in natural materials are 
encouraged, unless such material has been artificially colored in a manner which would be contrary 
to the intent of this code. 
(e) ?Awning colors: Awning colors shall be consistent with item (a) above. 
(f) ?Overlay District master color list. The Overlay Districts master color list and approved color board 
shall be maintained and made available by the planning and growth management staff. The list can 
be mailed or faxed upon request. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.7. - Landscape requirements. 
(a) ?Purpose: The purpose of the Riverfront District Landscape Code is to emphasize the impact of 
landscape design and maintenance on the health of the Indian River Lagoon and to enhance the 
beauty of the Riverfront District. 
(b) ?Intent: The intent of the Riverfront Landscape Code is to promote wise landscape design that can 
benefit the Indian River Lagoon with reduced irrigation, fertilization, and pest control needs. 
(1) ?Encourage the use of native plants. Large oaks and cabbage palms are among the many 
native plants which can give the feel of "Old Florida Fishing Village". Native plants properly sited 
can minimize maintenance costs and compliment the historic appeal of the Riverfront District. 
(2) ?Put the right plant in the right place. Encourage the use of plants suited to the soil conditions 
rather than the use of soil amendments. 
(3) ?Native plant list. This list of native plants is intended to assist the landowner in choosing 
indigenous landscaping that will have a minimal impact on the Indian River Lagoon. 
(c) ?Requirements: All development in the Riverfront District shall comply with the landscaping 
requirements as described in article XIV and shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1) ?Landscape strips. 
a. ?The width of the perimeter landscape strips shall be determined by the required front, side 
and rear setbacks as described in the underlying zoning district. For residential uses, the 
perimeter landscape strips shall be 25% of those setbacks. 
For community facilities and commercial uses, the perimeter landscape strips shall be 50% 
of those setbacks, but not less than ten feet. When a zero front setback is allowed and is 
used, a front perimeter landscape strip between the building and the property line is not 
required. 
b. ?Required perimeter and interior landscape strips shall not be used for any other uses 
including stormwater management. 
c. ?No more than 25% of the required perimeter and interior landscape strips shall be covered 
in sod or grass. 
d. ?All required perimeter and interior landscape strips not sodded or grassed shall be covered 
in recycled or environmentally friendly mulch. Lava rocks or other dark rocks may be used 
in areas of high pedestrian traffic. River rock, gravel, pea rock, or similar material is 
encouraged for use in the required perimeter and interior landscape strips. 
e. ?Within the perimeter landscape strips, the following landscaping shall be provided per 100 
(lineal feet): 
1. ?Five canopy trees. 
2. ?Six understory trees. 
3. ?Continuous hedge: Three to three and one-half feet high at planting. 
NOTE: The hedge shall provide a visual screen three feet high above the grade of the 
project site parking area. Hedge material shall provide full screening to the ground; 
therefore, myrtles and shrubs with similar leafing characteristics shall not be used for 
hedge material unless a double row arrangement is used. At the time of a certificate of 
occupancy (CO) for the project site, the hedging shall provide a three-foot visual screen, 
subject to city sight distance requirements. 
Clustering of trees along the buffer strip is encouraged, and uniform spacing of trees is 
discouraged, except where used to emphasize a particular planting theme or development 
style. 
(2) ?Foundation plantings. Foundation plantings shall be required as stated below for buildings in 
commercial and industrial areas and for businesses allowed in residential areas. However, for 
industrial and storage buildings located in the commercial, industrial and mixed use zoning 
districts, foundation planting strips shall be exempt for sides of buildings not fronting on a 
residentially designated area, or public or platted road. 
a. ?Along the front, sides and rear of buildings, the following foundation planting landscape 
strips shall be provided in accordance with the building height: 
Buil
din
g 
Hei
ght 
Fou
nda
tion 
Pla
ntin
g  
Stri
p 
De
pth 
1 
Up 
to 
12 
feet 
hig
h 
5 
feet 
dep
th 
12 
feet 
to 
25 
feet 
hig
h 
10 
feet 
dep
th 
Ove
r 25 
feet 
hig
h 
15 
feet 
dep
th 
 
       1 A distance measured perpendicular to the building, from the foundation outward. 
b. ?Within such foundation planting landscape strips, the following landscaping shall be 
provided: 
1. ?40% of the foundation perimeter (excluding entranceways and overhead doors) along 
all building faces shall be landscaped, as follows: 
Buil
din
g 
Hei
ght 
Lan
dsc
ape 
Spe
cific
atio
ns 
Min
imu
m 
pla
nt 
mat
eria
l 
req
uire
d: 
•?1 
pal
m 
tre
e or 
app
rop
riat
e 
can
opy 
tre
e 
for 
eve
ry 
10 
line
al 
feet 
of 
pla
ntin
g 
stri
p 
(clu
ster
ed) 

•?1 
und
erst
ory 
tre
e 
for 
eve
ry 
20 
line
al 
feet 
of 
req
uire
d 
pla
ntin
g 
stri
p. 

•?3 
shr
ubs 
for 
eve
ry 
10 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
req
uire
d 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a. 

•?
Gro
und 
cov
er, 
flo
wer
ing 
pla
nts 
or 
sod 
in 
the 
re
mai
nin
g 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a 
For 
buil
din
gs 
of 
12 
to 
25 
feet 
in 
hei
ght: 
•?
10 
feet 
min
imu
m 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a 
dep
th 

•?1 
can
opy 
tre
e 
for 
eve
ry 
10 
line
al 
feet 
of 
pla
ntin
g 
stri
p (3 
pal
ms 
wit
h a 
min
imu
m 
hei
ght 
of 
12 
feet 
eac
h 
ma
y 
be 
sub
stit
ute
d 
for 
eac
h 
can
opy 
tre
e). 

•?1 
und
erst
ory 
tre
e 
for 
eve
ry 
20 
line
al 
feet 
of 
req
uire
d 
pla
ntin
g 
stri
p. 

•?3 
shr
ubs 
for 
eve
ry 
10 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
req
uire
d 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a. 

•?
Gro
und 
cov
er, 
flo
wer
ing 
pla
nts 
or 
sod 
in 
the 
re
mai
nin
g 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a 
For 
buil
din
gs 
ove
r 25 
feet 
in 
hei
ght: 
•?
15 
feet 
min
imu
m 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a 
dep
th 

•?1 
can
opy 
tre
e 
for 
eve
ry 7 
line
al 
feet 
of 
pla
ntin
g 
stri
p (3 
pal
ms 
wit
h a 
min
imu
m 
hei
ght 
of 
16 
feet 
eac
h 
ma
y 
be 
sub
stit
ute
d 
for 
eac
h 
can
opy 
tre
e). 

•?1 
und
erst
ory 
tre
e 
for 
eve
ry 
10 
line
al 
feet 
of 
req
uire
d 
pla
ntin
g 
stri
p. 

•?3 
shr
ubs 
for 
eve
ry 
10 
squ
are 
feet 
of 
req
uire
d 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a. 

•?
Gro
und 
cov
er, 
flo
wer
ing 
pla
nts 
or 
sod 
in 
the 
re
mai
nin
g 
pla
ntin
g 
are
a 
 
2. ?The following modifications are allowed upon approval from the planning and growth 
management director or other designee: 
i. ?Foundation planting strips may be located away from buildings to avoid conflicts 
with architectural features (e.g., roof overhangs), driveways, and vehicular areas 
serving drive-up windows. 
ii. ?The depth of foundation planting strips may be modified if the overall minimum 
area covered by the foundation plantings proposed meets or exceeds the area 
encompassed by the required foundation planting area. 
(d) ?Increased foundation plantings for "blank facade" building faces. As referenced in the 
architectural/building standards section of this plan, "blank facade" building faces that are 
unarticulated are allowed if foundation plantings are provided as specified above with a 100% 
increase (doubling) in required plant material quantities (as specified above). 
(e) ?Increased canopy tree size. All canopy trees required under normal landscaping and buffering 
requirements and special Riverfront corridor plan requirements for projects within the corridor shall 
have a minimum height of 12 feet and minimum spread of six feet at time of planting. Palm tree 
clusters may be used as canopy trees as specified in the landscape ordinance. However, such palm 
trees shall have a minimum clear trunk height of 12 feet. 
(f) ?Other requirements. For parcels east of Indian River Drive, the landscape plan shall include a 
description of the existing and proposed shoreline and wetland vegetation. 
(g) ?Native plants for the sebastian riverfront district. Native plants can help to preserve and foster the 
feeling of an "Old Florida Fishing Village". These plants are well-adapted to Florida life and, properly 
sited, thrive with minimal irrigation, fertilization, and pest control. The Association of Florida Native 
Nurseries can assist with availability information. The following plants are encouraged in the 
Riverfront District. 
Can
opy 
Tre
es 

Red 
ma
ple 
..... 
Ace
r 
rub
ru
m 
Pau
roti
s 
pal
m 
..... 
Aco
elor
rap
he 
wri
ghti
i 
Sou
the
rn 
red 
ced
ar 
..... 
Juni
per
us 
silic
icol
a 
Sou
the
rn 
ma
gno
lia 
..... 
Ma
gno
lia 
gra
ndif
lora 
Red 
mul
ber
ry 
..... 
Mo
rus 
rub
ra 
Red
bay 
..... 
Per
sea 
bor
bon
ia 
San
d 
pin
e 
..... 
Pin
us 
cla
usa 
Sou
th 
Flor
ida 
slas
h 
pin
e 
..... 
Pin
us 
elli
otti 
var. 
den
sa 
Live 
oak 
..... 
Qu
erc
us 
virg
inia
na 
Sab
al 
pal
m 
..... 
Sab
al 
pal
met
to 
Cyp
ress 
..... 
Tax
odi
um 
sp. 
Her
cul
es 
clu
b 
..... 
Zan
tho
xyl
um 
clav
a-
her
culi
s 
Un
der
stor
y 
tree
s 

Tou
gh 
bu
mel
ia 
..... 
Bu
mel
ia 
ten
ax 
But
ton
wo
od 
..... 
Con
oca
rpu
s 
ere
ctu
s 
Cor
alb
ean 
..... 
Eryt
hrin
a 
her
bac
ea 
Flor
ida 
priv
et 
..... 
For
esti
era 
seg
reg
ata 
Dah
oon 
holl
y 
..... 
Ilex 
cas
sin
e 
Bla
ck 
iron
wo
od 
..... 
Kru
gio
den
dro
n 
ferr
eu
m 
Sim
pso
ns 
sto
ppe
r 
..... 
My
rcia
nth
es 
frag
ran
s 
sim
pso
ni 
Wa
x 
myr
tle 
..... 
My
rica 
ceri
fera 
San
d 
live 
oak 
..... 
Qu
erc
us 
ge
min
ata 
Shr
ubs
/he
dge
s 

Bea
uty
ber
ry 
..... 
Call
icar
pa 
am
eric
ana 
Jam
aica 
cap
er 
..... 
Cap
pari
s 
cyn
oph
allo
pho
ra 
Fid
dle
wo
od 
..... 
Cith
are
xyl
um 
frui
tico
su
m 
Sea
gra
pe 
..... 
Coc
col
oba 
uvif
era 
Var
nis
h 
leaf 
..... 
Do
don
aea 
visc
osa 
Fire
bus
h 
..... 
Ha
mm
elia 
pat
ens 
Flor
ida 
priv
et 
..... 
For
esti
era 
seg
reg
ata 
Yau
pon 
holl
y 
..... 
Ilex 
vo
mit
oria 
Sim
pso
ns 
sto
ppe
r 
..... 
My
rcia
nth
es 
frag
ran
s 
sim
pso
ni 
Wil
d 
coff
ee 
..... 
Psy
cho
tria 
ner
vos
a 
Ne
edl
e 
pal
m 
..... 
Rha
pid
oph
yllu
m 
hys
trix 
Sa
w 
pal
met
to 
..... 
Ser
eno
a 
rep
ens 
Nec
klac
e 
pod 
..... 
Sop
hor
a 
to
me
nto
sa 
Wal
ters 
vib
urn
um 
..... 
Vib
urn
um 
obo
vat
um 
Spa
nis
h 
bay
one
t 
..... 
Yuc
ca 
aloi
foli
a 
Gro
und 
cov
ers 

Bea
ch 
bea
n 
..... 
Can
ava
lia 
ros
ea 
Gol
den 
cre
epe
r 
..... 
Ern
ode
a 
litt
oral
is 
Yell
owt
op 
..... 
Flav
eria 
line
aris 
Bla
nke
t 
flo
wer 
..... 
Gail
lard
ia 
pul
che
lla 
Bea
ch 
dun
e 
sun
flo
wer 
..... 
Heli
ant
hus 
deb
ilis 
Spi
der 
lily 
..... 
Hy
me
noc
allis 
latif
olia 
Dw
arf 
yau
pon 
holl
y 
..... 
Ilex 
vo
mit
oria 
var 
Sch
elli
ngs 
Bea
ch 
mo
rnin
g 
glor
y 
..... 
Ipo
mo
ea 
pes
-
cap
re 
Bea
ch 
eld
er 
..... 
Iva 
imb
rica
ta 
Cor
al 
hon
eys
uckl
e 
..... 
Lon
icer
a 
se
mp
ervi
ren
s 
Mu
hly 
gra
ss 
..... 
Mu
hle
nbe
rgia 
cap
illar
is 
Bos
ton 
fer
n 
..... 
Ne
prol
eps
is 
bis
err
ata 
Wil
d 
pet
uni
a 
..... 
Rue
llia 
car
olin
ien
sis 
Red 
sag
e 
..... 
Salv
ia 
coc
cin
ea 
Spi
der
wor
t 
..... 
Tra
des
can
tia 
ohi
ens
is 
Coo
ntie 
..... 
Za
mia 
pu
mil
a 
Alo
ng 
the 
sho
reli
ne 

Gia
nt 
leat
her 
fer
n 
..... 
Acr
osti
chu
m 
dan
aeif
oliu
m 
Bla
ck 
ma
ngr
ove 
..... 
Avi
cen
nia 
ger
min
ans 
Sea
-
oxe
ye 
dais
y 
..... 
Bor
rich
ia 
frut
esc
ens 
Rail
roa
d 
vin
e 
..... 
Ipo
mo
ea 
pes
-
cap
re 
Wh
ite 
ma
ngr
ove 
..... 
Lag
unc
ular
ia 
rac
em
osa 
Chr
ist
ma
s 
ber
ry 
..... 
Lyci
um 
car
olin
ian
um 
Red 
ma
ngr
ove 
..... 
Rhi
zop
hor
a 
ma
ngl
e 
Cor
dgr
ass 
..... 
Spa
rtin
a 
sp. 
 
(h) ?Approval for changes of landscape plan required: Any change of a landscape plan in the Riverfront 
District, originally required to comply with these landscape requirements, shall require review and 
approval by the growth management department. Such changes shall include, but not be limited to, 
changes of plant material, height, location, colors, or hardscape materials. Routine maintenance and 
replacement of materials which does not affect the approved landscape plan shall be exempt from 
this paragraph. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.8. - Sign regulations. 
(a) ?Scope: These special regulations consist of additional requirements above and beyond the city's 
sign ordinance and shall supersede any less restrictive provisions found in the sign ordinance. All 
signage shall comply with the requirements of the sign ordinance except as modified by these 
special sign regulations. All signs within the district are intended to be consistent with and further the 
"Old Florida Fishing Village" theme. 
(b) ?Prohibited signs. The provisions stated herein are in addition to prohibitions listed in article XVI, 
Signage and Advertising. The following are prohibited: 
(1) ?Lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or 
color, except for time-temperature-date signs. Public signs permitted pursuant to article XVI, 
Signage and Advertising provisions, are excluded from this prohibition and are allowed. 
(2) ?Electronic message boards and message centers, electronic adjustable alternation displays, or 
any sign that automatically displays words, numerals, and or characters in a programmed 
manner. Traffic regulatory and directional signs permitted pursuant to article XVI, Signage and 
Advertising provisions, are excluded from this prohibition and are allowed. 
(3) ?Portable or trailer style changeable copy signs, excepting approved special event signs. 
(4) ?Signs with the optical illusions of movement by means of a design that presents a pattern 
capable of giving the illusion of motion or changing of copy. 
(5) ?Strings of light bulbs used on nonresidential structures for commercial purposes, other than 
traditional holiday decorations at the appropriate time of the year. 
(6) ?Signs that emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or steam. 
(7) ?Neon lighting, fiber optics or similar systems, which exceed six square feet in area, and where 
the neon tube, fiber optic or similar system is visible from the outside is prohibited. Neon 
lighting, fiber optics and similar systems shall not be used for outlining the building including the 
windows. 
(8) ?Rough plywood used for permanent signs. 
(9) ?Any material used in such a manner for a permanent sign that results in a sign having a 
semblance to the look of a temporary sign but intended by the owner to be permanent. 
(10) ?Installation of an additional sign (or signs) that does not harmonize with the design or 
materials of the initial sign, such as: 
a. ?Attachment or mounting of signs where mounting hardware is left exposed. 
b. ?Signs with different color cabinets, frames, or structure. 
(11) ?Appliques or letters of vinyl and similar materials for use on any permanent monument sign. 
They are also prohibited for use on any permanent wall or facade signs that exceed three 
square feet. Window signs as allowed in this article are excluded from this prohibition. 
Regardless of size, appliques or vinyl letters are prohibited for use on plastic sign faces. 
(12) ?Changeable copy signs for office, industrial, commercial and residential uses, unless such 
sign is incorporated within the allowable monument sign area. 
(c) ?Items that are encouraged: 
(1) ?Attractive and durable materials such as the following are consistent with the "Old Florida 
Fishing Village" theme and are encouraged: 
a. ?Shaped and fashioned "wood look" multi-level signs are encouraged (i.e.: sand blasted or 
carved). Low maintenance, durable materials such as high density polyurethane, PVC, and 
high performance vinyl are encouraged and preferred over actual wood or medium density 
overlay (MDO) plywood. 
b. ?Internally illuminated aluminum cabinet with textured finish, and cut-out inset or push 
through acrylic letters. 
c. ?Backlit reverse pan channel letters (opaque faced) mounted on sign that is harmonious 
with the project's architecture. 
(2) ?Encourage consistency in materials and continuity of the sign design for a permanent sign. 
(3) ?Signage that relates to the building's style of architecture and materials is encouraged. 
(d) ?Modifications of sign regulations. 
(1) ?Maximum copy area: Reduce to 50% of what is allowed in article XVI, Signage. 
(2) ?Required setbacks from property lines or right-of-way: No change. 
(3) ?Distance separating signs: No change. 
(e) ?Colors: 
(1) ?The following colors are encouraged for signage: 
a. ?Use of earth-tone colors and pastels. 
b. ?Darker backgrounds with light color sign copy. 
c. ?Use of colors that match or are compatible with the project's architecture. 
d. ?Colors such as medium or dark bronze are acceptable and encouraged. Polished or 
weathered true bronze, brass, or copper metal finished are acceptable and encouraged. 
Precious metal colors are allowed on sand blasted or carved "wood look" style signs. 
(2) ?The following colors are prohibited for signage: 
a. ?The use of shiny or bright metallic or mill finish colors (i.e.: gold, silver, bronze, chrome, 
aluminum, stainless steel, etc.). 
b. ?The use of garish colors (including but not limited to: purple, chartreuse and/or fluorescent 
colors), unless such colors are part of a state or federal registered trademark. 
(f) ?Approval for change of sign design required: Any exterior change of signage in the Riverfront 
District, originally required to comply with this sign ordinance, shall require review and approval by 
the community development department. Such changes shall include, but not be limited to, changes 
of: sign area (square footage), sign copy area (square footage), sign copy (this does not apply to 
"changeable copy" signage), height, shape, style, location, colors, materials, or method of 
illumination. Routine maintenance and replacement of materials which does not affect the approved 
design shall be exempt from this paragraph. 
(g) ?Special provisions. 
(1) ?Multi-tenant spaces: Multi-tenant spaces such as shopping centers, out parcels, commercial 
complexes and parks, and office complexes and parks will be required to submit to the growth 
management department a sign program for review and approval. This sign program shall 
communicate the coordination and consistency of design, colors, materials, illumination, and 
locations of signage. In multi-tenant spaces where no established pattern exists as described 
above, the owner of the multi-tenant spaces shall be required to submit a sign program for 
approval prior to issuance of any new sign permits. 
(2) ?Wall signage: 
a. ?The maximum vertical dimension of a facade or wall sign shall not exceed 25% of the 
building height, not to exceed four feet. 
b. ?Awnings with lettering shall be considered a wall sign. Where lettering is used on an 
awning, the area of lettering shall be included in the percentage limitation of a project's 
sign area. 
c. ?Wall signs (facade signs) are prohibited on roofs. 
(3) ?Changeable copy signs: Changeable copy signs shall be regulated under the following 
guidelines. 
a. ?Changeable copy signs shall not comprise more than 50% of the permitted sign area and 
shall be included as part of the permitted sign area, except as described herein below. 
b. ?Motor vehicle service stations and convenience stores with gas pumps may utilize up to 
100% of permitted sign area for changeable prices of gasolines only (or as regulated by 
federal law). 
c. ?Movie theaters may utilize up to 80% of permitted sign area for display of names of films, 
plays or other performances currently showing. Such changeable copy areas shall be 
included as part of the permitted sign area. 
(4) ?Illumination: All external flood sign illumination shall be mounted at grade, directly in front of the 
sign area. Light source shall be completely shielded from oncoming motorist's view. 
(5) ?Nonconforming signs: It is the intent of this section to allow nonconforming signs permitted 
before the adoption of this code to continue until they are no longer used, or become 
hazardous, but not to encourage their survival. Such signs are hereby declared to be 
incompatible with the overall intent of this section. 
a. ?Removal of nonconforming signs: All nonconforming signs, except as provided for herein, 
shall be removed. 
b. ?Continuance of nonconforming signs: A nonconforming sign may be continued, subject to 
the following provisions: 
1. ?A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or increased in any way from its lawful 
size at the time of the adoption of this code. 
2. ?Nonconforming signs or nonconforming sign structures that are defined as abandoned 
signs shall not be permitted for reuse. 
3. ?Except as otherwise provided herein, there may be a change of tenancy or ownership 
of a nonconforming sign, without the loss of nonconforming status, if the property is 
not abandoned. 
c. ?Repairs, maintenance, and improvements: Normal repairs, maintenance, and 
improvements may be made. 
d. ?Reconstruction: If any nonconforming sign is destroyed by fire, flood, explosion, collapse, 
wind, or other catastrophe, it shall not be used or reconstructed except in full conformity 
with the provisions of these special regulations. 
e. ?Casual, temporary, or illegal use: The casual, temporary, or illegal use of any sign shall not 
be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create any rights in the 
continuance of such use. 


Sec. 54-4-21.A.9. - Nonconformities. 
    Within the Riverfront Overlay District, legally established existing development and uses that do not 
comply with these special regulations are grandfathered-in. All nonconforming uses and structures are 
governed by article VIII. In addition, within the Riverfront District, the following nonconformities regulations 
shall apply: 
(a) ?Nonconforming property: It is the intent of this chapter to allow nonconforming properties to 
continue, but also encourage their conformity to what extent is possible considering the existing 
site conditions and characteristics." A "compatible property" shall be considered in compliance 
with the intent of the Riverfront District special regulations. 
(b) ?Continuance of nonconforming property: A nonconforming property may be continued, subject 
to the following provisions: 
(1) ?Use of nonconforming structures abandoned for a period of six or more consecutive 
months located on a nonconforming property shall not be permitted until the property is 
brought into compliance with the requirements of a compatible property. 
(2) ?Except as otherwise provided herein, there may be a change of tenancy or ownership of a 
nonconforming property, without the loss of nonconforming status, if use of the 
nonconforming structures is not abandoned for a period of six or more consecutive months. 
(3) ?Colors of a structure located on a nonconforming property shall not be changed from 
those existing at the time of the adoption of these special regulations, unless the new, to-
be-painted colors comply with the Riverfront District special color regulations. 
(4) ?Projects on nonconforming properties requiring a building permit (excluding permits for 
roofs or minor repairs) shall be required to bring the property into compliance as a 
"compatible property." 
(5) ?A structure located on a nonconforming property shall not be enlarged or increased in any 
way from its lawful size at the time of the adoption of these special regulations. Where 
such changes are made, a building permit and compliance with the requirements of a 
"compatible property" are required for the enlargement or addition. 


DIVISION B. - CR512 OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 


Sec. 54-4-21.B.1. - Intent. 
    As a significant business and residential center and a major entranceway into the City of Sebastian, 
the corridor will have an attractive, well maintained, orderly and uncluttered appearance. The corridor will 
be characterized by impressive vegetation and landscaping; complementary buildings and signs with 
enhanced designs and aesthetic appearances; and a safe transportation system that accommodates 
mass transit, pedestrians, bicycles, and other transportation alternatives, as well as automobiles. 


Sec. 54-4-21.B.2. - Boundaries of the CR 512 Corridor. 
    The boundaries of the CR 512 Overlay District shall include all the properties which abut CR 512 and 
that are located within the city limits of the City of Sebastian. If any additional segments of CR 512 are 
subsequently duly annexed into the city, land development along the said newly annexed segment shall 
be consistent with the city's land development code, including this article. In the CR 512 Overlay District, 
the following special regulations and exemptions shall apply to new development and redevelopment. 


Sec. 54-4-21.B.3. - Architectural/building standards. 
(a) ?Prohibited architectural styles. The following are prohibited: 
(1) ?Corporate signature or commercial prototype architecture, unless such is consistent with these 
special corridor requirements. Examples of such prohibited architecture include flat roofed 
convenience stores, gas stations, and canopies for gas stations, car washes, and drive through 
facilities. 
(2) ?Any kitsch architecture (such as a building that does not resemble a typical structure), including 
structures or elements that resemble an exaggerated plant, fish, edible food, or other such 
items such as giant oranges, ice cream cones, dinosaurs. 
(3) ?Any architecture having a thematic reference that is so different from current design philosophy 
that such reference is inconsistent and/or incompatible with surrounding structures. Examples of 
such include: Igloos, domes or geodesic domes, quonset style structures, teepees, log cabins, 
western "false fronts", medieval castles, caves, and the like. 
(b) ?Special provisions. 
(1) ?Industrial and storage uses in commercial and industrial districts. Compliance shall be required 
only for those facades fronting on residentially designated areas or public or platted roads. 
However, industrial buildings shall satisfy the color requirements. 
(2) ?Residentially designated properties. The following materials are approved for use in 
residentially designated areas: fiberglass or asphalt shingle-style roofing for sloped roofs and 
visible roof structures, and textured plywood as a finish product. Rooftop screening devices 
shall not be required for attic ventilators or plumbing roof vents on residentially designated 
properties. However, roof ventilators, roof vents, and the like shall be located where they will be 
least visible from roadways. 
(3) ?Shopping centers and out-parcels. The materials, exterior finishes, signage and colors of 
shopping centers and structures developed on shopping center outparcels shall be compatible 
and harmonious with each other as determined by which structures are developed first. This 
requirement may be waived by the planning and growth management department if: 
a. ?The initial shopping center or outparcel was built prior to the enactment of the CR 512, 
special regulations; and 
b. ?It is determined by the planning and growth management department that enforcement of 
this requirement would conflict with the intent of these CR 512 special requirements. 
(4) ?Electrical substations and similar uses. Electrical substations and similar uses that prohibit 
access by the public into the site may be exempted from all architectural/building requirements 
by the planning and growth management director if the exempted building(s) and equipment will 
be visually screened from adjacent properties and roadways. 
(c) ?General design criteria. 
(1) ?Buildings with facades fronting on more than one street shall have similar design 
considerations (e.g. roof treatment, building articulation, entrance features, and window 
placement) and consistent detailing on all street frontages. 
(2) ?General prohibitions and restrictions: 
a. ?Flat, blank, unarticulated, or massive facades fronting on a roadway, exclusive access 
drive or residentially designated areas are prohibited. Facades fronting such roads, drives, 
or areas shall be designed to incorporate architectural elements providing breaks in the 
planes of exterior walls and/or roofs to articulate the building and to lessen the appearance 
of excessive mass. Facades should incorporate elements relating to human scale, and can 
be divided by use at proportional expression of structure, openings, arcades, canopies, 
fenestration, changes in materials, cornice details, molding details, changes in the heights 
of different sections of the building, and the like (stepping or sloping of a parapet wall in 
conjunction with a low sloped roof is prohibited). Flat, blank, unarticulated, or massive 
facades will be permitted on the sides of a building when building is constructed to the 
allowable zero foot side setback. 
b. ?The following materials or systems are prohibited as a finish and/or exposed product: 
corrugated or ribbed metal panels, smooth finish concrete block (standard concrete 
masonry units), precast concrete tee systems, plywood or textured plywood. Plywood shall 
be allowed for soffit material. 
c. ?Any canopy (such as for a gas station, car wash, or drive-through facility) that is wholly or 
partially within 75 feet of a thoroughfare plan road right-of-way shall meet the following 
requirements concerning maximum fascia height (This pertains to all fascia on the above 
described canopy including any canopy fascia that continues beyond the 75-foot limit.): 
Roo
f 
Slo
pe 
Dist
anc
e 
Ma
xim
um 
Fas
cia 
Hei
ght 
Les
s 
tha
n 
10 
feet 
8 
inc
hes 
10 
to 
20 
feet 
12 
inc
hes 
Gre
ate
r 
tha
n 
20 
feet 
16 
inc
hes 
 
d. ?Plastic or metal is prohibited as a finish material for walls or trim. Plastic is prohibited as a 
finish material for sloped roofs, visible roof structures, and fascias. Although prohibited in 
general, certain metal and plastic construction products may be approved by the planning 
and zoning commission, upon a written request and product sample submitted by the 
applicant. The planning and zoning commission may approve use of the material if the 
following criteria are satisfied: 
i. ?The product shall appear authentic from the closest distance that it will be viewed by 
the general public. 
ii. ?The product shall be substantial. Thin and flimsy imitations are unacceptable. 
iii. ?The product shall hold up as well as the product it is imitating. That is, it must be 
fabricated in such a way that it will retain its original shape, appearance, and color, as 
well as the product it is imitating. 
iv. ?The product's color shall resemble the color of the product it is imitating. 
e. ?Any exposed masonry in a stack bond is prohibited. 
f. ?Lighting structures or strip lighting that follows the form of the building, parts of the building, 
or building elements is prohibited. 
g. ?Neon lighting, fiber optics or similar systems, which exceed six square feet in area, and 
where the neon tube, fiber optic or similar system is visible from the outside is prohibited. 
Neon lighting, fiber optics and similar systems shall not be used for outlining the building 
including the windows. 
h. ?Backlit transparent or translucent architectural elements, backlit architectural elements, as 
well as illuminated or backlit awnings and roof mounted elements are prohibited. This does 
not prohibit the use of glass blocks. This does not prohibit the use of an illuminated sign 
attached to a building: 
i. ?Facades that appear to be primarily awnings are prohibited. An awning shall not run 
continuously for more than 30% of the length of any single facade. Placement of awning 
segments shall relate to building features (e.g. doorways and windows), where possible. 
Awnings shall not exceed 25% of the area of any single facade. 
j. ?Drive-up windows shall not be located on a building facade that faces a residential area or a 
roadway unless architecturally integrated into the building and screened by landscaping 
equivalent to the landscape material required in a local road buffer and must run the length 
of the drive-through lane. Speakers shall be oriented so as not to project sound toward 
residential areas. 
k. ?Accessory structures, including sheds, out-buildings, dumpster enclosures, and screening 
structures, shall match the style, finish, and color of the site's main building. Metal utility 
sheds and temporary car canopies are prohibited. 
(d) ?Roofs and parapets: 
(1) ?Sloped roofs. Gable, hip, and shed style roofs shall have a slope no less than 5:12 (rise:run). 
Mansard style roofs with a slope greater than 30:12 (rise:run) are prohibited. Generous eaves 
on sloped roofs are encouraged. Any roof with a slope less than 5:12 (rise:run) ("low sloped 
roof") shall not be visible from a roadway and/or residentially designated area. Low sloped roofs 
must be screened with a visible roof structure or parapet wall. 
(2) ?Visible roof structures. Visible roof structures shall be of such height, bulk, and mass, so as to 
appear structural, even where the design is non-structural and shall have a minimum vertical 
rise of six feet (not including fascia). Visible roof structures shall have a slope no less than 5:12 
(rise:run). Mansard style visible roof structures with a slope greater than 10:12 (rise:run) are 
prohibited. Where visible roof structures are utilized in a building design, they shall be 
continuous around all sides of the structure, except where incorporated with a parapet wall or 
other architectural element (this does not allow "stuck-on" roofs). Any facade that is not visible 
from a roadway, exclusive access drive or residentially designated area, such as facades that 
are interior to a tightly spaced compound of buildings, will not require a continuous visible roof 
structure on that facade. Any building with less than 3,500 square feet of ground floor area shall 
have a visible roof structure an all facades. 
(3) ?The following roof styles are prohibited. "A-frame," bowstring, dome, gambrel, non-symmetrical 
gable or hip (different slope on each side of ridge), quonset, and polynesian. Gable or hip roof 
with up to a 10:12 (rise:run) maximum pitch with a "skirted" or "flared" lower portion at a 3:12 
(rise:run) minimum pitch is allowed. 
(4) ?The ridge or plane of a roof (or visible roof structure), that runs parallel (or slightly parallel) with 
a roadway shall not run continuous for more than 100 feet without offsetting or jogging 
(vertically or horizontally) the roof ridge or plane a minimum of 16 inches. Low sloped roofs and 
parapet walls are excluded from this requirement. 
(5) ?Roofing on sloped roofs and visible roof structures shall be limited to the following systems: 
a. ?Cedar shingles or shakes, slate, clay tile, or cement tile. 
b. ?Steel, copper, and factory painted aluminum standing seam roofing. 
c. ?5-V crimp roof. 
d. ?Galvanized metal or copper shingles of Victorian or diamond shape or pattern. 
e. ?Three dimensional fiberglass or asphalt shingle. 
Architectural standing seam roofs shall be limited to the following systems: flat metal panels 
with narrow raised seams running 12 to 20 inches apart, which are secured with continuous 
seam covers or mechanically seamed. Light and natural colors, as well as mill finish metal roofs 
are encouraged. Mixing colors of metal panels is prohibited. Roofs on any one site shall be of 
one color. 
(6) ?Roofing materials are prohibited for use as a finish material on parapets or any surface with a 
slope greater than 10:12 (rise:run) up to and including vertical surfaces. This pertains only to 
those surfaces visible from adjacent property, exclusive of access drives or roadways. This 
does not exclude the use of metal fascia six inches or less in height, use of typical metal 
flashing, wall cap, drip edge, and the like, use of roofing materials as a screening device (as 
long as it does not function as a building's parapet), and use of cedar shingles or shakes as a 
wall material used below the roof line. 
(7) ?Plastic or metal roof panels or systems, corrugated or ribbed roof panels, hot mopped systems, 
built-up, gravel, torched on foam or fluid applied, roll or membrane roofing, and the like are 
prohibited on any roof which is visible from any roadway and/or residentially designated area. 
This does not exclude the use of architectural standing seam metal roofing or galvanized 5-V 
crimp metal roofing. Use of metal or plastic tooling materials may be approved as specified 
under the section as finish materials for walls, fascia, and trim. 
(8) ?Partial parapet walls are prohibited. If a parapet wall is used on a building, then a parapet wall 
of the same style and material is to be continuous around all sides of the structure, except 
where incorporated with a visible roof structure or other architectural element. Introduction of 
any visible roof structure shall not appear "fake." Any facade that is not visible from a roadway 
and/or residentially designated area shall not require a continuous parapet wall on that facade. 
Stepping or sloping of a parapet wall in conjunction with a low sloped roof is prohibited. 
(e) ?Site elements: 
(1) ?All telephones, vending machines, or any facility dispensing merchandise or a service on 
private property shall be confined to a space built into the building or buildings, or enclosed in a 
separate structure compatible with the main building's architecture. These areas are to be 
designed with the safety of the user in mind. Public phones and ATMs should have 24-hour 
access. 
(2) ?No advertising will be allowed on any exposed amenity or facility such as benches or trash 
containers. 
(3) ?When feasible, existing specimen trees should be preserved in place or relocated on site. Use 
of tree wells, as well as adaptation and variations of siting in order to conserve native 
vegetation, is encouraged. 
(4) ?The use of thematic and decorative site lighting is encouraged. Low lights of a modest scale 
can be used along with feature lighting that emphasizes plants, trees, entrances, and exits. 
Light bollards are encouraged along pedestrian paths. The color of the light sources (lamp) 
should be consistent throughout the project. Color of site lighting luminaries, poles, and the like 
shall be limited to dark bronze, black, or dark green (decorative fixtures attached to buildings 
are exempt from the fixture color requirement). 
Lighting is not to be used as a form of advertising or in a manner that draws considerably more 
attention to the building or grounds at night than in the day. Site lighting shall be designed to 
direct light into the property. Lighting shall avoid any annoyance to the neighbors from 
brightness or glare. 
Roadway style luminaries (fixtures) such as cobra heads, Nema heads, and the like are 
prohibited. Wall pads and flood light luminaries are prohibited where the light source would be 
visible from a roadway, parking area and/or residentially designated area. High intensity 
discharge (e.g. high pressure sodium, metal halide, mercury vapor, tungsten halogen) lighting 
fixtures mounted on buildings and poles higher than 18 feet above the parking lot grade, and 
under canopies, shall be directed perpendicular to the ground. Other than decorative and low 
level/low height lighting, no light source or lens shall project above or below a fixture, box, 
shield, or canopy. 
(f) ?Screening devices. 
(1) ?"Visually offensive elements", whether freestanding, mounted on roofs, or anywhere on a 
structure, shall be concealed from view on all sides. "Visually offensive elements" consist of: 
Walk-in coolers/freezers, transformers, electrical equipment (including panels and meters), 
water or waste piping and valves, pumps, fans, exhaust vents, compressors, generators, tanks, 
and similar equipment. Individual screens, building elements, or appropriate landscaping, are to 
be used to completely screen the offensive elements. Parapet walls, visible roof structures, 
individual screens, or building elements, are to be used to completely screen roof mounted, 
visually offensive elements. They are to be screened from view from any point around the entire 
building perimeter. Screening devices shall relate to the building's style of architecture and 
materials. All screening devices shall be designed so that no part of the offensive element 
extends beyond the top of the screen, measured horizontally. Rooftop screening devices will not 
be required for plumbing roof vents which are less than four inches in diameter and less than 12 
inches above roof penetration. These roof vents should be located where they will be least 
visible from roadways. Where chain link or similar fencing is allowed to be used (e.g., around 
storm water ponds), such fencing shall be green or black and shall be located and landscaped 
so as to visually screen the fencing from public view. 
(2) ?"Nuisance elements" shall be visually screened from adjacent roadways and/or residentially 
designated areas with solid walls in addition to any required landscaping. Loading dock 
buffering shall meet standards of the landscape ordinance (article XIV). All other walls shall be a 
minimum of six feet in height. All dumpster and trash container areas shall be completely 
screened on all sides. Acoustical material shall be used on the inside face of walls around 
HVAC equipment. 
(3) ?Individual screens and walls shall relate to the building's style of architecture and materials. A 
durable material such as reinforced concrete masonry units is recommended with an 
architecturally compatible finish. Wood fences are encouraged. 
(4) ?Chain link fencing, with or without slats, is prohibited as a screening device for screening 
visually offensive elements and nuisance elements. 


Sec. 54-4-21.B.4. - Colors and building graphics. 
(a) ?The following building graphics are prohibited. Polka dots, circles, vertical stripes, diagonal stripes 
or lines, plaids, animals, and symbols such as lightning bolts. However, legally registered trademarks 
which directly relate to the building occupant (not trademarks of products or services sold or 
displayed) are allowed, subject to applicable sign and color regulations. 
(b) ?Color standards. All buildings and accessory structures within the CR-512 Overlay District shall be 
limited to the colors listed in the Overlay Districts master color list. 
(1) ?Base building colors. Base building colors relate to wall and parapet wall areas and shall be 
limited to colors consisting of white and light neutral colors in the warm range. 
(2) ?Secondary building colors. Secondary building colors relate to larger trim areas and shall not 
exceed 30% of the area of any one building facade elevation. These colors consist of a mid-
range intensity of the base building colors and complementary colors, and include all base 
building colors. 
(3) ?Trim colors. Trim colors are used for accent of smaller trim areas, are the brightest group of 
colors allowed, and include all base building and secondary building colors. Use of metallic 
colors (i.e.: gold, silver, bronze, chrome, and other extraordinarily bright colors) and use of 
garish colors, such as fluorescent colors (e.g. hot pink, shocking yellow), is prohibited. Trim 
colors shall not exceed ten percent of the surface area of any one building facade elevation. 
(4) ?Roof colors (requirements for roofs that are visible from a roadway and/or residentially 
designated area). These colors consist of natural mill finish, white, light neutral colors in the 
warm range, blue, and a limited number of earth-tone colors. Mixing or alternating colors of 
metal panels is prohibited. For non-metal roofs, other than natural variations in color or color 
blends within a tile, the mixing or alternating of roof color in the same roof material is prohibited. 
Colors and color blends shall not be contrary to the intent of this code. Color for roofing which is 
glared, slurry coated, or artificially colored on the surface by any other means shall be limited to 
the same colors as approved for metal roofs. 
(5) ?Natural finish materials. The color regiments listed above shall not apply to the colors of true 
natural finish materials such as brick, stone, terra cotta, concrete roof tiles, slate, integrally 
colored concrete masonry units, copper, and wood. Color commonly found in natural materials 
are acceptable, unless such material has been artificially colored in a manner which would be 
contrary to the intent of these requirements. Black, gray, blue, or extremely dark colors for brick. 
concrete masonry units, roofing, wood or stone is prohibited. This provision shall not prohibit the 
use of colors for natural finish roofing materials that match those colors approved for metal 
roofs. 
(6) ?Awning colors. Awning colors may include base building colors and/or secondary building 
colors and/or trim colors. However, secondary building colors and trim color area used for 
awnings shall be included in the percentage limitation on the secondary building color and trim 
color surface area of a facade. 
(7) ?Overlay District master color list. The Overlay Districts master color list and approved color 
board shall be maintained and made available by the planning and growth management staff. 
The list can be mailed or faxed upon request. 


Sec. 54-4-21.B.5. - Landscaping. 
    The city landscaping requirements of article XIV apply except as noted herein. 
(a) ?Increased canopy tree size. All canopy trees required under normal landscaping and buffering 
requirements and special CR 512 corridor plan requirements for projects within the corridor 
shall have a minimum height of 12 feet and minimum spread of six feet at time of planting. Palm 
tree clusters may be used as canopy trees as specified in the landscape ordinance. However, 
such palm trees shall have a minimum clear trunk of 12 feet. 
(b) ?CR 512 and thoroughfare plan road buffer. Within the corridor plan area, the following 
landscape buffer shall be provided along the entire length of a site's CR 512 frontage, except for 
approved driveways: 
CR-
512 
Fro
nta
ge 
Buf
fer 
De
pth 
Min
imu
m 
Pla
ntin
g/B
er
m  
Req
uire
me
nts 
per 
100
? 
Ove
r 
400 
feet 
10 
feet 
5 
can
opy 
tre
es  
6 
Un
der
stor
y 
tre
es  
Con
tinu
ous 
hed
ge 1 
: 
2.5-
3 
feet 
hig
h at 
pla
ntin
g  
Ber
m: 
1'-
1.5' 
hig
h 1 
250 
to 
400 
feet 
10 
feet 
4.5 
Can
opy 
tre
es  
5.5 
Un
der
stor
y 
tre
es  
Con
tinu
ous 
hed
ge 1 
: 
1.5-
2.5 
feet 
hig
h at 
pla
ntin
g  
Ber
m: 
1.5'
-
2.5' 
hig
h 
Les
s 
tha
n 
250 
feet 
10 
feet 
4 
Can
opy 
tre
es  
5 
Un
der
stor
y 
tre
es  
Con
tinu
ous 
hed
ge 1 
: 
1.5-
2.5 
feet 
hig
h at 
pla
ntin
g  
Ber
m: 
1.5 
'-3' 
hig
h 1 
 
1 NOTE: The hedge and berm combination shall provide a visual screen four feet high above the 
grade of the project site parking area. Hedge material shall provide full screening to the ground; 
therefore, a mix of myrtles and shrubs with similar leafing characteristics shall not be used for 
hedge material unless a double row arrangement is used. At the time of a certificate of 
occupancy (CO) for the project site, the combination of berming and hedging shall provide a 
four-foot visual screen, subject to city sight distance requirements. Undulations in the berm and 
corresponding hedge height are encouraged. 
Hedge shrubs shall be planted no further apart than 24 inches on center along the length of the 
buffer strip, to form a hedge that appears continuous as viewed from the roadway being 
buffered. 
Berms shall have a slope no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, and shall be 
continuous along the length of the buffer strip, except where berm modifications may be 
necessary for tree preservation as determined by the planning and growth management director 
or his designee. 
Clustering of trees along the buffer strip is encouraged, and uniform spacing of trees is 
discouraged, except where used to emphasize a particular planting theme or development style. 
Hedge plantings may be asymmetrical, and a buffer wall not to exceed four feet in height except 
as specified below, is allowed within the middle one-third of the buffer strip's width (measured 
perpendicular to the road being buffered) if landscaping material is planted on each side of the 
wall. 
(c) ?Special buffer for multifamily projects. Multifamily projects shall provide the CR512 and 
thoroughfare plan road buffer as described above, with the additional requirement that the 
buffer shall include a six-foot opaque screen consistent with specifications in article XIV. Where 
a wall or fence is used, such wall or fence shall be located with the middle one-third of the buffer 
strip's width (measured perpendicular to the road being buffed), and landscaping material shall 
be planted on each side of the wall or fence. 
(d) ?Landscape islands. Landscape islands shall be backfilled at least to the top of curb or 
protective barrier, and may be bermed to a maximum height of 24 inches above the adjacent 
parking lot grade. 


Sec. 54-4-21.B.6. - Special sign regulations. 
(a) ?Scope. These special regulations are in addition to the city's sign ordinance and shall supersede 
any less restrictive provisions found in the sign ordinance. All signage shall comply with the 
requirements of the sign ordinance except as modified by these special sign regulations. 
(b) ?Approval or change of sign design required. Any exterior change to CR 512 Overlay District signage 
shall require review and approval by the planning and growth management department. Such 
changes shall include, but not be limited to, changes of sign area (square footage), sign copy area 
(square footage), sign copy (this does not apply to "changeable copy" signage), height, shape, style, 
location, colors, materials, or method of illumination. Routine maintenance and replacement of 
materials which does not affect the approved design shall be exempt from this review and approval. 
Changes to signs not originally required to comply with these special sign regulations are addressed 
in the "nonconforming signs" section of these regulations. 
(c) ?Prohibited signs. The provisions stated herein are in addition to prohibitions listed in article XVI, 
Signage and Advertising. The following are prohibited: 
(1) ?Lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or 
color, except for time-temperature-date signs. Public signs permitted pursuant to article XVI, 
Signage and Advertising provisions, are excluded from this prohibition and are allowed. 
(2) ?Electronic message boards and message centers, electronic adjustable alternation displays, or 
any sign that automatically displays words, numerals, and/or characters in a programmed 
manner. Traffic regulatory and directional signs permitted pursuant to article XVI, Signage and 
Advertising provisions, are excluded from this prohibition and are allowed. 
(3) ?Portable or trailer style changeable copy signs, excepting approved special event signs. 
(4) ?Signs with the optical illusions of movement by means of a design that presents a pattern 
capable of giving the illusion of motion or changing of copy. 
(5) ?Strings of light bulbs used on nonresidential structures for commercial purposes, other than 
traditional holiday decorations at the appropriate time of the year. 
(6) ?Signs that emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter, such as smoke or steam. 
(7) ?Neon lighting, fiber optics or similar systems, which exceed six square feet in area, and where 
the neon tube, fiber optic or similar system is visible from the outside is prohibited. Neon 
lighting, fiber optics and similar systems shall not be used for outlining the building including the 
windows. 
(8) ?Rough plywood used for permanent signs. 
(9) ?Any material used in such a manner for a permanent sign that results in a sign having a 
semblance to the look of a temporary sign but intended by the owner to be permanent. 
(10) ?Installation of an additional sign (or signs) that does not harmonize with the design or 
materials of the initial sign, such as: 
a. ?Attachment or mounting of signs where mounting hardware is left exposed. 
b. ?Signs with different color cabinets, frames, or structure. 
(11) ?Appliques or letters of vinyl and similar materials for use on any permanent monument sign. 
They are also prohibited for use on any permanent wall or facade signs that exceed three 
square feet. Window signs as allowed in this article are excluded from this prohibition. 
Regardless of size, appliques or vinyl letters are prohibited for use on plastic sign faces. 
(12) ?Changeable copy signs for office, industrial, commercial and residential uses, unless such 
sign is incorporated within the allowable monument sign area. 
(d) ?Signs that are encouraged: 
(1) ?Shaped and fashioned "wood look" multi-level signs (i.e.: sand blasted or carved), and signs 
having durable sign cabinet material such as high-density polyurethane arid PVC. 
(2) ?Internally illuminated aluminum cabinet with textured finish, and cutout inset or push through 
acrylic letters. 
(3) ?Backlit reverse pan channel letters (opaque faced) mounted on sign that is harmonious with the 
project's architecture. 
(4) ?Signage that relates to the building's style of architecture and materials. 
(5) ?Thematic signage. 
(e) ?Colors. 
(1) ?The following colors are encouraged for signage: 
a. ?Use of earth-tone colors and pastels. 
b. ?Darker backgrounds with light color sign copy. 
c. ?Use of colors that match or are compatible with the project's architecture. 
d. ?Polished or weathered true bronze, brass, or copper metal finishes are acceptable and 
encouraged. 
(2) ?The following colors are prohibited for signage: 
a. ?The use of bright metallic or mill finish colors (i.e., gold, silver, bronze, chrome, aluminum, 
stainless steel, or other extraordinarily bright colors). Colors such as medium or dark 
bronze are acceptable and encouraged. Precious metal colors are allowed on sand blasted 
or carved "wood look" style signs. 
b. ?The use of garish colors, such as fluorescent colors, is prohibited. 
(f) ?Multi-tenant spaces. Applicants of proposed multi-tenant projects, such as shopping centers, out 
parcels, industrial complexes and parks, and office complexes and parks, shall submit a sign 
program for review and approval. This sign program shall communicate the coordination and 
consistency of design, colors, materials, illumination, and locations of signage. In a multi-tenant 
project where no established pattern exists as described above, the owner of the multi-tenant project 
shall be required to submit a sign program for approval prior to issuance of any new sign permits for 
a tenant space. 
(g) ?Design criteria and additional restrictions. 
(1) ?Freestanding changeable copy signs. Where allowed, a freestanding changeable copy sign 
shall not comprise more than 80% of the total area of the actual sign. 
(2) ?Wall/facade signage. 
a. ?The maximum vertical dimension of a facade or wall sign shall not exceed 25% of the 
building height. 
b. ?Awnings with lettering shall be considered wall signs. Where lettering is used on an 
awning, the area of lettering shall be included in the percentage limitation of a project's 
sign area. 
c. ?Lettering, logos, and trim colors on canopy fascia shall be considered a wall sign and shall 
be limited to 33% of the fascia area of any one elevation. Internally illuminated signs shall 
not be placed on a canopy structure, and no sign shall be placed above the fascia on a 
canopy structure. 
(3) ?Changeable copy wall signs for theaters. Theaters may utilize up to 80% of actual sign area for 
display of names of films, plays or other performances currently showing. 
(4) ?Illumination. All external flood sign illumination shall be mounted at grade, directly in front of the 
sign area. Light source shall be completely shielded from oncoming motorist's view. 
(h) ?Nonconforming signs : It is the intent of this section to allow nonconforming signs permitted before 
the adoption of this code to continue until they are no longer used, or become hazardous, but not to 
encourage their survival. Such signs are hereby declared to be incompatible with the overall intent of 
this section. 
(1) ?Removal of nonconforming signs: All nonconforming signs, except as provided for herein, shall 
be removed. 
(2) ?Continuance of nonconforming signs: A nonconforming sign may be continued, subject to the 
following provisions: 
a. ?A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or increased in any way from its lawful size at 
the time of the adoption of this code. 
b. ?Nonconforming signs or nonconforming sign structures that are defined as abandoned 
signs shall not be permitted for reuse. 
c. ?Except as otherwise provided herein, there may be a change of tenancy or ownership of a 
nonconforming sign, without the loss of nonconforming status, if the property is not 
abandoned. 
(3) ?Repairs, maintenance, and improvements: Normal repairs, maintenance, and improvements 
may be made. 
(4) ?Reconstruction: If any nonconforming sign is destroyed by fire, flood, explosion, collapse, wind, 
or other catastrophe, it shall not be used or reconstructed except in full conformity with the 
provisions of these special regulations. 
(5) ?Casual, temporary, or illegal use : the casual, temporary, or illegal use of any sign shall not 
be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create any rights in the 
continuance of such use. 


Sec. 54-4-21.B.7. - Nonconformities. 
    Within the CR 512 District area, legally established existing development and uses that do not 
comply with these special regulations are grandfathered in. All nonconforming uses and structures are 
governed by article VIII. In addition, within the CR 512 District area the following nonconformity 
regulations shall apply: 
(a) ?Nonconforming property: It is the intent of this chapter to allow nonconforming properties to 
continue, but also encourage their conformity to what extent is possible considering the existing 
site conditions and characteristics. A "compatible property" shall be considered in compliance 
with the intent of the CR 512 District special regulations. 
(b) ?Continuance of nonconforming property: A nonconforming property may be continued, subject 
to the following provisions: 
(1) ?Use of nonconforming structures abandoned for a period of six or more consecutive 
months located on a nonconforming property shall not be permitted until the property is 
brought into compliance with the requirements of a compatible property. 
(2) ?Except as otherwise provided herein, there may be a change of tenancy or ownership of a 
nonconforming property, without the loss of nonconforming status, if use of the 
nonconforming structures is not abandoned for a period of six or more consecutive months. 
(3) ?Colors of a structure located on a nonconforming property shall not be changed from 
those existing at the time of the adoption of these special regulations, unless the new, to-
be-painted colors comply with the CR 512 special color regulations. 
(4) ?Projects on nonconforming properties requiring a building permit (excluding permits for 
roofs or minor repairs) shall be required to bring the property into compliance as a 
"compatible property." 
(5) ?A structure located on a nonconforming property shall not be enlarged or increased in any 
way from its lawful size at the time of the adoption of these special regulations. Where 
such changes are made, a building permit and compliance with the requirements of a 
"compatible property" are required for the enlargement or addition. 


DIVISION C. - SEBASTIAN BOULEVARD TRIANGLE OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 


Sec. 54-4-21.C.1. - Intent. 
    The Sebastian Boulevard Triangle is envisioned as a mixed-use district that will extend the town 
center outward from its traditional riverfront district into the more recently developed business district 
along Sebastian Boulevard/County Road 512. As a gateway into the City of Sebastian riverfront district, 
the triangle area will have an attractive, well maintained, orderly and uncluttered appearance which will be 
characterized by impressive vegetation and landscaping; complementary buildings and signs with 
enhanced designs and aesthetic appearances; and a safe transportation system that accommodates 
mass transit, pedestrians, bicycles, and other transportation alternatives, as well as automobiles. 
(Ord. O-05-13, § 1, 6-22-2005) 


Sec. 54-4-21.C.2. - Boundaries of the Sebastian Boulevard Triangle Overlay District. 
    The boundaries of the Sebastian Boulevard Triangle Overlay District shall include all the properties 
included in the Sebastian Community Redevelopment District lying north of the eastbound roadway of the 
divided right-of-way of the twin pairs of Sebastian Boulevard, and west of the CSX Railway right-of-way. 
(Ord. O-05-13, § 1, 6-22-2005) 


Sec. 54-4-21.C.3. - Adoption of performance standards. 
    The performance and nonconformity standards set forth for the Riverfront Overlay District in sections 
54-4-21.A.3 through 54-4-21.A.9 shall apply to properties within the Sebastian Boulevard Triangle 
Overlay District. 
(Ord. O-05-13, § 1, 6-22-2005) 


Sec. 54-4-21.C.4. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 54-4-21.1, the permitted and conditional uses within the 
various zoning districts of this Code shall be modified for the Sebastian Boulevard Triangle Overlay 
District to list as follows: 
CG Zone 
Permitted uses: 
Cultural or civic facilities. 
Churches. 
Clubs and lodges, public and private. 
Business and professional offices, excluding drive-through facilities. 
Medical services. 
Commercial retail ? 20,000 sq. ft. 
Plant nurseries. 
Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities. 
Trade and skilled services. 
Hotels and motels. 
Administrative services, public and private. 
Accessory uses to permitted uses. 
Home occupations. 
All uses permitted within the RM-8 Zoning District. 
Conditional uses: 
Bars and lounges. 
Commercial retail > 20,000 sq. ft. 
Business and professional offices with drive-through facilities. 
Farmer's markets. 
Funeral homes. 
Nursing homes. 
Child care services. 
Utilities, public and private. 
Parks and recreation, public. 
Protective and emergency services, public. 
Restaurants with drive-through facilities. 
Veterinary services. 
Wholesale trades and services. 
Commercial amusements, enclosed. 
Accessory uses to conditional uses. 
Vehicular sales indoors. 
Gasoline sales as part of retail operation. 
Parking garages. 
PS Zone 
{No changes}. 
IN Zone 
Permitted uses: 
Business and professional offices, with or without drive-through facilities. 
Commercial retail ? 5,000 sq. ft. 
Commercial amusements, enclosed. 
Plant nurseries. 
Restaurants with or without drive-through facilities. 
Trades and skilled services. 
Wholesale trades and services. 
Veterinary services. 
Clubs and lodges, public and private. 
Administrative services, public and private. 
Accessory watchman facilities. 
Medical services. 
Accessory uses to permitted uses. 
Conditional uses: 
Commercial retail with > 5,000 sq. ft. 
Hotels and motels. 
Protective and emergency services, public. 
Parks and recreation, public. 
Parking garages. 
Utilities, public and private. 
Commercial amusements, unenclosed. 
Flea markets. 
Electronics, research and development, and similar uses ? 5,000 sq. ft. 
Vehicular sales enclosed. 
All uses permitted within the RM-8 Zoning District. 
Accessory uses to conditional uses. 
(Ord. O-05-13, § 1, 6-22-2005) 


Chapter V - GLOSSARY 


ARTICLE XXII. - LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS 


Sec. 54-5-22.1. - General interpretation. 
    For the purpose of the land development regulations, certain terms used herein are herewith defined. 
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the 
singular number include the plural; and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word 
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "structure" shall include the word 
"building". The word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, 
leased or intended to be used. The word "lot" includes the word "plot", "tract", and "building site". 


Sec. 54-5-22.2. - Definition of terms. 
    Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be interpreted first by reference to the comprehensive plan 
and this code; secondly, by reference to generally accepted engineering, planning, or other professional 
terminology if technical; and otherwise according to common usage, unless the context clearly indicates 
otherwise. 
    For the purpose of enforcing and administering this code, the following words shall have the 
definition and meanings herein ascribed: 
    Abandon. To discontinue a land use for a period of six months without demonstrating an intent to 
continue the use as indicated by the following: 
(1) ?Allowing licenses to lapse; 
(2) ?Removing meters; 
(3) ?Not maintaining structure in a habitable condition; 
(4) ?Not making unit available for occupation (i.e. advertising or marketing through a realtor or other 
agent); and/or 
(5) ?Failure to perform pursuant to the terms of an active building permit. 
    Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-
of-way, alley, or easement. 
    Accessory structure. A structure which is customarily associated with, subordinate in size and 
incidental in use to the principal structure and located on the same site. Examples are tool sheds and 
garages. 
    Accessory use. A use that is clearly incidental to the principal use, that is subordinate in area, extent 
or purpose to the principal use and that contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the 
principal use, and that is located on the same lot with such principal building or use. 
    Accessway. A paved or unpaved area intended to provide ingress and egress from a public right-of-
way to a public or private premises, including an off-street parking area. 
    Addition, building. Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the 
addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. 
    Address of convenience. A home occupation shall be considered as an "address of convenience" if 
the activities thereof consist solely of receiving phone calls, making phone calls, receiving mail, storing 
accessory supplies or equipment or keeping business records of the home occupation. 
    Adjoining lot or land. A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line. 
    Adverse impacts. Any modifications, alterations or effects upon a feature or characteristic of water or 
flood prone land, which are, or potentially may be, harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or 
property, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor 
recreation. The term includes secondary and cumulative as well as direct impacts. 
    Advertising display. Any device including but not limited to balloons, flags, pennants, or propellers, 
contrivance, statue, structure or sign used as a display, regardless of size or shape and used for the 
purpose of attracting attention or making known, the origin or place of sale on the property with such 
advertising display. 
    Airport elevation. The highest point of the airport's usable landing area measured in feet above sea 
level. 
    Airport hazard. Any structure, street or use of land, which obstructs the air space required for landing 
or take-off at the airport, or which is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft. 
    Alley. Any public or private right-of-way set aside for secondary public travel and servicing, which is 
less than 30 feet in width. 
    Alteration. Any work beyond maintenance of the original condition including additions to an existing 
system, a change of any part of an existing system to capacities or locations different from those 
originally constructed, or changes in the rate, volume or timing of discharges. 
    Amenities. Site/subdivision improvements which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
club houses, swimming pools, tennis courts, golf courses, nature trails, playgrounds and other such 
recreation areas or gathering places for use by the subdivision residents and/or members of the general 
public. 
    Apartment. A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment building arranged, intended or designed 
to be used as a home or residence of one family and with kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of the one 
family. 
    Apartment building. A building which is used or intended to be used as a home or residence for three 
or more families living in separate apartments. 
    Appeal . A request for a review of a decision, finding, order, interpretation or other action concerning 
the land development regulations. 
    Aquaculture. Any activity devoted to the hatching, raising, and breeding of fish or other aquatic plants 
or animals for sale or personal use. 
    Aquifer recharge areas. An area that has soils and geological features that are conducive to allowing 
significant amounts of surface water to percolate into groundwater. 
    Arcade. A covered walkway located entirely on private property along the street facade of a building 
that is open to the adjacent street between columns, which may be either weight-bearing or cosmetic. 
    Architectural feature. A structural or cosmetic feature of a building or structure, including but not 
limited to chimneys, bay windows, cornices, coping, parapets, porches, steps, staircases, screened 
utilities, and tower structures. 
    As built plans. Amended construction drawings specifying the actual locations, dimensions, 
elevations, capacities, and capabilities of structures and facilities as they have been constructed on or 
under the site; also known as drawings of record. 
    Automotive vehicle. Any power-propelled vehicle or conveyance designed and used for the purpose 
of transporting or moving persons, animals, freight, merchandise or any substance. The phrase shall 
include passenger cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, scooters and station wagons, but shall not include 
tractors, construction equipment or machinery or any device used for performing a job except as stated 
above. 
    Awning. Any structure made of flexible fabric or similar rigid material covering a metal frame attached 
to a building, whether or not the same is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against 
the building when not in use. 
    Balcony. A structural platform surrounded by a railing or other retaining device which projects from 
the street facade of a building at an elevated floor with or without direct support from the ground. 
    Banktop. The point where the upward slope of the land from the water surface, or the bottom of a dry 
excavation, intersects with the existing ground elevation or crest of berm, whichever is of higher elevation. 
    Barrier. A solid and unbroken visual screen, including a masonry fence or solid wood fence which 
presents a 100% opaque screen. 
    Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Berm. Mounding of soil which is planted with living plant material designed as a natural landscape 
buffer to screen incompatible land uses or to absorb or otherwise reduce nuisance impacts, such as 
noise, smoke, glare or other similar impacts. 
    Boat or vessel. Every description of power-propelled watercraft used or capable of being used as a 
means of transportation on water, including all types of boats and all uses thereof. As used herein, the 
terms boat or vessel are synonymous with watercraft. 
    Buffer strip. A parcel or tract of land, plant material, or other landscaping that is used to separate one 
use from another to shield or block noise, light or other nuisances. 
    Buildable area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards and required open space and 
landscaped areas have been provided. 
    Builder. Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, realtor or corporation who 
constructs residential or commercial building for sale or use by the public. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof and supported by columns or walls and which is entirely 
separated from any other structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors or 
windows or any similar opening. 
    Building coverage. The percentage of lot area covered by buildings and including roofed porches, 
decks and similar structures. 
    Building permit. For purposes of the concurrency management ordinance, a permit which authorizes 
the construction of a new building, or the expansion of floor area, or the increase in the number of 
dwelling units contained in an existing building, or change in use, shall qualify as a building permit. 
    Building, principal. A building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. 
    Camper: 
(1) ?A trailer or a semitrailer which is designed, constructed, and equipped as a dwelling place, 
living abode, or sleeping place (either temporarily or permanently) and is equipped for use as a 
conveyance on streets and highways; or 
(2) ?Any motor vehicle which is designed, constructed, or modified, and equipped as a dwelling 
place, living abode, or sleeping place (either temporarily or permanently); or 
(3) ?A trailer or a semitrailer, the chassis and exterior shell of which is designed and constructed for 
use as a camper, as defined in subparagraphs (1) or (2), but which is used instead, 
permanently or temporarily, for the advertising, sales, display, or promotion of merchandise or 
services. 
    Canopy. The upper portion of a tree consisting of limbs, branches, and leaves. 
    Capacity. Refers to the availability of a public service or facility to accommodate users, expressed in 
an appropriate unit of measure, such as gallons per day or average daily trips. 
    Capacity, available. Capacity that can be reserved or committed to future users for a specific public 
facility. 
    Capacity, committed. The amount of capacity which has been committed to accommodate existing 
developments, developments which have been issued a final development order, committed 
development, and vested developments. 
    Capacity, reserved. Capacity that has been removed from the available capacity pool and allocated 
to a particular property for a set period of time. 
    Central zone. Air space extending upward from the surface of the earth which may include one or 
more airports and is normally a circular area of five statute miles in radius, with extension where 
necessary to include instrument approach and departure paths. 
    Certificate of completion. A certificate issued for subdivision projects by the engineering department 
and/or building department after final inspection of a subdivision or development activity acknowledges 
that improvements have been completed in conformity with the requirements of city land development 
regulations and with the approved development plans and specifications. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A certificate issued by the building department after final inspection of a 
development activity acknowledges that improvements have been completed in conformity with the 
requirements of city land development regulations, building code standards, and with the approved land 
development plans and specifications. 
    Clearing. The process of removing trees, brush and other obstructions from a tract of land. 
    Clear space. An area clear of any obstructions or projections, which measures 20 feet in length, 
measured from the point of entrance, and at least ten feet in width. 
    Climb gradient. An aircraft instrument departure procedure requiring adherence to a minimum climb, 
slope or grade expressed in feet per nautical mile. 
    Commercial mulching machines. A machine which can be transported to a site and erected for the 
purpose of chopping vegetative material into mulch. This definition does not include a chipping machine, 
with drum or disc cutters, which is typically pulled behind a truck or moved by hand, and the vegetation is 
fed by hand. 
    Comprehensive plan. The City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan, as may hereinafter be amended 
and which was prepared and adopted pursuant to the "County and Municipal Planning and Land 
Development Regulation Act", chapter 163; part II, F.S. 
    Concurrency certificate. A written certification of the availability of concurrency facility capacity 
issued by the planning and growth management director. 
    Concurrency facilities. Public facilities and services for which a level of service must be met 
concurrent with the impacts of development or an acceptable deadline, as mandated in the 
Comprehensive Plan pursuant to chapter 163, F.S., and 9J-5.0055, Florida Administrative Codes, shall 
include: 
•?
Pot
abl
e 
Wa
ter 
•?
San
itar
y 
Se
wer 
•?
Dra
ina
ge 
•?
Rec
rea
tion 
•?
Soli
d 
Wa
ste 
•?
Roa
ds 
 
    Concurrency management monitoring system. The data collection, processing and analysis 
performed by the city planning and growth management department to determine available capacity for 
concurrency facilities. Data utilized shall be the most current reliable information available to the city. 
    Concurrency management system. The procedure and process that the city uses to ensure that no 
development order or building permit is issued by the city unless the necessary concurrency facilities are 
available or are assured to be available consistent with the City of Sebastian Comprehensive Plan. The 
procedure and process is also intended to ensure that sufficient capacity for concurrency facilities is 
available to meet and maintain adopted levels of service. 
    Concurrency review. Evaluation by the planning and growth management director based on adopted 
level of service standards to ensure that public facilities and services needed to support development are 
available concurrent with the impacts of such development as defined in this article and if such facilities 
are not available, that the developer of a proposed development bear a cost of providing public services 
and facilities at a level of service defined by the comprehensive plan and concurrent with the impacts of a 
proposed development. 
    Concurrency status report. A status report prepared by the city identifying available concurrency 
facility capacity. The status report shall be produced, modified and adjusted twice a year as a result of the 
reservation of capacity or other act that alters the availability of concurrency facility capacity. 
    Conditional use. A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon successful demonstration 
that the use as proposed on a specific site will comply with all the conditions and standards for the 
location, design, and/or operation of such use as specified in the land development regulations and as 
authorized by the city. 
    Conditional use permit. Any administrative permit issued pursuant to article VI, Conditional Use 
Criteria. 
    Conservation easement. An easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate 
to retaining land or water areas predominately in their natural, scenic, open, or wooded condition; 
retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife; or maintaining existing land uses. 
    Construction. The building of or substantial improvement to any structure, or the clearing, filling, or 
excavation of any land. It shall also mean any alterations in the size or use of any existing structure or the 
appearance of any land. When appropriate to the context, "construction" refers to the act of construction 
or the result of construction. 
    Construction plans. Those detailed engineered plans, specifications and calculations prepared in 
accordance with city and other applicable regulations, codes and standards, submitted to the city for 
approval of a site and development plan or final subdivision plan, which set forth the specific 
improvements to be made in conjunction with development as they affect the existing site, its boundary 
conditions, topography, drainage, access, and associated road and other rights-of-way and easements. 
    Contiguous. Next to, abutting, or touching, and having a boundary, or portion thereof, which is joined. 
    Control elevation. That height above sea level established for a surface water management system 
and its control structures by the St. Johns River Water Management District through the analysis of 
engineering criteria for such systems and flood routing calculations, or as determined by the city engineer 
where St. Johns River Water Management District permits are not required. 
    Courtyard. An open, unobstructed, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same premises on 
which the building is located, or an unoccupied open space on the same lot with the principal building and 
fully enclosed on at least three adjacent sides by walls of the principal building. 
    Debris. Fragments or accumulations of pieces or cuttings of metal, rubber, plastics, cloth, paper, 
glass, or any other natural, manufactured or vegetative matter. 
    Decision height. The height at which decision must be made, during an instrument approach, to 
either continue the approach or to execute a missed approach. 
    Density. Density is defined as the maximum number of units divided by the gross land area. It is 
typically expressed in units per acre. 
    Density, maximum gross residential. The maximum gross residential density shall be determined by 
dividing the "maximum allowable units" by the "gross acres of land" (i.e., dwelling units/gross land acres). 
    Design capacity. The potential or suitability for holding, storing or accommodating the demands upon 
a concurrency facility. 
    Detention (detain). The collection and temporary storage of stormwater in such a manner as to 
provide for treatment through physical, chemical or biological processes with subsequent gradual release 
of the stormwater to the receiving waters, in which the capacity for the specified treatment volume of 
stormwater is again provided within 96 hours following a storm event. 
"On-line detention" is temporary storage along the axis of the drainage system; whereas "off-line 
detention" is temporary storage at a location away from the system's direct path. 
    Developer. A "developer" is any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, 
trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this ordinance to effect the subdivision 
and/or development of land in the City of Sebastian. 
    Developer's agreement. An agreement between the city, county or other jurisdictional agency and 
another party associated with the development of land, including agreements associated with 
development orders issued pursuant to article III. 
    Development. The commencement of any building activity or excavation, including the creation of 
any physical change in the use or appearance of any structure or land. The following activities or uses 
shall be considered development: 
(1) ?A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the external appearance of a 
structure on land. 
(2) ?A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in 
a structure or on land or a material increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing 
establishments, offices, or dwelling units in a structure or on land. 
(3) ?Alteration of a shore, stream, lake, pond, or canal, including any coastal construction. 
(4) ?Demolition of a structure. 
(5) ?Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(6) ?Placing fill on a parcel of land. 
    Development order. Any action granting, denying, or granting with conditions, an application for a 
development; such as preliminary subdivision plans, final subdivision plans, site and development plans, 
construction plans and planned unit developments. 
    Development order, final. Any building permit(s) authorizing construction of a new building, or the 
expansion of floor area, or the increase in the number of dwelling units contained in an existing building, 
or modifications to an existing building, or modifications to an existing building or site to accommodate a 
change in use of which a new certificate of occupancy (CO) will be required, and any CO authorizing a 
change in the use or authorizing the initial use of a parcel or structure or portion thereof where there is no 
other final development order in effect, reviewed and approved in accordance with this ordinance 
authorizing said use. 
    Development permit. Any building permit, zoning permit, preliminary subdivision plan, subdivision or 
other plat approval, site and development plan approval, comprehensive plan land use amendment, 
rezoning, certification, special use, variance or any other official action of the City of Sebastian or other 
state or local government commission, board, agency, department or official having the effect of 
permitting development of land located within the geographic area subject to the provisions of the City of 
Sebastian Land Development Regulations. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH). The standard measurement of the diameter, in inches, of a single-
stemmed tree measured at four and one-half feet above grade. The DBH of a multistemmed tree shall 
equal the sum total of the diameter of all stems measured at four and one-half feet above grade. 
    Discharge. The outflow of water from a project site, drainage basin or other facility. 
    Drainage system (artificial). Any canal, ditch, culvert, dike, storm sewer or other manmade facility 
which tends to control the surface flow of water. 
    Drainage system (natural). Surface streams or marshes which convey water to natural points of 
drainage. 
    Drive-through facilities. An establishment, which by design, physical facilities, service or by 
packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while 
remaining in motor vehicle. 
    Driveway. Every entrance or exit used by vehicular traffic to or from properties adjoining roadways. 
    Driveway, divided. A driveway so designated that traffic entering it is separated from traffic leaving it 
by a raised median or physical barrier. 
    Driveway, joint use. A driveway shared by two adjoining properties for connection to both properties. 
    Dwelling. A structure intended to be occupied primarily for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, attached. A one-family dwelling attached to one or more one family dwellings by a common 
wall. 
    Dwelling, detached. A dwelling which is not attached to any other dwelling by any structural means. 
    Dwelling, duplex or two-family. A detached residential building containing two dwelling units, 
designed for occupancy by not more than two families. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A residential building designed for or occupied by three or more families, 
with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family as a single 
housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling unit or living unit. One or more rooms in a residential building or residential portion of a 
building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use as a complete, independent living facility 
for no more than one family, and which includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking 
and sanitation. The room(s) shall provide direct access to the outside or to a common hallway. 
    Easement. A grant to another party by a property owner of the right to use land for a specific 
purpose, such as, but not limited to, drainage or placement of utility lines. 
    Elevation. Height in feet expressed in relation to mean sea level and referenced to the National 
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Encroachment. Any protrusion of a structure, vehicle, or other object into a designated area subject 
to the allowances and restrictions of city regulations. 
    Erodible slope. Erodible slope shall mean all slopes with inclines in excess of four percent unless 
modified by the city engineer based on consideration of specific soil conditions. 
    Excavation. Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil, rock, materials, mineral 
substances, native habitat or organic substances other than vegetation from water or land on or beneath 
the surface thereof, or beneath the land surface, whether exposed or submerged. 
    Extended care facility. A long term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed or approved as a 
nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged or a governmental medical institution. 
    Facade. That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the 
parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
    Family. Any number of individuals, related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or up to and including 
four individuals not so related living together as a single housekeeping unit, and utilizing common kitchen 
facilities within the dwelling. 
    Fence (or wall). A structure intended to separate or enclose or define space, basically freestanding, 
constructed of one or more of materials such as wire, wood, stone, cement or brick, designed to be 
decorative or ornamental or to serve utilitarian purposes as to control ingress or egress or persons or 
animals. 
    Fill. The placement of any sand, rock, gravel, soil, shellrock or mineral on the ground 
    Filtration. The selective removal of suspended matter from stormwater by passing the water through 
suitable fine textured granular media such as porous soil, sand and gravel, or other natural or artificial 
aggregate, which may be used in conjunction with filter fabric or underdrain pipe or both. 
    Flag. A piece of fabric of distinctive design, color or pattern that is used as a symbol of some country, 
state, county, city, political party, organization or other entity and is not used for commercial purposes. 
    Flag, decorative. A piece of fabric of distinctive design, color or pattern that represents a holiday, 
season or theme. 
    Flag lot. A lot not fronting on or abutting a public/private road and where access to the public/private 
road is by a narrow, private easement. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry 
land areas from: 
(1) ?The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2) ?The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floor. Any floor (including basement) usable for living purposes which includes working, sleeping, 
eating, cooking, or recreation, or a combination thereof. 
    Floor area. The area included within the outside dimensions of all enclosed floor area under roof, 
excluding garages, open and screened porches, carports, terraces, and patios. 
    Floor area ratio. A measure determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the 
areas of that lot. 
    Frontage. The lineal distance measured along abutting public or private rights-of-way. 
    Frontage street facade. A building facade that fronts on a street. 
    Garage. A detached accessory building or portion of the main building used for the parking or 
storage of automobiles for the occupants of the main building. A carport is to be considered a garage. 
    Garbage. Every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter that attends the 
preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of edibles, and any other matter, of any nature 
whatsoever, which is subject to decay, putrefaction, and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or 
odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-
carrying insects, or any other container of the material defined herein 
    Garish. Bright, showy, gaudy or too highly ornamented to be in good taste. 
    Grade, established. The elevation at the street center line, or lines, as established by the city. 
    Gross floor area. The areas of all floors of a building, including finished basements and all covered 
areas, including porches, sheds, carports, and garages. If the first finished floor level of an elevated 
building or structure is elevated to a height greater than seven feet above the base flood elevation, then 
the area below such first floor shall be included in calculating gross floor areas of the building or structure. 
    Ground cover. Low growing living plant material or inanimate material. 
    Grubbing. The removal of any type of rooted vegetation from land by digging, raking, dragging or 
otherwise disturbing the vegetation or trees from land. 
    Guest house. An accessory structure to a main residence for the housing of guests of the owner or 
lessee of the main residence. 
    Hazard. Any object, protrusion or structure that potentially may pose a substantial present or 
potential hazard or danger to the general safety of the public. 
    Hazardous tree. A tree that constitutes a hazard to life or to property as the tree is in imminent 
danger of falling or is considered a hazard (i.e., dead, diseased, broken, split, cracked, leaning or 
uprooted trees). 
    Heavy equipment means vehicles, machinery, or other heavy items that are only incidentally 
operated upon or moving over roads or highways, including but not limited to the following items: ditch-
digging apparatus, well-boring apparatus, road construction machinery, asphalt spreaders, bituminous 
and other mixers, dump trucks, bucket loaders, tractors, ditchers, leveling rollers, earth moving 
equipment, carryalls, scrapers, power shovels, draglines, cranes, forklifts, and all other somewhat similar 
items. 
    Heavy truck. A vehicle that exceeds 23 feet long and/or nine feet high. 
    Hedge. Solid and unbroken visual screen of self-supporting living plant material. 
    Historic building. A building or structure of architectural, historical, cultural or historic planning 
significance that has been designated as such by a local, state or federal authority. 
    Historic tree. Individual tree(s) which have been found to be of notable historic interest to the city 
because of their age, type, size or historic association with the community and have been so designated 
by resolution of the city council. 
    Home occupation. Any money-raising occupation or activity carried on to benefit the owner or tenant 
of a residential property. 
    Homeowner's packet. Those documents and informational pamphlets regarding the protection of 
trees and available at the city building department for homeowners, property owners, contractors and 
developers. 
    Host site. The parcel of land upon which a temporary use or special event is conducted. 
    Impervious surface. A surface which is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes surfaces 
such as compacted sand, limerock, or clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, 
sidewalks, porous and nonporous parking lots and other similar structures. 
    Inanimate materials. Rocks, gravel, pebbles, driftwood, garden ornaments, statuary, sculpture or 
similar objects. 
    Infrastructure. Public domain assets such as roads, bridges, curbs, streets, sidewalks, drainage 
systems, lighting systems, and similar assets that are immovable and of value only to the government 
unit. 
    Instrument runway. A runway having an existing or planned instrument procedure utilizing air 
navigation facilities or area-type navigation equipment. 
    Intensity. Intensity shall be the floor area ratio as defined herein. 
    Junk. Old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors, watercraft, and other such vehicles and parts 
thereof; wagons and other kind of vehicles and parts thereof, household appliances, scrap building 
material, scrap contractors' equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, 
old iron, machinery, rags, paper excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds and bedding or any other kind of scrap 
or waste material which is stored, kept, handled or displayed. 
    Land clearing. The removal by any means of any type of vegetation or trees from land, but does not 
include mowing, trimming or pruning so as to maintain vegetation in a healthy, viable condition. 
    Landscape strip. A strip of land containing trees, barriers, ground cover and/or other plant material. 
    Landing area. The area of the airport used for the landing, take-off, or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Legal positive outfall. The availability of a permanent and legally established watercourse or similar 
facility or means which has the hydraulic capability of conveying the stormwater discharge from a 
development project to receiving waters downstream. "Legally established watercourse" refers to a 
watercourse which is established by either an express easement, plat dedication or other documentation, 
or implied easement or servitude as may be demonstrated to exist in accordance with Florida law. 
    Level of service (LOS). Indicators of the extent or degree of service provided by, or proposed to be 
provided by a facility, based on and related to the operational characteristics of the facility. LOS indicates 
the capacity per unit of demand of each public facility; an indicator of the operational efficiency of service 
provided by a concurrency facility. 
    Level of service standard. The adopted volume of demand required for each concurrency facility in 
order to achieve acceptable operational efficiency. 
    Littoral zone. The area bounded by a landward limit of one foot above the control water elevation and 
a waterward limit of two and one-half feet below the control water elevation. 
    Live-aboard vessel. Any vessel used as a residence. 
    Living area. The minimum floor area of a dwelling as measured by its inside dimensions exclusive of 
carports, porches, sheds, and attached garages. 
    Loading dock. A platform used for the loading and unloading of freight. 
    Loading space. Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and delivery vehicles 
expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. 
    Logo. An established identifying symbol or mark associated with a business or business entity. 
    Lot. A lot shall mean a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements 
for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are required in this 
chapter. 
    Lot, corner. A lot fronting upon two or more rights-of-way at their intersections. 
    Lot, depth. The distance measured in the mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint 
of the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite main rear line of the lot. 
    Lot, double frontage (also through lots). A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as 
distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot frontage. The portion of the lot nearest the street. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. 
    Lot, legal nonconforming. A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the 
adoption, revision or amendment of the land development regulations, but which fails by reason of such 
adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present land development regulations. 
    Lot lines. A line of record bounding a lot thereby dividing such lot from another lot or from a public or 
private right-of-way. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been duly approved by the 
city and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Indian River County or a lot described by 
metes and bounds, the description of which has been thus recorded. 
    Lot, through. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots 
abutting two streets may be referred to as a double frontage lot. 
    Lot width. A lineal dimension of a site or building measured on a line parallel to the line of the street 
frontage. In measuring lot width, said parallel line will run through the midpoint of a perpendicular line 
extending from the midpoint of the front lot line to the point at which it intersects the rear lot line. 
    Low sloped roof. A roof with a slope less than 5:12 (rise:run). Flat roofs are included in this term and 
classification. 
    Maintain (maintenance). To keep in an acceptable state of performance and repair and, when 
referring to the height of grasses in a stormwater management tract or facility, means to keep at a height 
of 12 inches or less above the ground. 
    Maintenance guarantee. A guarantee of facilities or work to ensure the correction of any failures of 
any improvements required pursuant to these land development regulations. 
    Mangrove. Rooted trees and seedlings of the following species, but only when having a coastal or 
estuarine association: 
Red 
Ma
ngr
ove
: 
Rhi
zop
hor
a 
ma
ngl
e; 
Wh
ite 
Ma
ngr
ove
: 
Lag
unc
ular
ia 
rac
em
osa
; 
Bla
ck 
Ma
ngr
ove
: 
Avi
cen
nia 
ger
min
ans
; 
But
ton
wo
od 
Ma
ngr
ove
: 
Con
oca
rpu
s 
ere
cta 
 
    Manufactured building. A closed structure, building assembly, or system of subassemblies, which 
may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating or other service systems manufactured in 
manufacturing facilities, for installation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a 
finished building or as part of a finished residential building, which shall be required to bear the insignia 
from the Department of Community Affairs, State of Florida (hereinafter DCA) or its successor agency, 
pursuant to regulations promulgated by DCA. 
    Marijuana. All parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; 
the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, 
or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin, including low-THC cannabis, which are dispensed from a 
medical marijuana treatment center for medical use by a qualified patient (F.S. Section 381.986(1)(f)). 
    Marquee. A permanent roofed structure, canopy or covered structure attached to and supported by a 
building when such structure extends beyond the building. 
    Master stormwater management plan. An engineering plan, written report or engineering drawing 
outlining the primary and secondary drainage and stormwater treatment facilities needed for the proper 
development of a specific increment of the incorporated area of the City of Sebastian. 
    Mean sea level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for 
establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous 
with "national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD)." 
    Medical marijuana treatment centers (MMTC). An entity, registered with the Department of Health 
that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes, transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or 
administers marijuana products containing marijuana, or related supplies to qualifying patients or their 
caregivers. Accordingly, MMTC's may open and operate dispensing facilities, which are separate and 
apart from the cultivation, processing, and delivery operations. (Art. X, & 29, Fla. Const.). 
    Minimum descent altitude. The lowest altitude, expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which 
descent is authorized on final approach or during circle-to-land maneuvering in execution of a standard 
instrument approach procedure, where no electronic glide slope is provided. 
    Minimum enroute altitude. The altitude in effect between radio fixes which assures acceptable 
navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance requirements between those fixes. 
    Minimum obstruction clearance altitude. The specified altitude in effect between radio fixes on VOR 
(visual omni range) airways, off airway routes, or route segment and which assures acceptable 
navigational signal coverage only within 22 miles of the VOR. 
    Minimum vectoring altitude. The lowest above mean sea level altitude at which aircraft operating on 
instrument flight rules will be vectored by a radar controller, except when otherwise authorized for radar 
approaches, departures or missed approaches. 
    Mining. The removal, either in or upon the soil of the earth or beneath the soil, of any valuable inert 
or lifeless substance formed or deposited in its present position through natural agencies alone, as a 
commercial business. 
    Mobile home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight 
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more 
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or 
without permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and including the plumbing, 
heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Calculations to determine the number 
of square footage in a structure will be based upon HUD standards, and such structures are subject to the 
regulations set forth therein. For the purposes of this code, a mobile home shall not be considered a 
single-family dwelling unit. 
    Nameplate. A sign stating only the name of the occupant and his or her occupation or specialty. 
    National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a 
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Native vegetation. Any and all plant and tree species that are indigenous to the City of Sebastian. 
    New development. The construction of a building or structure on unimproved real property. 
    Noncomplying building or structure. Any building or other structure, for which the use is lawful 
(permitted or nonconforming), but the building or other structure does not comply with all applicable 
provisions of this code, including, but not limited to size and dimension regulations, off-street parking 
requirements, landscape requirements, performance standards, or height requirements, either on the 
effective date of this ordinance or as a result of any subsequent amendment. Herein such noncomplying 
building or structure may be referred to as a noncompliance. 
    Nonconforming use. A use of a building or structure or a tract of land which does not, on the effective 
date of this ordinance or amendment thereto, conform to any one of the current permitted uses of the 
zoning district in which it is located, but which was legally established in accordance with the zoning in 
effect at the time of its inception or which use pre-dates all zoning codes and which use has not changed 
or been abandoned during its existence. Herein such nonconforming use may be referred to as a 
nonconformity. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway. A runway having an instrument approach procedure using air 
navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance or area type navigation equipment for which a straight-
in, nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no 
precision instrument approach facilities are planned or indicated on an appropriate civil or military airport 
planning document. 
    Nonstandard take-off minimums. Conditions of existing weather required for take-off at an airport 
which exceed the standards prescribed in Federal Aviation Regulations Part 91. 
    Non-vehicular open space. That portion of a site or parcel upon which buildings, pavement, or other 
improvements have not been placed, but excluding lakes and wet storage stormwater retention areas. 
    Nuisance. Any noise, debris, garbage, junk, trash, weeds, or unserviceable vehicles, or any other 
substance or material which, by nature of its location, is considered a health or safety hazard, and/or 
which is considered obnoxious and offensive to the general public. 
    Occupied. The use of a structure or land for any purpose, including occupancy for residential, 
business, industrial, manufacturing, storage, and public use. 
    Open space. That portion of land which includes the gross area of the site less building coverage, 
impervious parking areas, vehicular access or egress ways, and other cover through which water cannot 
penetrate. City approved recreation and pedestrian site amenities shall be included as open space even if 
they restrict the penetration of water. Dry retention ponds shall be considered open space. 
    Outbuilding. A secondary ancillary building, other than a storage shed, located in the rear yard of the 
principal building. Outbuildings shall have a maximum building footprint of 500 square feet and maximum 
gross floor area of 1,000 square feet. Outbuildings have a maximum height of 20 feet. 
    Outdoor storage. The keeping in an unroofed area of any goods, material, or merchandise in the 
same place for more than 24 hours. The parking of motor vehicles, in operating condition which are used 
in the operation of a commercial establishment shall not be considered outside storage. 
    Parapet. That portion of the facade which extends above the roof line. 
    Parcel. Any contiguous quantity of land capable of being described such that its location and 
boundaries may be established, that is designated by its owner(s) or developer(s) as land to be used or 
developed as a unit, or that has been used or developed as a unit. 
    Parking lot. An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of 
temporary, daily off-street parking. 
    Parking space, off-street. An area not within a building service way or other structure where motor 
vehicles may be stored for the purpose of temporary daily parking. This definition shall include a motor 
vehicle display lot, or display of boats, trailers and mobile homes. 
    Patio. An open unoccupied space on the same lot not fully enclosed on all four sides by the principal 
building. 
    Performance guarantee. A financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work 
required by these regulations will be completed in compliance with the regulations, and the approved 
plans and specifications of a development. 
    Permeable surface. Any surface permitting full or partial absorption of stormwater into previously 
unimproved land. 
    Permitted use. Any use allowed by right within a given zoning district upon satisfaction of applicable 
land development regulations. 
    Planned unit development. A "planned unit development" is land under unified control, planned and 
developed as a whole in a single operation or approved programmed series of operations for dwellings, 
for dwelling units and related uses and facilities; includes principal and accessory uses and structures 
substantially related to the character of the development and the surrounding area of which it is part; and 
is developed according to the comprehensive and detailed plans which include but are not limited to 
streets, utilities, lots or building sites and the like but also site plans and detailed plans for other uses and 
improvements, facilities and services as will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of the 
planned unit development but will not be provided, operated or maintained at public expense. 
    Plot plan. See Site plan. 
    Porch. An open-air roofed structure surrounded by a railing or other retaining device which is located 
along the facade of a building at any level. A porch shall include columns, which support its roof and floor. 
    Precision instrument runway. A runway having an instrument approach procedure utilizing an 
instrument landing system, microwave landing system or a precision approach radar including a runway 
for which such a system is planned and is so indicated on an approved civil or military airport layout plan, 
other FAA planning documents, or comparable military service planning documents. 
    Premises. Any land together with any buildings, structures or other appurtenances occupying it. 
    Principal building. A building in which the principal use of the property is located. 
    Principal structure. A building occupied by the principal use of the premises or lot. In a residential 
district any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot where it is located. An attached 
carport, shed, or garage with one or more walls or a part of one wall being a part of the principal building 
and structurally dependent, totally or in part, on the principal building, shall comprise a part of the 
principal building and be subject to all regulations applied to the principal building. 
    Principal use. The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure. 
    Proceeding in good faith. Tangible and continuing actions taken by an applicant of an approved final 
development order to perform actual project construction and implementation leading to completion of a 
final development plan within a reasonable period of time. 
    Prohibited or undesirable exotic trees: The following five tree species that if present on the site are 
considered to be prohibited trees (or undesirable exotic) and are subject only to a verification inspection 
by the city prior to removal: 
(1) ?Ear tree (Enterolobium cyclocarpum); 
(2) ?Chinaberry (Melia azedarch); 
(3) ?Australian Pine (Casuarina spp.); 
(4) ?Punk tree or cajeput tree (Maleleuca quinquernervia or Maleleuca Leucadendron); 
(5) ?Brazilian pepper (Schinus terebinthifolius). 
    Project area. For the purpose of computing density, lot coverage, and floor area ratio for any project 
site shall not include public rights-of-way, or land lying below the mean high water line. 
    Project site. That portion of the real property that is being developed. See also: "Development." 
    Protected tree. Any tree four inches diameter (or 12.6 inches in circumference) at breast height 
(DBH) or more, and shall include all mangroves and exclude palm trees except for sabal palms. 
    Protective barrier: A physical structure, such as protective bindings, braces or other similar 
noninjurious materials which effectively limit access to a protected area. 
    Public property. All real and personal property, including leasehold rights owned by the federal, state 
or local governments, including all political subdivisions, authorities, or other entities to which the rights, 
powers and privileges of the federal, state and local government have been delegated. 
    Public rights-of-way. Any state, county or city street, road, alley or highway or public easement 
acquired by city or the public by purchase, gift, devise, dedication, prescription, or otherwise within the 
corporate limits of the City of Sebastian. 
    Public use. Any use of land or structures owned and operated by a municipality, county, state or the 
federal government or any agency thereof and for a public service or purpose. 
    Public water and sewer service. This shall mean water and sewer systems, including pipes, rights-of-
way and treatment plants, owned and operated by the city or operated under a franchise granted by the 
city. 
    Recreational and landscaped open space. Unroofed or screen roofed ornamental landscaped areas 
and recreational areas which are easily accessible and regularly available to occupants of all dwelling 
units on the lot wherein the open space is located. Rooftops, porches, raised decks, parking spaces, 
driveways, utility and service areas are not calculated as open space. 
    Recreational vehicle (RV). Any travel trailer, camper, boat, or trailer as defined herein. Additionally, 
any portable vehicular structure that is built on a chassis, which is designed as a temporary dwelling for 
travel and recreation, and which has a transportable body width not exceeding eight feet and a length not 
exceeding 40 feet. 
    Redevelopment. See Development. 
    Regular mooring of watercraft. Any vessel moored, anchored, or docked in the same general area at 
least eight hours within any day (24-hour period), for ten days, not necessarily consecutive, within any 
calendar month. 
    Regulatory flood. The 100-year flood. The 100-flood is that flood which has a one percent probability 
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as indicated on the official City of Sebastian flood hazard 
map. 
    Renovation. Work which changes or modifies the original size, location, materials of interior/exterior 
finish of the components of a building. The change may include expansion or upgrading of a building. 
    Retention. The prevention of, or to prevent the discharge of, a given volume of stormwater runoff into 
surface waters of the state by complete on-site storage where the capacity to store the given volume of 
stormwater is again provided within 96 hours following the storm event. Wet retention refers to an area 
the lowest elevation of which penetrates the dry season groundwater table. Dry retention refers to an area 
the lowest elevation of which lies at least two feet above the wet season groundwater table. 
    Rights-of-way. Land dedicated, deeded, used, or to be used for a street, alley, walkway, boulevard, 
utility installations, drainage facility, access for ingress or egress, or other purpose by the public, certain 
designated individuals, or governing bodies. 
    Road tractor Any motor vehicle designed or used for pulling semi-trailers, trucks, or other road 
tractors. 
    Runway. The defined area of an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
    Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from 
another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
    Scrub oak: Any specimen of the scrub oak or of the species Chapmanii (Chapmans Oak), Quercus 
Geminata (Sand Live Oak), Quercus Minima (Dwarf Live Oak), and Quercus Myrtifolia (Myrtle Oak). 
    Sedimentation. Sedimentation shall mean the settling out of the soil particles that are transported by 
water or wind. Sedimentation occurs when the velocity of water or wind in which soil particles are 
suspended is slowed to a sufficient degree and for a sufficient period of time to allow the particles to settle 
out of suspension or when the degree of slope is lessened to achieve the same result. 
    Semi-public use. Any use of land or buildings owned and operated by an individual, firm, corporation, 
lodge or club, either as a profit or nonprofit activity, for a public service or purpose. This shall include 
privately owned utilities, transportation, recreation, education, and cultural activities and services. 
    Semi-trailer. Any vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying freight and which is 
drawn or pulled by another vehicle. This does not include recreational trailers. 
    Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear or side lines of the lot and the 
front, rear or side lines of the building including porches, carports, and accessory uses subject to yard 
encroachment provisions of article V, District Regulations. 
    Shoreline. The mean high water line for tidal water bodies and ordinary high water line for the non-
tidal waters for inland water bodies. 
    Shrubs. A self-supporting, woody perennial plant of low to medium height characterized by multiple 
stems and branches continuous from the base. 
    Sign. Any structure, housing, device, figure, statuary, painting display, message placard, any 
permanently installed or situated merchandise, any emblem, painting, banner, or other contrivance, or 
any part thereof, which is designed, constructed, created, engineered, intended, or used to advertise, 
promote, provide data or information in the nature of advertising for any of the following purposes: to 
designate, identify, or indicate the name of the business of the owner or occupant of the premises upon 
which the advertising display is located; or, to advertise the business conducted, services available or 
rendered, or the goods produced, sold, or available for sale, upon the property where the advertising 
display is erected; or, to promote the interests of any person, business or cause. 
    Sign, abandoned. A sign is considered abandoned based upon the good faith consideration of the 
following factors in their totality: the condition of the sign; evidence of its maintenance and repair; whether 
it is faded or defaced; whether its installation has been compromised by wind, weather, traffic, vandalism 
or otherwise; the time since installation, and whether it is capable of conveying an intelligible or useful 
message. 
    Sign, add-on. Any additional sign added to a previously permitted and/or conforming sign. 
    Sign, address. The numeric reference of a structure or use to a street, including as part of a 
freestanding or monument sign 
    Sign, A-frame. A free standing, movable sign capable of standing without support or attachment 
usually hinged at the top, or attached in a manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to 
the letter A. 
    Sign, animated. A sign with physical or light action or motion or the appearance thereof, including 
lenticulation, wind actuated elements, rotating, oscillating, fluttering, flashing, or swinging signs, banners, 
but excluding permitted flags. 
    Sign, awning. Any sign incorporated into an awning attached to a building. 
    Sign, banner. Any sign having the characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to cloth, 
paper, balloons, inflatable items or fabric of any kind with such material serving as foundation. The word 
"banner" shall also include pennant or any animated, rotating and/or fluttering device, with or without 
lettering for design, and manufactured and placed for the purpose of attracting attention. National, state 
and municipal and nationally or internationally recognized organizations flags shall not be considered 
banners. 
Municipal banner. A flag or sign installed by the city having characters, letters, illustrations or 
ornamentation representing civic events, special events or holidays and placed on public right-of-way 
and/or property. 
    Sign, barber. A candy striped rotating cylinder used traditionally to identify a barber shop. 
    Sign, bench. Copy painted on any portion of a bench. 
    Sign, billboard (off-premises sign). Any sign, or framework thereof, installed for the purpose of 
advertising an establishment, merchandise, services or entertainment, sold, produced, manufactured or 
furnished at a place other than the location where the sign is located. 
    Sign, changeable copy. A sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical, 
or electrical means not including time and temperature signs. 
    Sign, civic event. A temporary sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to advertise a civic event 
sponsored by a public agency, school, church, civic-fraternal organization, or similar non-commercial 
organization. 
    Sign, construction. A temporary sign erected on the parcel on which construction is taking place 
pursuant to a valid permit, limited to the duration of the construction, indicating the names, addresses and 
telephone numbers of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, or similar artisans, and 
the owner, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a major role or interest 
with respect to the structure or project. 
    Sign, directional. Any sign (other than a highway marker or any sign erected and maintained by 
public authority, or a public utility) which is designed, erected and maintained for the purpose of directing 
persons to a place, structure, or activity located in the city, but not located on the same premises as the 
sign. 
    Sign, feather flags. Customized banners made into a "feather shape" or the shape of a ship's sail. 
Constructed of a durable and lightweight fabric and mounted on a stationary base, and not exceeding 12 
feet in height. 
    Sign, flags. A piece of fabric of distinctive design, color or pattern that is used as a symbol of some 
country, state, county, city, political party, organization or other entity and used for symbolic non-
commercial purposes. 
    Sign, flashing. Any sign, used for identification, directional, advertising or promotional purposes, 
which flash, blink, cut on and off intermittently, and are used as exterior signs or interior signs visible from 
the public right-of-way. Changeable copy signs and time/temperature signs are not considered flashing 
signs. 
    Sign, freestanding. A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon 
the ground and independent of any support from buildings or other structures. Included are pole signs, 
pylon signs and masonry wall-type signs. This does not include portable or trailer type signs. 
    Sign, future tenant identification. A temporary sign which identifies a future use of a site or building. 
    Sign, garage sale. A sign which identifies the location and/or time of a general sale open to the 
public from or on residential property located in any zoning district. 
    Sign, grand opening. A sign announcing the opening of a new business or the relocation of an 
existing business within the city. Grand opening does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of 
retail sales by a business. 
    Sign, holiday. Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of holidays. 
    Sign, identification. One sign per business location not more than three square feet in area, painted 
on a wall or door or attached to the building used to identify the name of the business, or the name and 
logo in combination and/or its principals and address located therein. The top of said sign shall be no 
more than eight feet above ground level. 
    Sign, illuminated. A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message readable, 
including internally and externally lighted signs, where the immediate source of illumination is not 
enclosed by the surface of the sign structure. Neon tubes used as abstract, graphic, decorative, or 
architectural elements shall be considered to constitute an illuminated sign. 
    Sign, instructional. A sign, without advertising, designed and intended to convey information, 
instructions or warnings with respect to the premises on which it is maintained. (e.g. "Danger-Bad Dog," 
"Keep Off", "Secured by x.y.z. Security Company".) 
    Sign, monument. An independent structure supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the 
appearance of having a solid base. 
    Sign, marquee. Any sign attached to the side or front or hung under a marquee, which sign shall not 
extend above the top of a marquee or shall not be mounted upon the top of the marquee. 
    Sign, neon. An illuminated sign affected by a colorless, odorless light source consisting of a neon or 
gas tube which is bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes. 
    Sign, nonconforming. A sign lawfully erected and legally existing on the effective date of this section, 
or of amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the provisions of this section. 
    Sign, off-premises. See Billboard. 
    Sign, on-premises. Any sign that advertises, calls attention to or identifies the occupant of the 
premises on which the sign is maintained, or the business transacted thereon, or advertises the property 
itself or any part thereof as for sale or rent. 
    Sign, open house. A temporary sign posted to indicate a salesperson is available to represent the 
property subject to sale, lease, or rent. 
    Sign, painted. Any sign painted on any surface, including the roof of any building or structure, visible 
from any public right-of-way or from the air space above the structure. 
    Sign, portable. A sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, designed to be movable and 
not attached to the ground, a building, a structure or another sign. Portable or movable signs also include 
placards, signs, banners or similar devices attached to vehicles for advertising purposes, unless such 
devices are an integral part of such vehicle used in the normal course of business. 
    Sign, projecting. Any sign attached to the building wall or structure and which extends more than 18 
inches from the plane of such wall or structure. 
    Sign, public. Any signs mandated, authorized or approved by or on behalf of government—federal, 
state or local—or any agency or instrumentality thereof. Public signs also include signs erected or 
installed by or on behalf of any public utility, cable, fiber optic or wireless provider, railroad or public transit 
service. 
    Sign, real estate. Any sign, installed on a temporary basis, by the owner of real property or his agent, 
advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, sale, or lease, but shall not include 
rooming house signs. 
    Sign, revolving. See Animated sign. 
    Sign, roof. Any sign, installed, constructed or maintained above, or projects above, the roof including 
a mansard roof or the top of a parapet wall of a building or which is painted on or fastened to a roof. 
    Sign, sandwich. See A-frame sign. 
    Sign, sandwich board. Self-supporting A-shaped freestanding temporary sign with only two visible 
sides that is situated adjacent to the business being advertised in the sign. 
    Sign, snipe. Any sign of any size, made of any material, including paper, cardboard, wood and metal, 
when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to a tree, utility pole, fence 
or similar objects. Also includes any sign installed without permission of the owner of the real or personal 
property on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, special event. A sign advertising, promoting or announcing a short term event not generally 
held at that location. 
    Sign, subdivision entrance. An identification structure located at the main entrance to a city approved 
subdivision or development. The only advertising on the structure shall be the name of the subdivision or 
development. 
    Sign, swinging. The term "swinging sign" shall mean any sign that swings freely from or on supports 
independently of the guy wires used in connection therewith. 
    Sign, temporary. A temporary sign means a sign intended for a use not permanent in nature. A sign 
is considered temporary based upon the good faith consideration of the following factors in their totality: 
the materials used in its manufacture or creation; the manner in which it is constructed or assembled, the 
location and manner of its installation, and evidence of its upkeep and maintenance. 
    Sign, time/temperature. An electronic or mechanical device which shows time and/or temperature, 
but contains no business identification or advertising with a complete time and/or temperature sequence 
span of four to eight seconds. 
    Sign, vee-shaped. Any free standing sign which has two faces which are not parallel. 
    Sign, vehicular. A sign affixed to or painted on a transportation vehicle or trailer, for the purpose of 
business advertising; however, not to include signs affixed to vehicle or trailers for identification purposes. 
A vehicular sign shall not be used as a directional sign. 
    Sign, wall. A sign attached directly to or painted on an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a 
building for support with the exposed face of the sign located in a place substantially parallel to such 
exterior building wall to which the sign is attached. 
    Sign, window. A sign visible from any public right-of-way, painted or affixed on glass or other window 
material, or located inside within two feet of the inside of the window, directing attention to the principal 
business, profession or industry upon the premises where the sign is displayed, or to the type of products 
sold, manufactured or assembled, or to services or entertainment offered on said premises. On-site 
advisory signs are not considered window signs. 
    Sign area. The surface area of a sign shall be computed by including the entire area within a single, 
continuous, rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight straight lines, or a circle or an ellipse, enclosing 
the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or 
color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the 
backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework or bracing 
that is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
    Site plan. A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the 
boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development 
features proposed for a specific parcel of land. 
    Soil erosion. Soil erosion shall mean any removal and/or loss of soil by the action of water, gravity or 
wind. Erosion includes both the detachment and transport of soil particles. 
    Special event. The temporary use of facilities, parking areas and other open space for an event held 
by owner, nonowner, religious organizations, recreational/entertainment groups or local civic 
organizations. Special events may include circuses, carnivals, festivals, fairs, special exhibitions, 
concerts, church revivals and other similar activities. 
    Special exception. A use which is provided for in the zoning regulations for a particular zoning district 
or classification and if controlled would not affect the public safety, health or general welfare by allowing 
the use in an additional zoning district or classification. 
    Special use. A use which is not provided for in the zoning regulations and may be approved by the 
city council if the applicant meets special provisions and conditions as deemed appropriate. 
    Specimen tree. Any tree ten inches diameter (or 31 inches in circumference) at breast height (DBH) 
or more, and shall include all mangroves and exclude palm trees except for sabal palms. 
    Standpipe. An arrangement of piping, valves, hose outlets and allied equipment installed in a 
building or structure with outlets located in such a manner that water can be discharged through hose and 
nozzles for the purpose of extinguishing a fire. 
    Storage. The act of storing, state of being stored or a space for storing goods. 
    Stored, vehicle. Any vehicle or recreational vehicle not in normal daily usage for transportation of the 
occupants of the residence. 
    Stormwater. The flow of water which results from a rainfall event. 
    Stormwater detention. The prevention of, or to prevent the discharge of, a given volume of 
stomwater runoff into surface waters of the state by storage completely on-site. 
    Stormwater management plan. An engineering plan and written report outlining the drainage and 
stormwater treatment facilities required for the proper development of the tract under considerations 
pursuant to the stormwater management and flood protection plan, article XII. 
    Stormwater management system. A system of natural or artificial waterbodies or watercourses which 
stores or conveys water. 
    Stormwater retention. The collection and temporary storage of stormwater in such a manner as to 
provide for treatment and flood attenuation to the receiving waters. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper 
surface of the floor next above, or any portion of a building used for human occupancy between the 
topmost floor and the roof. A basement or cellar not used for human occupancy shall not be counted as a 
story. 
Half-story. A story under a sloping roof, the finished floor area of which does not exceed one-half the 
floor area of the floor immediately below it; or a basement used for human occupancy, the floor area 
of that part of the basement so used not to exceed 50% of the floor area of the floor immediately 
above. 
    Street. In addition to the definition contained in section 1.02 of the Sebastian Code of Ordinances, a 
street for the purposes of this these regulations shall be a public or private right-of-way/easement set 
aside for public travel which is 30 feet or more in width. A street affords principal means of access to 
abutting property. Street classifications include the following: 
Arterial. Arterial streets serve as principal routes through the city. The purpose of these facilities is to 
move large volumes of traffic from one part of the region or county to another. Arterial roads also 
provide connections between major activity centers of the county or city. 
Minor arterial. Those routes intended to carry heavy volumes of traffic for short distances within the 
city, as delineated on the City of Sebastian Thoroughfare Plan. 
Major collector streets. Major collector streets collect and distribute traffic from residential access 
streets to arterial streets or other collector streets. 
Minor collector streets. Minor collector streets collect traffic from local streets and feeds traffic to 
major collectors and arterials. 
Residential access streets (local streets). Streets which directly serve abutting properties and 
residences. These streets should be relatively safe and quiet and should be completely free of any 
through traffic. 
    Street right-of-way line. The property line which bounds the right-of-way set aside for use as a street. 
Where sidewalks exist and the exact location of the right-of-way is unknown, the side of the sidewalk 
farthest from the centerline of the traveled street shall be considered as the right-of-way line. 
    Street center line. The midpoint between the street right-of-way or the surveyed centerline of the 
street. 
    Street facade. That facade of a building which is nearest an adjacent street. 
    Street frontage. That portion of the property adjacent and generally parallel to the street right-of-way. 
    Structural alteration. Any change, except for repair or replacement in the supporting members of a 
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to 
something having or requiring a fixed location on the ground. Structures shall include buildings, mobile 
homes, walls, fences and signs, paving, sidewalks, utility transmission towers, and other similar 
improvements. 
    Subdivision. The division and recording in accordance with the city's land development regulations of 
a parcel of land into two or more lots or blocks for the purpose of transfer of ownership for development, 
sale or lease. 
    Substantial renovation. A development which includes improvements to existing buildings and site 
improvements consisting of any combination of repairs, reconstruction and alteration to a building or site. 
    Swimming pool. A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or portable, having a depth of 
more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface pool, having a depth of 
more than 30 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and bathing. 
    Synthetic plants. Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground covers or vines 
shall not be used in lieu of plant requirements in this article. 
    System. A dam, impoundment, reservoir, inlet, pipe, swale, ditch, appurtenant work or works, or a 
combination thereof, that is intended to provide drainage, water storage conveyance, prevent or impair 
inundation, or other water management capabilities in and for a discrete area or a work that traverses 
waters in the City of Sebastian. 
    Temporary structure. A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the 
designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
    Temporary use. A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use 
upon expiration of the time period. 
    Terrace. An unoccupied open space adjacent to the principal building on one or two sides, prepared 
with a hard, semi-hard, or improved surface, and uncovered, for the purpose of outdoor living. 
    Townhouse. A one-family dwelling in a group of at least three and no more than ten such units in 
which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, and the units are designed with 
distinctive facades or varied setbacks. No unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated 
from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. 
    Trailer. Any vehicle, with or without motor power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying 
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Transient live-aboard vessel. Any vessel used solely as a residence for a period of less than 30 days 
in a 12-month period. 
    Transient merchant. Any person or business entity that engages in the temporary sale of any 
merchandise not within an enclosed structure. The following will not be considered to be transient 
merchants: 
(1) ?Any merchants within enclosed structures who temporarily display their merchandise outside of 
the structure on their premises provided the display does not delete any required parking. 
(2) ?Any merchants who have received site plan approval from the planning and zoning commission 
for a specific outside sales and/or display area. 
    Travel trailer. Travel trailer shall mean a portable structure built on a chassis designed as a 
temporary dwelling for travel and vacational and not used as living quarters except in a trailer park. 
    Tree. A woody plant having a well defined stem, a more or less well defined crown, and which is 
capable of attaining a height of at least 12 feet and attaining a trunk diameter of not less than four inches 
diameter (or 12.6 inches in circumference) at breast height (DBH). 
    Tree survey. An aerial photograph or sketch prepared to a scale no smaller than one inch to 200 
feet, which provides the location, size and common name of all protected trees located on a given parcel 
of land intended for development or site planning as a single lot, tract, or building site. 
    Trellis. A frame supporting open latticework used for training vines and other climbing plants. 
    Understory. Plant coverage consisting of shrubs, herbs and vines, which because of their nature will 
not grow to such a height, that they will occur in the canopy layer of trees. 
    Undesirable tree. See: "Prohibited and Undesirable Exotic Tree." 
    Unity of title. Recorded legal instrument combining two or more lots or parcels into one lot or parcel. 
    Use. The "use" of property is the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is 
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of 
performance of such activity with reference to the specifications of this zoning [land development] 
ordinance. 
    Vacant. A building or parcel of land which is neither occupied nor used or is in an inoperative state. 
    Vacation of easement or right-of-way. The abandonment of a public easement or right-of-way which 
results in the removal of the easement or right-of-way, re-use of the property, and/or a change in the 
ownership of the property. 
    Variance. A dispensation permitted on individual parcels of property as a method of alleviating 
unnecessary hardship by allowing a reasonable use of the building, structure, or property, which, because 
of unusual or unique circumstances, is denied by the terms of this ordinance. As used in this ordinance, a 
variance is authorized only for size of structure or size of yards and open spaces. It does not include a 
density increase contrary to that permitted in the respective districts. 
    Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn 
upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Vested rights, common law. A right not created by statute or the provisions of the City of Sebastian 
Comprehensive Plan which would authorize the development of real property or the continued 
development of real property notwithstanding the provisions of the City of Sebastian Comprehensive 
Plan. The city may find such vesting to exist whenever the applicant proves by a preponderance of 
evidence that the real property owner, acting in good faith upon some act or omission of the city has 
made a substantial change in the position or has incurred such extensive obligations and expenses that it 
would be highly inequitable and unjust to destroy the right to develop or to continue the development of 
the real property. The assignment of the particular zoning classification or the assignment of a particular 
land use designation to parcel of real property does not guarantee or vest any specific development rights 
to any person or entity as to said real property. 
    Vested rights, statutory. A statutory right to develop or to continue the development of real property 
pursuant to the provisions of section 163.3187(8), F.S., or its successor provisions. Such vesting may be 
found to exist if a valid and unexpired final development order was issued by the city prior to the effective 
date of this code, if construction has commenced on the subject development and the development is in 
the process of being completed, or further development is continuing in good faith. Statutory vesting does 
not occur unless all material requirements, conditions, limitations and regulations of the development 
order have been met and are being maintained. 
    Vines. Plant material with a long slender stem shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height directly after 
planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier 
requirements as specified. 
    Visible roof structure. A partial or perimeter roof (used in conjunction with a low sloped roof) that 
gives the appearance of having a true gable, hip, shed, or mansard roof. A parapet wall is not a visible 
roof structure. 
    Vista. A visual corridor at ground level not obstructed by buildings, structures or portions thereof, 
which extends from public right-of-way to the waters of the Indian River. 
    Visual runway. Any runway other than an instrument runway. 
    Waiver. The act of the city relinquishing a developer and/or land owner of any of the regulatory 
provisions of the land development code. 
    Water. All water on or beneath the surface of the ground including natural or artificial watercourses, 
lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water and water standing, percolating or flowing beneath the surface of 
the ground, as well as all coastal waters within the city. 
    Water body. Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir or other area which ordinarily or 
intermittently contains water and which has a discernible shoreline. 
    Watercraft. See definition for "Boat or vessel". 
    Watershed. A drainage area or drainage basin contributing to the flow of water directly or indirectly 
into receiving waters. 
    Water-dependent uses. Activities which can be carried out only on, in or immediately adjacent to 
water areas because the use requires access to the water body for: waterborne transportation, including 
ports or marinas; recreation; electrical generating facilities; or water supply. 
    Water-related uses. Activities which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but 
which provide goods and services that are directly associated with water-dependent or waterway uses 
and/or provide supportive services to persons using a duly permitted marina. 
    Waters of the city. Includes the Indian River Lagoon, the Sebastian River, and waterways and canals 
within the city rights-of-way and easements, or on other city owned property. Similarly, refers to watered 
routes within the city limits, potentially transitable, which were established as outlets from federal and 
state sovereign waterways and are subject to federal preemption; or waters over lands held in trust by the 
State of Florida Trustees of the Internal Improvement Trust Fund (TIITF); or waterways platted as 
drainage easements or canals and deeded to the City of Sebastian to be maintained as stormwater 
management districts, and which, from time to time, following action by the controlling body after rain 
events or other reason, fill sufficiently to sustain the draft of a boat or vessel thus allowing use of the 
waterway as a roadstead for waterborne transportation. 
    Weir. A control structure built to direct, restrict or back up the flow of water. 
    Wetland. Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually 
at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this classification, 
wetlands must have one or more of the following three attributes: 
(1) ?At least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes; 
(2) ?The substrate is predominately undrained hydric soil; and 
(3) ?The substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time 
during the growing season of each year. 
Wetland jurisdictional determinations shall be consistent with those of the SJRWMD, and the U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers. 
    Yard. A yard shall be defined as an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot 
lines, unoccupied, open to the sky and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground 
upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the 
width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance 
between the lot line and the structure shall be used (A driveway or off-street parking area may be a 
portion of a "yard"). 
    Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and being the 
minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the structure or any projections thereof other 
than the projections of uncovered steps, and those allowed per section 54-2-5.10(e)(2)f. On corner lots 
and through lots, all yards which abut the street are considered front yards for setback purposes unless 
specific provision is made otherwise. 
Primary front yard. The yard of an improved corner lot which is located between the wall of the 
structure facing the street where the primary entrance is located and the street. 
Secondary front yard. The yard of an improved corner lot which is located between the wall of the 
structure facing the street where the primary entrance is not located and the street. 
    Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and between the rear 
lot line and the nearest structure. On lots with one front line, the lot line opposite the front lot line shall be 
the rear lot line. On corner lots which abut two streets with front lot lines of unequal length, the rear yard 
line shall be opposite and parallel to the shortest front lot line. On a corner lot which abuts three streets, 
the remaining lot line shall be a side yard if it abuts a side yard and shall be a rear yard if it abuts a rear 
yard. 
    Yard, side. A yard between any structure and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front lot 
line to the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of 
any structure. A yard which is not a front or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. O-01-12, § 1, 6-13-2001; Ord. No. O-02-9, § 2, 7-24-2002; Ord. O-05-18, §§ 17—19, 
10-16-2005; Ord. No. O-07-15, § 1, 12-12-2007; Ord. No. O-11-03, § 1, 4-13-2011; Ord. No. O-
11-04, § 3, 7-13-2011; Ord. No. O-16-05, § 3, 8-10-2016; Ord. No. O-18-01, § 2, 6-13-2018) 


Sec. 54-5-22.3. - Land use classifications. 
    The purpose of these provisions is to classify uses into specially defined types on the basis of 
common functional characteristics and land use compatibility. These provisions apply throughout the 
zoning regulations. All land use activities are classified into the following activity types. This section shall 
not be considered an all inclusive list of all permitted and/or conditional uses contained within the land 
development regulations. 
(a) ?Residential activities: 
(1) ?Single-family dwellings. 
(2) ?Duplex dwellings. 
(3) ?Multifamily dwellings. 
(4) ?Mobile homes. 
(5) ?Foster care/group homes. 
(6) ?Accessory residential activities. 
(b) ?Community facilities: 
(1) ?Administrative services. Activities typically performed by not-for-profit private or public 
social services and utility administrative offices. 
(2) ?Airport facilities. Activities which are customarily incidental to airport operations and 
maintenance including airport terminal; heliport; fixed base operators; airport hangars; 
runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons for the landing, takeoff, or surface maneuvering of 
aircraft; and communicative and visual guidance systems. 
(3) ?Cemetery. Property used for the interring of the dead. 
(4) ?Child care services. A facility which includes any duly licensed child care center of child 
care arrangement that provides child care for more than five children unrelated to the 
operator and which receives payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving care, 
wherever operated, and whether or not operated for profit. The provisions of this act shall 
not apply to a child care facility which is an integral part of a church when such child care is 
only associated with child care provided during services and other church activities or 
parochial schools conducting regular classes or courses of study. 
(5) ?Churches. An institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious 
services, meetings, and other activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular 
connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination 
are held. 
(6) ?Clubs, and lodges. Not-for-profit activities typically operated by a government or by a 
group of persons for social or recreational purposes and primarily including services which 
are not customarily carried on as a business for profit. For the purposes of this code, clubs 
and lodges shall include community centers. 
(7) ?Cultural and civic activities. Activities typically performed by public or private not-for-profit 
private entities for the promotion of a common cultural or civic objective such as historical, 
literary, scientific, musical, dramatic, artistic or similar objectives. 
(8) ?Foster care/group home facility. A residential facility which provides a family living 
environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, 
and social needs of its residents. 
(9) ?Golf course and support facilities. Large unobstructed acreage with enough room over 
which to walk or ride a prescribed course, and to stroke one ball long distances. 
Commercial miniature golf courses and independent driving ranges and similar facilities 
are excluded from this activity as defined. 
(10) ?Hospitals and intensive care facilities. Institutions providing health services, primarily for 
in-patients, and medical or surgical care; including, as an integral part of the institution, 
related facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
(11) ?Nursing homes. Activities customarily performed by a home for the elderly or infirmed in 
which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided 
with food, shelter and care for compensation. This activity shall include rest homes, 
convalescent homes and extended care facilities. 
(12) ?Parks and recreation, public. Public parks and recreation land and facilities developed for 
use by the general public. 
a. ?Active parks and recreation. Leisure time activities, usually of a more formal nature 
and performed with others, often requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed 
places, sites or fields. This may include but is not limited to swimming, tennis, and 
other court games, baseball and other field sports, and playground activities. 
b. ?Passive parks and recreation. Leisure time activities not considered active. This may 
include water-related activities such as boardwalks and interpretive trails, fishing piers 
as well as boating. Passive recreation may also include non-water related activities 
such as hiking, golfing, observation towers, and picnicking. 
(13) ?Protective and emergency services. Fire, law enforcement and emergency medical 
related facilities planned and operated for the general welfare of the public. 
(14) ?Schools. A private or public or not for profit institution conducting regular academic 
instruction at kindergarten, elementary, and secondary levels, operated by a governmental 
or non-governmental organization, which is licensed by the State of Florida. 
(15) ?Utilities, public and private. Use of land which is customary and necessary to the 
maintenance and operation of essential public services, such as electricity and gas 
transmission systems; water distribution, collection and disposal; communication; and 
similar services and facilities. 
(c) ?Commercial activities: 
(1) ?Adult entertainment establishments. Any of the following described businesses: Adult 
arcade, adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture booth, adult 
mini-motion picture theater or drive-in, adult motel/hotel, adult personal service business 
and adult theater. 
(1.1) ?Adult personal service business. Does not include activities performed by persons 
pursuant to, and in accordance with, licenses issued to such persons by the State of 
Florida. These activities are considered commercial retail. 
(2) ?Bars and lounges. A commercial establishment selling and dispensing, for the drinking on 
the premises, of liquor, malt, wine or other alcoholic beverages. This shall not include the 
sale of alcoholic beverages accessory to and within a restaurant use duly licensed by the 
state as a restaurant. 
(3) ?Bed and breakfast. An owner-occupied dwelling unit where guest room lodging, with or 
without meals, is provided for compensation. 
(4) ?Boat sales and rentals. A commercial establishment where boat sales and rentals may 
occur together with servicing and sales of marine supplies but excluding boat or ship 
building. 
(5) ?Business and professional offices. Government offices and private for-profit offices 
extending advice, information or consultation of a professional nature. Offices exclude 
commercial storage of goods and possessions for the purpose of sale or resale as a 
principal use. 
(5.1) ?Commercial retail. Establishments where the principal use is the selling or renting of 
goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption 
thereby serving the day-to-day commercial needs of a community, including the rendering 
of services incidental to the sale of such goods. Establishments include convenience 
stores, supermarkets, department stores, florists, gift shops, thrift and resale stores, 
automotive supply stores, and similar retail sales and services. This definition shall not 
include adult bookstores, or other adult establishments. 
(6) ?Commercial use. All nonresidential, noninstitutional and industrial establishments, but not 
limited to and without regard to whether they are profit or nonprofit organizations or retail 
and/or wholesale establishments; including motels, hotels, stores, office buildings, 
restaurants, service stations, garages, laundries, cleaning establishments, for hire services 
and all other business required to obtain occupational licenses. 
(7) ?Commercial amusements. Establishments engaged primarily in providing amusement or 
entertainment for a fee or admission charge. 
(8) ?Farmers market. Sale of agricultural produce within an enclosed building. 
(9) ?Fish markets and packing facilities. Commercial establishments for the receiving, 
processing, packaging, storage, wholesale or retail distribution and sale of products of the 
sea. Such an establishment may include facilities of the docking, loading, unloading, 
fueling, icing and provision of vessels and for the drying, maintenance, and storage of 
equipment. 
(10) ?Flea market. Those uses which involve the setting up of two or more booths, tables, 
platforms, racks or similar display areas for the purpose of selling or buying merchandise, 
goods, materials, products or other items offered for sale inside an enclosed building. A 
"flea market" as defined herein shall not be intended to include a "garage sale," "bake 
sale," fruit or produce stands, or art festivals or any similar activities. 
(11) ?Funeral homes. A premises, structure or site uses as a commercial establishment for the 
preparation of deceased humans for burial and/or for the conduction of funeral services 
prior to burial or other disposition of deceased human remains. 
(13) ?Gasoline sales. Any structure, building or land used for retail sales and dispensing of 
motor vehicle fuels or oils, whether self-service or not. A service station may furnish 
supplies, equipment and minor repair services, including tires to vehicles incidental to 
selling and dispensing of motor vehicle fuels and oils. 
(14) ?Hotels/motels. A building with dwelling units for accommodation of transient guests or 
tenants. 
(15) ?Kennels. Facilities for the boarding of domestic dogs and cats and veterinary medical 
operations. 
(16) ?Manufacturing facilities. To fabricate, assemble or concoct, from raw materials, goods 
that are intended for sale and distribution. 
(17) ?Marinas. A commercial establishment providing for the docking, storage, and servicing of 
watercraft, including dispensing of motor fuel. 
(17.1) ?Medical marijuana dispensaries. A property or building used exclusively for the 
storage, sale or dispensing of marijuana products in accordance with Florida law by a 
Florida approved dispensing organization or Medical Marijuana Treatment Center (as 
those terms are defined by Florida Law). 
(18) ?Medical services. The provision of therapeutic, preventive, curative or other corrective 
personal treatment services by physicians, dentists and other licensed medical 
practitioners, as well as the provision of medical testing and analysis services. These 
services are provided to patients who are admitted for examination and treatment by a 
physician and with no overnight lodging. 
(19) ?Mini-storage. A building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound that 
contains equal or varying size of individual compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls 
or lockers for the dead storage of customers' goods or wares. 
(20) ?Model home. A house constructed by a builder, which represents a design or type and 
serves as an example to be emulated or imitated. 
(21) ?Off-street parking. An area not within a building, service area or other structure where 
motor vehicles may be stored for the purpose of temporary, daily parking. This definition 
shall include a motor vehicle display lot, or display of boats, trailers and mobile homes. 
(22) ?Parking garages. Governmental or private commercial buildings or structures solely for 
the off-street parking of operative motor vehicles. 
(23) ?Pawn shops. An establishment in which goods or property are bartered in exchange for 
loans or cash. Additionally, said goods or property may be sold at retail from such 
establishments. 
(23.1) ?Pharmacies. Any pharmacy that is subject to licensure or regulation by the Florida 
Department of Health under F.S. Ch. 465, and dispenses controlled substances. 
(24) ?Plant nursery. Any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants for sale or 
for transplanting. 
(25) ?Restaurants, excluding drive-through facilities and fast food services. Any establishment 
(which is not a drive-through service establishment) where the principal business is the 
sale of food, desserts and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and 
receives more than 50% of its gross revenues from food sales, determined on a monthly 
basis. This includes service within the building as well as "take out" or delivery service. 
(26) ?Restaurants, drive-through facilities and fast food services. Any establishment where the 
principal business is the sale of foods, desserts and beverages generally contained in a 
ready-to-consume state and the service and/or consumption of foods, desserts, or 
beverages. 
(27) ?Time share facility. Any interest in a dwelling unit under which the exclusive right of use, 
ownership, possession, or occupancy of the unit circulates among the various owners of 
time share estates in such unity in accordance with a fixed time schedule on a periodically 
recurring basis for a period of time established by such schedule. 
(28) ?Trades and skilled services. Any such operation providing services requiring skilled labor 
or craftsmanship. 
(29) ?Vehicular sales. The sale or rental of motor vehicles and related equipment, with 
incidental accessory service activities. 
(30) ?Vehicular service and maintenance. Establishments for the dispensing of motor fuels and 
related products at retail and having pumps, underground storage tanks and other facilities 
for such activity and which may include the retail sale of minor automobile parts and 
accessories such as tires, batteries, spark plugs, fan belts, shock absorbers, mirrors, floor 
mats, cleaning and polishing materials and similar items, and which may include the 
inspection, servicing or minor repair of motor vehicles. These services shall not include 
body repair and painting, frame straightening, or tire recapping or vulcanizing. 
(31) ?Veterinary medical services. The provision of animal medical care and treatment by a 
Florida licensed veterinarian. 
(32) ?Wholesale trades and services. The display, limited storage and sale of goods to other 
firms for resale. 
(d) ?Industrial activities. The following compatible land uses shall be considered industrial activities: 
(1) ?Warehousing, storage and wholesaling within enclosed buildings. 
(2) ?Mechanical repair and service, including but not limited to, machine shops and vehicular 
repair, service and maintenance. 
(3) ?Light manufacturing including skilled trades and services, light processing of woods, 
synthetics, and metal fabrication, assembly and distribution functions, electronics, research 
and development, and similar uses. 
(4) ?Building materials supply and storage, and contractor's storage. 
(5) ?Accessory uses to those described above. 
(6) ?Outside storage. 
(Ord. No. O-18-01, § 2, 6-13-2018; Ord. No. O-19-01, § 1, 3-13-2019) 


Chapter VI - COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 


ARTICLE XXIII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES STANDARDS 


Sec. 54-6-23.1. - Purpose. 
    In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications 
facilities protects the city's health, safety, public welfare, environmental features and other aspects of the 
quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this article, the city hereby adopts an overall policy with 
respect to a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of 
achieving the following goals: 
(a) ?Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a conditional use permit for wireless 
telecommunications facilities; 
(b) ?Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a conditional use permit for 
wireless telecommunications facilities that is both fair and consistent; 
(c) ?Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or collocation of wireless 
telecommunications facilities among service providers; 
(d) ?Providing for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the 
City of Sebastian, including prohibition of new telecommunications facilities in areas zoned for 
residential use; 
(e) ?Minimizing adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, 
siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging and promoting use of alternative 
telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional 
single-use towers; 
(f) ?Avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure through 
engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennas; and 
(g) ?Maximizing use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need 
to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 1, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.2. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(a) ?Emergency wireless telecommunications facility. Temporary wireless communication facilities 
for emergency communications by public officials. 
(b) ?Amateur (ham) radio stations. Amateur (ham) radio stations licensed by the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC). 
(c) ?Maintenance or repair. Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a wireless telecommunications 
facility and related equipment, provided that there is no change in the height or any other 
dimension of the facility. 
(d) ?Temporary wireless telecommunications facility. Temporary wireless telecommunications 
facility, in operation for a maximum period of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(e) ?Antennas as accessory uses. An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling 
unit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 2, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.3. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular section, the 
defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this 
section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, 
words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number 
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
    Accessory facility or structure means an accessory facility or structure serving or being used in 
conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or lot as the 
wireless telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, 
storage sheds or cabinets. 
    Alternative tower structure includes, but is not limited to the following: Manmade trees, clock towers, 
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal 
the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna means a system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or 
radio frequency signals. Such waves shall include, but not be limited to radio, television, cellular, paging, 
personal telecommunications services (PCS), and microwave telecommunications. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application to the City of Sebastian for a conditional use 
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    Application means the development order form together with all necessary and appropriate 
documentation that an applicant submits in order to receive a conditional use permit for wireless 
telecommunications facilities. 
    City means the City of Sebastian, Florida. 
    Collection means the use of the same telecommunications tower or structure to carry two or more 
antennas for the provision of wireless services by two or more persons or entities. 
    Commercial impracticability or commercially impracticable shall have the meaning in this article and 
any conditional use permit granted hereunder as a circumstance which may excuse the applicant or 
holder from performing a requirement where these three conditions exist: 1) a contingency must occur; 2) 
nonoccurrence of the contingency must have been a basic assumption on which the requirement was 
made; and 3) performance must thereby be made "impractical" because of including but not limited to 
excessive and unreasonable cost. 
    Completed application means an application that contains all information and/or data necessary to 
enable the commission to evaluate the merits of the application, and to make an informed decision with 
respect to the effect and impact of wireless telecommunications facilities on the city in the context of the 
permitted land use for the particular location requested. 
    Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the City of Sebastian. 
    Conditional use permit means the official document or permit by which an applicant is allowed to 
construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted or issued by the city. 
    Direct-to home satellite services or direct broadcast service or DBS means only programming 
transmitted or broadcast by satellite directly to subscribers' premises without the use of ground receiving 
equipment, except at the subscribers' premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. 
    EPA means the state and/or federal Environmental Protection Agency or its duly designated and 
authorized successor agency. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor 
agency. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized 
successor agency. 
    Free standing tower means a tower that is not supported by guy wires and ground anchors or other 
means of attached or external support. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from the preexisting 
grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
    Lattice tower means a self-supporting communications tower with three or more sides of open 
framed supports. 
    Monopole tower means a cylindrical self-supporting communications tower constructed as a single 
spire. 
    NIER means non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock company, association 
of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or any other entity. 
    Personal wireless facility see definition for "Wireless telecommunications facilities". 
    Personal wireless services or PWS or personal telecommunications service or PCS shall have the 
same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act. 
    State means the State of Florida. 
    Survey means a survey containing the seal and certification of a properly licensed professional 
engineer or professional land surveyor. 
    Telecommunication site see definition for "Wireless telecommunications facilities." 
    Telecommunications means the transmission and reception of audio, video, data, and other 
information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or electromagnetic systems. 
    Telecommunications structure means a structure used in the provision of services described in the 
definition of "Wireless telecommunications facilities". 
    Temporary means in relation to all aspects and components of this article, something intended to, or 
that does, exist for fewer than 180 days. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities or telecommunications tower or telecommunications site or 
personal wireless facility means a structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used as, or 
used to support, antennas, as well as antennas or any functional equivalent equipment used to transmit 
or receive signals. It includes without limit, the tower compound, free standing towers, guyed towers, 
monopoles, and similar structures that employ camouflage technology, including, but not limited to 
structures such as a multi-story building, church steeple, silo, water tower, sign or other similar structures 
intended to mitigate the visual impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such. It is a structure 
intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications 
services, or microwave telecommunications, but excluding those used exclusively for fire, police and other 
dispatch telecommunications, or exclusively for private radio and television reception and private citizen's 
bands, amateur radio and other similar telecommunications. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 3, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.4. - Pre-application meeting. 
    There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to 
address issues which will help to expedite the review and permitting process. A pre-application meeting 
may also include a site visit if required. Where the application is for the collocation of an existing 
telecommunications tower(s) or other high structure, the applicant should seek to waive any section or 
subsection of this article that may not be required. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 4, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.5. - Collocation of wireless telecommunications facilities and other structures. 
(a) ?Collocation of existing wireless telecommunications facilities shall be preferred by the city, as 
opposed to the proposed construction of a new telecommunications tower. Where such collocation is 
unavailable, location of antennas on other pre-existing structures shall be considered and preferred. 
The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing towers and other 
appropriate structures within four miles of any proposed new tower site, unless the applicant can 
show that some other distance is more reasonable, and outlining opportunities for collocate of 
existing facilities and the use of other pre-existing structures as a preferred alternative to new 
construction. 
(b) ?An applicant intending to share use of an existing telecommunications tower or other structure shall 
be required to document the intent of the existing owner to share use. In the event an application to 
share the use of an existing telecommunications tower does not increase the height of the 
telecommunications tower, city staff shall waive such requirements of the application required by this 
local ordinance as may be for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 5, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.6. - Location of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a) ?Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. No new tower shall 
be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning 
commission that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use 
of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall 
submit information requested by the growth management department related to the availability of 
suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to 
demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the 
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following (although nothing should be 
construed to infer that meeting one, some or all of the following shall entitle the applicant to 
approval): 
(1) ?No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's 
engineering requirements. 
(2) ?Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering 
requirements. 
(3) ?Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's 
proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4) ?The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna 
on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would 
cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5) ?The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing 
tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs 
exceeding new tower development by 25% are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(6) ?The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and 
structures unsuitable. 
(7) ?The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of 
towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered 
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative 
technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the 
technology unsuitable. 
(b) ?In the event no existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet 
applicant's engineering requirements, applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall 
locate, site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the following 
priorities, one being the highest priority and three being the lowest priority. 
(1) ?Collocation on existing telecommunications towers or other tall structures; 
(2) ?On municipally owned properties; 
(3) ?On other property in the city zoned for either commercial or industrial use only. 
(c) ?If the proposed property site is not the highest priority listed above, then a detailed explanation must 
be provided as to why a site of a higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an 
exception must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be 
granted for the proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit 
were not granted for the proposed site. 
(d) ?An applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority by stating the site presented is the only site 
leased or selected. An application shall address collocation as an option and if such option is not 
proposed, the applicant must explain why collocation is commercially impracticable. 
(e) ?Notwithstanding the above, the commission may approve any site located within an area in the 
above list of priorities, provided that the commission finds that the proposed site is in the best 
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(f) ?The applicant shall, in writing, identify and disclose the number and locations of any additional sites 
that the applicant has been, is, or will be considering, reviewing or planning for wireless 
telecommunications facilities in the city. 
(g) ?Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of highest priority or highest 
available priority, the commission may disapprove an application for any of the following reasons: 
(1) ?Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements; 
(2) ?Conflict with any historic preservation regulations pertaining to any historical district; 
(3) ?The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities which is contrary to an 
already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation; 
(4) ?The placement and location of wireless telecommunications facilities which would create an 
unacceptable risk, or the probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of 
the city, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; 
(5) ?Conflicts with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 6, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.7. - Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant. 
(a) ?The city may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the city in reviewing and 
evaluating the application and any requests for recertification. 
(b) ?An applicant shall deposit with the city funds sufficient to reimburse the city for all reasonable costs 
of consultant and expert evaluation and consultation to the city in connection with the review of any 
application. The initial deposit shall be $7,500.00. These funds shall accompany the filing of an 
application and the city will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds. The city's 
consultants/experts shall bill or invoice the city no less frequently than monthly for its services in 
reviewing the application and performing its duties. If at any time during the review process this 
escrow account has a balance less than $2,500.00, Applicant shall immediately, upon notification by 
the city, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least $2,500.00. Such additional 
escrow funds must be deposited with the city before any further action or consideration is taken on 
the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by the city is more than the amount of 
the actual billing or invoicing at the conclusion of the review process, the difference shall be promptly 
refunded to the applicant. 
(c) ?The total amount of the funds set forth in subsection (b) of this section may vary with the scope and 
complexity of the project, the completeness of the application and other information as may be 
needed by the city or its consultant/expert to complete the necessary review and analysis. Additional 
escrow funds, as required and requested by the city, shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 7, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.8. - Exceptions from a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a) ?No conditional use permit shall be required for collocating antennas on existing wireless 
telecommunications facilities. Additionally, no conditional use permit shall be required for those 
exceptions noted in the definition of wireless telecommunications facilities, such as those used 
exclusively for fire, police and other dispatch telecommunications, or exclusively for private radio and 
television reception and private citizen's bands, amateur radio and other similar telecommunications. 
(b) ?All wireless telecommunications facilities legally existing on or before the effective date of this article 
shall be allowed to continue as they presently exist, provided however, that any modification to 
existing wireless telecommunications facilities must comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 8, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.9. - Conditional use permit application and other requirements. 
(a) ?All applicants for a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities or any 
modification of such facility shall comply with the requirements set forth in this section. The planning 
and zoning commission is the officially designated agency or body of the community to whom 
applications for a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be made, and 
that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not 
granting, or revoking conditional use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(b) ?An applicant for a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall either be a 
licensed carrier or have a licensed carrier as a co-applicant that has obtained FCC approval to install 
equipment on the subject site. 
(c) ?An application for a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall be signed 
on behalf of the applicant by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and 
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. The 
landowner, if different than the applicant, shall also sign the application, and submit an authorization 
letter stipulating the applicant is legally authorized to act on behalf of the owner. 
(d) ?Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are otherwise incomplete, may be 
rejected by the commission. 
(e) ?The applicant shall include a statement in writing: 
(1) ?That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in a 
safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the conditional use permit, without 
exception, unless specifically granted relief by the commission in writing, as well as all 
applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all 
applicable county, state and federal ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(2) ?That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is legally permissible, 
including, but not limited to the fact that the applicant is authorized to do business in the State of 
Florida. 
(f) ?No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed or constructed until the site plan is 
reviewed and approved by the commission, the conditional use permit has been approved, and the 
building permit has been issued by the building department. 
(g) ?All new wireless telecommunication facilities requiring a new supporting tower to be erected shall 
use a monopole tower, or other acceptable alternative tower structure, as defined herein. All 
conditional use permit applications for new wireless telecommunications facilities shall be 
accompanied by a report containing the information hereinafter set forth. The report shall be signed 
by a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Florida. Where this section calls for 
certification, such certification shall be by a qualified Florida state licensed professional engineer 
acceptable to the city, unless otherwise noted. The application shall include, in addition to the other 
requirements for the conditional use permit, the following information: 
(1) ?Documentation that demonstrates the need for the wireless telecommunications facility to 
provide service primarily within the city; 
(2) ?Name, address and phone number of the person preparing the report; 
(3) ?Name, address, and phone number of the property owner, operator, and applicant, to include 
the legal form of the applicant; 
(4) ?Postal address and tax map parcel number of the property; 
(5) ?Zoning district or designation in which the property is situated; 
(6) ?Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line dimensions, and a diagram showing 
the location of all lot lines reflected on a survey; 
(7) ?Location of nearest residential structure or residential zoning district; 
(8) ?Location of nearest habitable structure; 
(9) ?Location, size and height of all structures on the property which is the subject of the 
application; 
(10) ?Location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas and all appurtenant 
structures; 
(11) ?Type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping, and fencing; 
(12) ?The number, type and design of the telecommunications tower(s) antenna(s) proposed and 
the basis for the calculations of the telecommunications tower's capacity to accommodate 
multiple users; 
(13) ?The make, model and manufacturer of the tower and antenna(s); 
(14) ?A description of the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all related fixtures, structures, 
appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and 
lighting; 
(15) ?The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other transmitting equipment; 
(16) ?Transmission and maximum effective radiated power of the antenna(s); 
(17) ?Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the antenna(s); 
(18) ?Applicant's proposed tower maintenance and inspection procedures and related system of 
records; 
(19) ?Certification that NIER levels at the proposed site are within the threshold levels adopted by 
the FCC; 
(20) ?Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause interference with existing 
telecommunications devices, which certification shall be reviewed by a licensed engineer 
approved by the city; 
(21) ?A copy of the FCC license applicable for the use of wireless telecommunications facilities; 
(22) ?Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and analysis has been conducted, 
and that taking into account the subsurface and substrata, and the proposed drainage plan, that 
the site is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed wireless telecommunications facilities 
on the proposed site, which certification shall be reviewed by a licensed engineer designated by 
the city; 
(23) ?Propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining proposed, in-service or existing 
sites; 
(24) ?Applicant shall disclose in writing any agreement in existence prior to submission of the 
application that would limit or preclude the ability of the applicant to share any new 
telecommunication tower that it constructs. 
(25) ?Certification and statement that appropriate space has been reserved on the tower for public 
safety usage at no cost to the public safety entity. The city will provide the specific requirements 
for such public safety usage, if any, promptly after the preapplication meeting. 
(h) ?In the case of a new telecommunication tower, the applicant shall be required to submit a written 
report demonstrating its efforts to secure collocation rights of existing telecommunications tower(s) or 
use of existing buildings or other structures within the city. Copies of written requests and responses 
for collocation shall be provided to the commission. 
(i) ?The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment which shall include: 
(1) ?A "zone of visibility map" which shall be provided in order to determine locations where the 
tower may be seen. 
(2) ?An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, and accessory buildings from abutting 
and adjacent properties and streets. 
(3) ?An artist's rendering or other visual representation showing the effect of light emanating from 
the site on neighboring habitable structures within 1,500 feet of all property lines of the parcel 
on which the wireless telecommunications facilities are located. 
(j) ?All utilities from wireless telecommunications facilities sites shall be installed underground and in 
compliance with all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, including specifically, but not limited 
to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where appropriate. 
(k) ?Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory or associated facilities shall 
maximize use of building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which 
it may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. 
(l) ?At a telecommunications site, an access road and parking shall be provided to assure adequate 
emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be 
made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and 
vegetation cutting/removal. 
(m) ?A person who holds a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall 
construct, operate, maintain, repair, provide for removal of, modify or restore the permitted wireless 
telecommunications facilities in strict compliance with all current technical, safety and safety-related 
codes adopted by the city, state, or federal, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the 
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and 
responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended practices of the National Association 
of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, 
building, electrical, fire, safety, and health codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of 
the preceding the more stringent shall apply. 
(n) ?A holder of a conditional use permit granted under this article shall obtain, at its own expense, all 
permits and licenses required by applicable rule, regulation or ordinance, and must maintain the 
same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the city or other governmental entity or 
agency having jurisdiction over the applicant. 
(o) ?The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a proposed telecommunications tower to 
accommodate future demand for at least two additional commercial applications, for example, future 
collocations. The telecommunications tower shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least 
two additional antenna arrays equal to those of the applicant, and located as close to the applicant's 
antenna as possible without causing interference. This requirement may be waived, provided that the 
applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provision of future shared usage of the 
telecommunications tower is not technologically feasible, or is commercially impracticable and 
creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon: 
(1) ?The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area; 
(2) ?The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and structure proposed; 
(3) ?The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless telecommunications facilities 
spaces/sites; 
(4) ?Available space on existing and approved telecommunications towers. 
(p) ?The applicant shall submit to the city a letter of intent committing the owner of the proposed new 
tower, and his/her successors in interest, to negotiate in good faith for collocation of the proposed 
tower by other telecommunications providers in the future. This letter shall be filed with the city. 
Failure to abide by the conditions outlined in the letter may be grounds for revocation of the 
conditional use permit. The letter shall commit the new tower owner and their successors in interest 
to: 
(1) ?Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a potential collocate applicant; 
(2) ?Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for collocation of the new tower by other 
telecommunications providers; 
(q) ?The holder of a conditional use permit shall notify the city of any intended modification of a wireless 
telecommunication facility and shall apply to the city to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless 
telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 9, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.10. - Factors to be considered in granting conditional use permits for towers. 
    In addition to any standards for consideration of conditional use permit applications pursuant to 
article VI of this code, the planning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether 
to issue a conditional use permit, although the planning commission may waive or reduce the burden on 
the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the planning commission concludes that the goals of this 
section are better served thereby: 
(1) ?Location of nearest habitable structure, nearest residential structure or residential zoning 
district; 
(2) ?Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3) ?Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4) ?Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of 
reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(5) ?Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6) ?Surrounding topography; 
(7) ?Height of the proposed tower; 
(8) ?Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technologies not requiring 
the use of towers or structures; 
(9) ?The number, type and design of the telecommunications tower(s) antenna(s) proposed and the 
basis for the calculations of the telecommunications tower's capacity to accommodate multiple 
users. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 10, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.11. - Aesthetics and visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a) ?Applicants must provide camouflaging as defined by the term "alternative tower structure" or provide 
documentation as to why camouflage is not feasible. Alternative tower structures include: Manmade 
trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that 
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
(b) ?If the tower is not to be camouflaged by an alternative tower structure, the tower shall either 
maintain a neutral color consisting of the light gray and light blue color spectrum, or meet the 
applicable standards of the FAA. 
(c) ?Whether a tower is camouflaged or not at a tower site, the design of the buildings and related 
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping 
that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
(d) ?If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical 
and mechanical equipment must be a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with the 
color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually 
unobtrusive as possible. 
(e) ?State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of 
the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to 
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of 
the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into 
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of 
such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the 
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such 
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at 
the owner's expense. 
(f) ?Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or marked, except as required 
by this article or other regulatory authority. 
(g) ?Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view 
of the tower compound from adjacent property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped 
strip at least ten feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. Any combination of hedges, 
landscaped berm or ground cover shall be planted or installed along the entire length of each 
required landscape strip. The barrier, hedge, or landscape berm shall be a minimum of four feet in 
height. In addition, there shall be a minimum of one shrub for every two lineal feet of the required 
landscape strip. Additionally one tree per every 25 lineal feet shall be included within said 
landscaped strip. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 11, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.12. - Site plan requirements. 
(a) ?A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land 
uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), 
land use classification of the site and all properties within 1,500 feet, adjacent roadways, proposed 
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any 
other structures, topography, parking, landscaping, fencing and other information deemed by the 
growth management department to be necessary to assess compliance with this section; 
(b) ?Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable); 
(c) ?The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted 
residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties; 
(d) ?The separation distance from other towers within the city's boundaries shall be shown on an 
updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing 
tower(s), if known, as well as the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), as applicable; 
(e) ?A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials; The applicant shall demonstrate and 
provide in writing and/or by drawing how it shall effectively screen from view its proposed wireless 
telecommunications facilities base and all related facilities and structures; 
(f) ?Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination; 
(g) ?A description of compliance with all regulations contained herein, all applicable federal, state or 
local laws; 
(h) ?A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate 
collocation of additional antennas for future users and if not why it will not; 
(i) ?A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology 
not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of 
the proposed new tower; 
(j) ?A description of the feasible locations of future towers or antennas within the City of Sebastian based 
upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the 
proposed tower is erected; 
(k) ?Applicant's proposed tower maintenance and inspection procedures and related system of records; 
(l) ?If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive 
and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations, and 
(m) ?The applicant shall provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified individual or 
organization, to determine if the telecommunications tower or existing structure intended to support 
wireless facilities requires lighting under Federal Aviation Regulation Part 77. This requirement shall 
be for any new tower, or for an existing structure or building where the application increases the 
height of the structure or building. If this analysis determines, that the FAA must be contacted, then 
all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be 
provided in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 12, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.13. - Lot size and setbacks. 
(a) ?Wireless telecommunications facilities, excluding alternative tower structures, shall be located with a 
minimum setback from any property line a distance equal to the height of the wireless 
telecommunications facility or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, 
whichever is greater. Further, any accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the 
applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. 
(b) ?Alternative tower structures shall be exempt from subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 13, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.14. - Height of telecommunications tower(s). 
(a) ?The applicant must submit documentation justifying to the commission the total height of any 
telecommunications tower, facility and/or antenna and the basis therefore. Such justification shall be 
to provide service within the city, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown. 
(b) ?Telecommunications towers shall be no higher than the minimum height necessary. Unless waived 
by the commission upon good cause shown, the maximum height shall be one hundred ten feet, 
based on three collocated tiers, 95 feet, based on two collocated tiers, and 80 feet, based on single 
antennas. 
(c) ?The maximum height of any telecommunications tower and attached antennas constructed after the 
effective date of this article [January 8, 2003] shall not exceed that which shall permit operation 
without artificial lighting of any kind, in accordance with municipal, county, state, and/or any federal 
statute, code, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 14, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.15. - Security of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
    All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located, fenced or otherwise secured 
in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specific requirements are as follows: 
(a) ?All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, shall be enclosed by security fencing not 
less than six feet, yet no greater than eight feet, in height and shall also be equipped with no 
more than three strands of barbed wire; and 
(b) ?Transmitters and telecommunications control points must be installed such that they are readily 
accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 15, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.16. - Signage. 
    Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than six square feet to provide 
adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of the presence of an antenna that has 
transmission capabilities. The sign shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the 
antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be located so as to be visible from the 
access point of the site. The sign shall not be lighted unless the commission shall have allowed such 
lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted on any facilities, antennas, antenna 
supporting structures or antenna towers, unless otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 16, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.17. - Application fee. 
    At the time that a person submits an application for a conditional use permit for a new 
telecommunications tower, such person shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $1,500.00 to the city. 
If the application is for a conditional use permit for collocating on an existing telecommunications tower or 
high structure, where no increase in height of the tower or structure is required, the nonrefundable fee 
shall be $1,000.00. These fees shall not include the cost of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 17, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.18. - Performance security. 
    The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless telecommunications facilities 
property site shall at its cost and expense, be jointly required to execute and file with the city a bond, or 
other form of security acceptable to the city as to type of security and the form and manner of execution, 
in an amount of at least $75,000.00 and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the commission to 
assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this article and conditions of any conditional 
use permit issued pursuant to this article. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force 
and effect throughout the term of the conditional use permit, including a transference of ownership, and/or 
until the removal of the wireless telecommunications facilities, and any necessary site restoration is 
completed. The failure to pay any annual premium for the renewal of any such security shall be a violation 
of the provisions of the conditional use permit and shall entitle the commission to revoke the conditional 
use permit after prior written notice to the applicant and holder of the permit and after a hearing upon due 
prior notice to the applicant and holder of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 18, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.19. - Public hearing required. 
(a) ?Prior to the approval of any application for a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications 
facilities, a public hearing shall be held by the commission, notice of which shall be published in a 
newspaper of general circulation within the city no less than 15 calendar days prior to the scheduled 
date of the public hearing. In order to insure that nearby landowners are informed, the applicant, at 
time of application submittal shall be required to provide names and address of all landowners 
whose property is located within 500 feet of any property line of the lot on which the new wireless 
telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located and certify that the applicant has provided 
notice to said landowners of the public hearing. 
(b) ?The city shall schedule the public hearing referred to in subsection (a) of this section once it finds 
the application is complete. The city, at any stage prior to issuing a conditional use permit, may 
require such additional information as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 19, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.20. - Action on an application for a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications 
facilities. 
(a) ?The commission will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this article in a timely fashion, 
and shall act within a reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of the application and 
the circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be involved, and the 
applicant's desire for a timely resolution. 
(b) ?Except for necessary building permits, once a conditional use permit has been granted hereunder, 
no additional permits or approvals shall be required by the city. 
(c) ?After the public hearing and after formally considering the application, the commission may approve 
and issue, or deny, a conditional use permit. It's decision shall be in writing and shall be supported 
by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit 
shall always be upon the applicant. 
(d) ?The applicant shall be notified in writing of the commission's decision regarding the conditional use 
permit application within ten calendar days of the commission's action. 
(e) ?Appeals of decisions of the planning and zoning commission shall be to the city council pursuant to 
section 54-1-2.4(g). 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 20, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.21. - Extent and parameters of conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications 
facilities. 
    The extent and parameters of a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall 
be as follows: 
(a) ?Such conditional use permit shall be nonexclusive; 
(b) ?Such conditional use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the express prior 
written consent of the staff, and such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed; 
(c) ?Such conditional use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice to the applicant, be 
revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the conditions and provisions of the conditional 
use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, or for a material violation of this article after 
prior written notice to the applicant and the holder of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 21, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.22. - Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations. 
(a) ?To the extent that the holder of a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities 
has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or 
regulations, then the holder of such a conditional use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all 
applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but 
not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and 
regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards. 
(b) ?To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or federal 
agency, including but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and 
regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the 
duration of a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such 
a conditional use permit shall conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities to the 
applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 
months of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard, or 
provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 22, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.23. - Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(a) ?Under the following circumstances, staff may determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests 
of the city warrant and require the removal of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(1) ?Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have been abandoned (i.e. not used as 
wireless telecommunications facilities) for a period exceeding 180 days, except for periods 
caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall commence 
within 90 days; 
(2) ?Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a state of disrepair that it creates 
a health or safety hazard; 
(3) ?Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located, constructed, or modified without first 
obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required conditional use permit, or any other 
necessary authorization. 
(b) ?If the city makes such a determination as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the city shall 
notify the holder of the conditional use permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities within 48 
hours that said wireless telecommunications facilities are to be removed. The city may approve an 
interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless 
telecommunications facilities. 
(c) ?The holder of the conditional use permit, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove 
such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all associated structures and facilities, from the site 
and restore the site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited 
only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the 
city. 
(d) ?If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial progress has not been made 
to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has 
received notice, then the city may order officials or representatives of the city to remove the wireless 
telecommunications facilities at the sole expense of the owner or conditional use permit holder. 
(e) ?If the city removes or causes to be removed, wireless telecommunications facilities, and the owner 
of the wireless telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful 
location within ten days, then the city may take steps to declare the wireless telecommunications 
facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components. 
(f) ?Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, staff may approve a temporary use 
permit/agreement for the wireless telecommunications facilities, for no more than 90 days, during 
which time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or relocation of the affected wireless 
telecommunications facilities shall be developed by the holder of the conditional use permit, subject 
to the approval of the staff, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of the 
conditional use permit and the city. If such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within 
the 90-day time period, then the city may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless 
telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 23, 1-8-03) 


Sec. 54-6-23.24. - Relief. 
    Any applicant desiring relief or exemption from any aspect or requirement of this article may request 
such from the city at a pre-application meeting, provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the 
original application for either a conditional use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously granted 
conditional use permit, a request for modification of its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be 
temporary, permanent, partial or complete, at the sole discretion of the commission. However, the burden 
of proving the need for the requested relief or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove to the 
satisfaction of the commission. The applicant shall bear all costs of the city in considering the request and 
the relief shall not be transferable without the specific written permission of the city. Such permission shall 
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the 
applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted the relief or exemption will have 
no significant effect on the health, safety and welfare of the city, its residents and other service providers. 
(Ord. No. O-02-18, § 24, 1-8-03) 


COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    As ordinances amending this code are inserted, they will be listed herein, together with their date of 
adoption and disposition within this code. 
Ord
ina
nce  
Nu
mb
er 
Dat
e 
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion  
 
this 
Cod
e 
O-
00-
15 
?6-
14-
200
0 
1 
54-
1-
1.1
—
54-
1-
1.1
4 



54-
1-
2.1
—
54-
1-
2.1
0 



54-
2-
3.1
—
54-
2-
3.5 



54-
2-
4.1
—
54-
2-
4.5 



54-
2-
5.1
—
54-
2-
5.1
5 



54-
2-
6.1
—
54-
2-
6.4 



54-
2-
7.1
—
54-
2-
7.2
1 



54-
2-
8.1
—
54-
2-
8.8 



54-
3-
9.1
—
54-
3-
9.9 



54-
3-
10.
1—
54-
3-
10.
10 



54-
3-
11.
1—
54-
2-
11.
9 



54-
3-
12.
1—
54-
3-
12.
18 



54-
3-
13.
1—
54-
3-
13.
21 



54-
3-
14.
1—
54-
3-
14.
17 



54-
3-
15.
1—
54-
3-
15.
5 



54-
3-
16.
1—
54-
3-
16.
8 



54-
4-
18.
1—
54-
4-
18.
7 



54-
4-
19.
1—
54-
4-
19.
12 



54-
4-
20.
1—
54-
4-
20.
7 



54-
4-
21.
1—
54-
4-
21.
6 



54-
4-
21.
A.1
—
54-
4-
21.
A.9 



54-
4-
21.
B.1
—
54.
4.2
1.B.
7 



54-
4-
22.
1—
54-
5-
22.
3 
O-
01-
07 
?4-
11-
200
1 
1 
54-
2-
5.3.
2(c) 


2 
54-
2-
6.4(
36A
) 
O-
01-
12 
?6-
13-
200
1 
1 
54-
5-
22.
2 
O-
01-
13 
?7-
11-
200
1 
1 
54-
2-
7.8 
O-
01-
24 
10-
24-
200
1 
1(E
xh. 
A) 
54-
2-
5.2.
4(b
), 
(e) 
O-
02-
04 
?2-
13-
200
2 
1 
54-
1-
2.5 
O-
02-
06 
?4-
10-
200
2 
1 
54-
3-
14.
17 
O-
02-
9 
?7-
24-
200
2 
1 
54-
2-
5.2.
3(d
)(5) 


2 
54-
5-
22.
2 
O-
02-
19 
12-
11-
200
2 
1 
54-
2-
7.5 
O-
02-
18 
?1-?
8-
200
3 
1—
24 
54-
6-
23.
1—
54-
6-
23.
24 
O-
03-
03 
?9-
10-
200
3 
1 
54-
2-
7.2
0(n
ote
) 
O-
05-
13 
?6-
22-
200
5 
1 
54-
4-
21C
.1
—
54-
4-
21C
.4 
O-
05-
18 
10-
16-
200
5 
1—
5 
54-
3-
14.
1—
54.
3-
14.
15 


16 
54-
3-
14.
17 


17
—
19 
54-
5-
22.
2 
O-
07-
05 
?3-
14-
200
7 
1     
  
Add
ed 
54-
3-
11.
10 
O-
07-
15 
12-
12-
200
7 
1 
54-
5-
22.
2 
O-
09-
14 
?1-
13-
201
0 
1     
  
Add
ed 
54-
3-
11.
11 
O-
10-
05 
?9-
22-
201
0 
1 
54-
3-
15.
1—
54-
3-
15.
5 
O-
10-
08 
12-
15-
201
0 
1 
54-
3-
11.
3 
O-
11-
03 
?4-
13-
201
1 
1     
  
Rpl
d 
54-
3-
12.
15
—
54-
3-
12.
17 


      
Rpl
d 
54-
3-
13.
1—
54-
3-
13.
21 



54-
5-
22.
2 
O-
11-
04 
?7-
13-
201
1 
1     
  
Add
ed 
54-
3-
16.
5(b
)(5) 


2 
54-
3-
16.
4(1
0), 



54-
3-
16.
5(e)
(1), 
(e)(
2), 
(e)(
6), 


      
Add
ed 
54-
3-
16.
5(e)
(2)
d. 


3 
54-
5-
22.
2 
O-
11-
16 
?8-
24-
201
1 
1 
54-
3-
16.
5(e)
(4)
d. 
O-
12-
07 
?9-
26-
201
2 
1 
54-
3-
10.
6(a)
(3) 



54-
3-
10.
7(c)
(1) 
O-
12-
10 
10-
10-
201
2 
1 
54-
2-
5.3.
2 


2 
54-
2-
5.4 


3 
54-
2-
5.5 


4 
54-
2-
5.6 


5 
54-
2-
5.7 


6 
54-
2-
5.9 


7 
54-
2-
6.4(
4)a. 


8     
  
Add
ed 
54-
2-
6.4(
6A) 


9 
54-
2-
6.4(
7)a. 


10 
54-
2-
6.4(
8)a. 


11 
54-
2-
6.4(
15)
a. 


12 
54-
2-
6.4(
26)
a. 


13   
    
Rpl
d 
54-
2-
6.4(
27) 


14 
54-
2-
6.4(
28)
a. 


15 
54-
2-
6.4(
30)
a. 


16 
54-
2-
6.4(
31)
a. 


17   
    
Add
ed 
54-
2-
6.4(
44) 


18   
    
Rnb
d 
54-
2-
6.4(
44) 


      
as 
54-
2-
6.4(
45) 



54-
2-
6.4(
45)
a. 
O-
14-
06 
?1-
14-
201
5 
1 
54-
2-
3.2 



54-
2-
3.3(
c) 



54-
2-
3.4 
O-
14-
07 
12-
10-
201
4 
1     
  
Rpl
d 
54-
1-
2.4(
g)(6
) 


2     
  
Rpl
d 
54-
1-
2.5(
d)(
4) 



54-
1-
2.5(
e) 


3 
54-
4-
18.
6(c) 
O-
15-
03 
?3-
11-
201
5 
1 
54-
2-
3.2
—
54-
2-
3.5 
O-
16-
05 
?8-
10-
201
6 
1 
54-
3-
16.
1 


2 
54-
3-
16.
3(8) 



54-
3-
16.
5(e) 


3 
54-
5-
22.
2 


4     
  
Add
ed 
54-
3-
16.
9 
O-
18-
01 
?6-
13-
201
8 
2 
54-
5-
22.
2 


      
Add
ed 
54-
5-
22.
3(c)
(5.1
), 
(17.
1), 
(23.
1) 


3 
54-
2-
5.3.
1(b
) 


      
Add
ed 
54-
2-
5.3.
1(d
)(7) 



54-
2-
5.3.
2(b
) 


      
Add
ed 
54-
2-
5.3.
2(d
)(6) 



54-
2-
5.3.
3(b
) 


      
Add
ed 
54-
2-
5.3.
3(d
)(6) 



54-
2-
5.4(
b) 


      
Add
ed 
54-
2-
5.4(
d)(
6) 



54-
2-
5.6(
b) 


      
Add
ed 
54-
2-
5.6(
d)(
6) 


3(E
xh. 
A) 
54-
2-
5.9 
O-
18-
08 
?9-
12-
201
8 
1     
  
Add
ed 
54-
2-
7.2
2 
O-
18-
10 
?1-
23-
201
9 
1 
54-
2-
7.7 
O-
19-
01 
?3-
13-
201
9 
1     
  
Add
ed 
54-
5-
22.
3(c)
(1.1
) 
 


STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
?This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of 
references to the state law or related matters. 
F.S. 
Sec
tion 
Sec
tion?  
this 
Cod
e 
ch. 
163 
54-
1-
2.4 

54-
1-
2.5, 
54-
1-
2.6 

54-
2-
7.1
2 
ch. 
163
, Pt. 
II 
54-
1-
1.4 

54-
3-
9.1 

54-
5-
22.
2 
163
.31
74 
54-
1-
2.2, 
54-
1-
2.4 
163
.31
74(
4)(a
) 
54-
1-
2.4 
163
.31
74(
4)(c
), 
163
.31
74(
4)(
d) 
54-
1-
2.4 
163
.31
87(
8) 
54-
5-
22.
2 
163
.31
91 
54-
1-
2.4 
163
.32
01 
54-
1-
1.2, 
54-
1-
1.4 

54-
2-
4.1 
163
.32
02 
54-
1-
1.2, 
54-
1-
1.4 

54-
1-
2.6 
163
.32
20 
54-
3-
9.4 

54-
3-
9.5 
ch. 
163
; pt. 
II 
54-
5-
22.
2 
ch. 
177 
54-
4-
19.
5, 
54-
4-
19.
11 
197
.19
2 
54-
4-
19.
5 
ch. 
320 
54-
2-
5.2.
5 

54-
2-
5.1
4 
chs. 
320
, 
553 
54-
2-
4.2 

54-
2-
7.1
7 
320
.82
3 
54-
2-
4.2 

54-
2-
7.1
7 
366
.02 
54-
2-
7.1
5 
ch. 
380 
54-
3-
9.4 

54-
4-
20.
3 
380
.06 
54-
4-
19.
5 
381
.98
6(1)
(f) 
54-
5-
22.
2 
403
.52
—
403
.53
6 
54-
2-
7.1
5 
403
.50
1—
403
.51
7 
54-
2-
7.1
5 
ch. 
465 
54-
5-
22.
3(2
3.1) 
ch. 
471 
54-
4-
18.
4 
ch. 
481 
54-
4-
18.
4 
ch. 
481
.22
9 
54-
3-
12.
10 
419
.00
1 
54-
2-
6.4 
509
.01
3 
54-
2-
7.2
2 
ch. 
553 
54-
2-
5.2.
5 
 
