
Weston, FL Code of Ordinances


WESTON, FLORIDA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-35 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 9-30-2019






Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




CHARTER



Section



ARTICLE I.  CORPORATE EXISTENCE, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARY AND POWERS



   1.01   Corporate existence



   1.02   Form of government



   1.03   Corporate boundary/map



   1.04   Powers



   1.05   Construction



ARTICLE II.  CITY COMMISSION; MAYOR



   2.01   City Commission



   2.02   Mayor



   2.03   Election and Term of Office



   2.04   Qualifications



   2.05   Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies



   2.06   Compensation; reimbursement for expenses



   2.07   Residence



ARTICLE III.  ADMINISTRATIVE



   3.01   City Manager



   3.02   Appointment; removal; compensation



   3.03   Powers and duties of the City Manager



   3.04   Absence or disability of City Manager



   3.05   Bond of City Manager



   3.06   City Clerk



   3.07   City Attorney



   3.08   Removal procedure



   3.09   Expenditure of City funds



   3.10   City boards and agencies



   3.11   Contracting for Traditional Municipal Services



ARTICLE IV.  LEGISLATIVE



   4.01   Commission meeting procedure



   4.02   Prohibitions



   4.03   Emergency ordinances



   4.04   Annual budget adoption



   4.05   Authentication, recording and disposition of ordinances;
resolutions and Charter amendments



   4.06   Tax levy and Assessments



   4.07   Borrowing



   4.08   Independent Audit



ARTICLE V.  ELECTIONS



   5.01   Elections



   5.02   Initiative and referendum



ARTICLE VI. CHARTER AMENDMENTS



   6.01   Charter amendments



   6.02   Procedure to amend



ARTICLE VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS



   7.01   Severability



   7.02   Conflicts of interest; ethical standards



   7.03   City personnel system



   7.04   Charitable contributions



   7.05   Charter revision



   7.06   Variation of pronouns



   7.07   Style and capitalization



   7.08   Calendar day



   7.09   No Discrimination



   7.10   Commission approval of site plans



   7.11   Temporary nature of Article



   7.12   State Shared Revenues



ARTICLE VIII. RESERVED



ARTICLE IX.  CONTINUATION, MERGER AND DISSOLUTION OF EXISTING DISTRICTS



   9.01   Indian Trace Community Development District



   9.02   [Reserved]



   9.03   Continuance of rights, powers, privileges, property,
ordinances, resolutions, taxes, fees, offices, departments, boards, and
agencies of City



   9.04   Time of taking effect



*Charter Review Board Note - The following is the Charter of the City, as
adopted by referendum on November 7, 2000 and amended by referenda on
November 5, 2002, March 11, 2003, November 2, 2004, November 7, 2006 and
November 4, 2014.



ARTICLE I. CORPORATE EXISTENCE, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARY AND POWERS



Section 1.01.  Corporate existence.--



   A municipal corporation known as the City of Weston (the “City”) is
hereby confirmed and continued pursuant to this Charter and the Constitution
of the State of Florida (the “State”).



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of municipalities, see Florida Constitution Article VIII,
§ 2



   Formation of local governments, see Florida Statutes Chapter 165



Section 1.02.  Form of government.--



   The City shall have a “Commission-Manager” form of government.



Section 1.03.  Corporate boundary/map.--



   The corporate boundaries of the Cityshall be those described in Laws of
Florida Chapter 2015-190 on file at the City Clerk’s Office and as
generally depicted on the following map:







 



Section 1.04.  Powers.--



   The City shall have all available governmental, corporate and
proprietary powers and may exercise them except when prohibited by law. The
electors of the City intend that the municipal government established by this
Charter shall have the broadest exercise of home rule powers permitted under
the Constitution and laws of the State.



Statutory reference:



   Municipal home rule powers, see Florida Constitution Article VIII, §
2(b), Florida Statutes § 166.021



Section 1.05.  Construction.--



   This Charter and the powers of the City shall be construed liberally in
favor of the City.



ARTICLE II.  CITY COMMISSION; MAYOR



Section 2.01.  City Commission.--



   There shall be a City Commission (the “Commission”) vested with all
legislative powers of the City, consisting of four members
(“Commissioners”) and the Mayor. References in this Charter to
Commissioners shall include the Mayor unless the context dictates otherwise.



Section 2.02.  Mayor.--



   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Commission and be a voting
member of the Commission. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of City
government for all ceremonial purposes, for purposes of military law, for
service of process, execution of duly authorized contracts, deeds and other
documents, and as the City official designated to represent the City in all
dealings with other governmental entities.



Section 2.03.  Election and Term of Office.--



   (a)   ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.--Each Commissioner and the Mayor
shall be elected at-large for 4-year terms by the electors of the City in the
manner provided in Article V of this Charter. Each Commissioner and the Mayor
shall remain in office until his or her successor is elected and assumes the
duties of the position.



   (b)   RESIDENTIAL AREAS.--The City shall be divided into four areas
as delineated on the map below (collectively, “Residential Areas,”
individually, each is a “Residential Area”) and assigned numbered seats
1, 2, 3, and 4 (collectively, “Seats”  Individually each is a
“Seat”). One Commissioner shall be elected to each Seat. A person must be
a resident of the Residential Area that s/he represents during his/her term
of office.







 



   (c)   TERM LIMITS.--



      (1)   No person may serve in the position of Mayor for more
than two consecutive terms; provided, however, that service, as Mayor during
the unexpired portion of a term which another person was elected shall not be
counted when applying this limitation. If a person who has previously served
in the position of Mayor does not serve in the position of Mayor for at least
one full term, that person’s prior service shall not be counted when
applying this limitation.



      (2)   No person may serve in the position of City Commissioner
(regardless of Seat) for  more than two consecutive terms; provided,
however, that service, as Commissioner during the unexpired portion of a term
which another person was elected shall not be counted when applying this
limitation. If a person who has previously served in the position of
Commissioner does not serve in the position of Commissioner for at least one
full term, that person’s prior service shall not be counted when applying
this limitation.



(Ord. 2002-01, certified 11-18-2002; Am. Ord. 2002-27, certified 11-18-2002;
Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



Section 2.04.  Qualifications.--



   Candidates for Commissioner or Mayor shall qualify for election by
filing a written notice of candidacy with the City Clerk at such time and in
such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance and paying to the City Clerk
$100, in addition to any fees required by Florida Statutes, as a qualifying
fee. A person may not be a candidate for Commission and Mayor in the same
election. Only electors of the City who have resided continuously within the
Residential Area for which election is being sought for at least one year
preceding the date of such filing shall be eligible to hold the office of
Commissioner. If at the conclusion of the qualifying period no elector from
any Residential Area shall file for that Seat, the qualifying period for that
Seat shall be reopened for a period of five days and any qualified elector
who has resided in the City continuously for at least one year preceding the
date of such filing may file a written notice of candidacy for the Seat in
accordance with the remaining provisions of this Section. Only electors of
the City who have resided continuously in the City for at least one year
preceding the date of filing shall be eligible to hold the office of Mayor.



Cross-reference:



   Qualification of candidates, see § 21.01



Statutory reference:



   Municipal candidates; election assessment, see Florida Statutes §
99.093



Section 2.05.  Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies.--



   (a)   VACANCIES.--The office of the Mayor or a Commissioner shall
become vacant upon his or her death, resignation, removal from office in any
manner authorized by law or by forfeiture of his or her office. A resignation
shall be deemed to occur upon the day of submission of a letter of
resignation, unless the letter provides for a future effective date, in which
case the resignation shall be deemed to occur on the earlier of the effective
date provided in the letter or the date the resigning official’s successor
takes office.



   (b)   FORFEITURE OF OFFICE.--



      (1)   Forfeiture by disqualification.--The Mayor shall forfeit
his/her office if at any time during his/her term s/he ceases to maintain
his/her permanent residence in the City or otherwise ceases to be a qualified
elector of the City. A Commissioner shall forfeit his or her office if at any
time during his/her term s/he ceases to maintain his/her permanent residence
in his or her respective Residential Area or otherwise ceases to be a
qualified elector of the City. A Commissioner shall not forfeit his/her
office under this paragraph if, in the process of relocating within a
Residential Area, s/he lives outside of his/her Residential Area but within
the City for a period of no more than 90 days.



      (2)   Forfeiture by absence.--A Commissioner shall be subject
to forfeiture of his/her office, in the discretion of the remaining
Commissioners, if s/he is absent without good cause from any four regular
meetings of the Commission during any calendar year, or if s/he is absent
without good cause from any four, or three as to the Mayor, consecutive
regular meetings of the Commission, whether or not during the same calendar
year.



      (3)   Procedures.--The Commission shall be the sole judge of
the qualifications of its members and shall hear all questions relating to
forfeiture of a Commissioner’s office, including whether or not good cause
for absence has been or may be established. The burden of establishing good
cause shall be on the Commissioner in question; provided, however, that any
Commissioner may at any time during any duly held meeting move to establish
good cause for the absence of him/herself or any other Commissioner, from any
past, present or future meetings, which motion, if carried, shall be
conclusive. A Commissioner whose qualifications are in question or who is
otherwise subject to forfeiture of his/her office shall not vote on any such
matters. The Commissioner in question shall be entitled to a public hearing
on request regarding an alleged forfeiture of office. If a public hearing is
requested, notice thereof shall be published in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the City at least one week in advance of the hearing.
Any final determination by the Commission that a Commissioner has forfeited
his/her office shall be made by resolution. All votes and other acts of the
Commissioner in question prior to the effective date of such resolution shall
be valid regardless of the grounds of forfeiture.



   (c)   FILLING OF VACANCIES.--



      (1)   If there is an available city election scheduled to be
held within one year of the submission of a letter of resignation or the
death, forfeiture or removal from office of an elected official, the office
shall be filled at the first scheduled available city election and the person
elected shall serve the remainder of the term of the vacated office. If there
is no available city election scheduled to be held within one year of the
submission of a letter of resignation or the death, forfeiture or removal
from office of an elected official, but there is an available county, state
or national election in that time period, the office shall be filled at the
first scheduled available county, state or national election and the person
elected shall serve the remainder of the term of the vacated office. If there
is no scheduled available city, county, state or national election within one
year of the submission of a letter of resignation or the death, forfeiture or
removal from office of an elected official, the office shall be filled no
sooner than 90 days and no later than 360 days after the submission of a
letter of resignation or the death, forfeiture or removal from office of an
elected official by a special election and the person elected shall serve the
remainder of the term of the vacated office. An election shall be deemed
available if there is sufficient time to hold a qualifying period and to
provide all legally required notices, and the Supervisor of Elections
acknowledges that the election can be placed on the ballot for that election.



      (2)   A vacancy in any Seat shall be filled by a qualified
person residing within the corresponding Residential Area.



      (3)   Persons filling vacancies shall meet the qualifications
specified in this Article II.



      (4)   If no candidate for a vacancy meets the qualifications
under this Article for that vacancy, the Commission shall appoint a person
qualified under this Article to fill the vacancy.



      (5)   Notwithstanding any quorum requirements established
herein, if at any time the full membership of the Commission is reduced to
less than a quorum, the remaining members may, by majority vote, appoint
additional members to the extent otherwise permitted or required under this
subsection.



      (6)   In the event that all the members of the Commission are
removed by death, disability, recall, removal, forfeiture of office,
resignation, and/or otherwise, the Governor shall appoint an interim Mayor
and an interim Commissioner for each seat, each of whom shall serve until a
replacement is elected. If there is no regular City election scheduled to
take place during the subsequent 180 days, the interim Mayor and interim
Commissioners shall call a special election that shall be held within 180
days of the appointments at which time a Mayor and Commissioner for each seat
shall be elected to complete the remainder of the terms. If there is a
regular City election scheduled to take place during the subsequent 360 days,
a Mayor and a Commissioner for each seat shall be elected at that regular
election, and the people elected shall serve either a full term (for those
positions that were up for election at that time) or the remainder of the
terms (for those positions that were not up for election at that time).
Appointees must meet all requirements for candidates provided for in Article
II.



(Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-08, certified
11-21-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal officials; suspension and removal by Governor, see Florida
Statutes § 112.51



   Qualified electors, see Florida Statutes § 166.032



   Vacancies, see Florida Statutes § 166.031



Section 2.06.  Compensation; reimbursement for expenses.--



   Commissioners shall be compensated at the rate of $12,300 per year and
the Mayor shall be compensated at the rate of $16,000 per year, to be
increased annually on December 1, based on the annual change in the February
Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the Miami-Fort Lauderdale area. The Mayor and
Commissioners shall receive reimbursement in accordance with applicable law,
or as may be otherwise provided by ordinance, for authorized travel and per
diem expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.



(Am. Ord. 2017-09, certified 11-19-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Per diem and travel expenses, see Florida Statutes § 112.061



Section 2.07.  Residence.--



   For purposes of this Article, “Residence” shall require all of the
following:



   (a)   A place of abode within the Residential Area/City;



   (b)   A declaration of intent of making that place of abode the
person’s permanent home;



   (c)   Registration to vote at the address of that place of abode; and



   (d)   A Florida driver’s license (or, if the person does not
possess a driver’s license, an official Florida state identification) that
reflects the address of that place of abode.



   The terms “Resident,” “Resided” and “Residing” shall be
based upon this definition.



(Ord. 2004-09, certified 11-2-2004)



ARTICLE III.  ADMINISTRATIVE



Section 3.01.  City Manager.--



   There shall be a City Manager, who shall be an individual employed by
the City (the “City Manager”) who shall be the chief executive and chief
administrative officer of the City. The City Manager shall be responsible to
the Commission for the execution and administration of all City affairs.



(Am. Ord. 2006-09, certified 11-20-2006)



Section 3.02.  Appointment; removal; compensation.--



   A majority of the Commission shall appoint the City Manager for an
indefinite term. The Commission may remove the City Manager at any time, as
provided for in Section 3.08. The compensation and benefits of the City
Manager shall be fixed by the Commission.



Section 3.03.  Powers and duties of the City Manager.--



   The City Manager shall:



   (a)   Be responsible for the hiring, supervision and removal of all
City employees;



   (b)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments and
offices but not City boards or agencies, unless so directed by the Commission
from time to time;



   (c)   Attend all Commission meetings and have the right to take part
in discussion but not the right to vote;



   (d)   Ensure that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of
the Commission, subject to enforcement and/or administration by him/her or by
officers subject to his/her direction and supervision, are faithfully
executed;



   (e)   Prepare and submit to the Commission a proposed annual budget
and capital program;



   (f)   Submit to the Commission and make available to the public an
annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of
the end of each fiscal year;



   (g)   Prepare such other reports as the Commission may require
concerning the operations of City departments, offices, boards and agencies;



   (h)   Keep the Commission fully advised as to the financial
condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the
Commission concerning the affairs of the City as s/he deems to be in the best
interests of the City;



   (i)   Execute contracts, deeds and other documents on behalf of the
City as authorized by the Commission;



   (j)   Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or
as may be required by the Commission;



   (k)   Call a Special Meeting of the Commission at his/her discretion
or at the request of three Commissioners;



   (l)   Have the power, jointly with the Mayor, to declare a state of
emergency pursuant to Chapter 870, Florida Statutes, and/or a state of local
emergency pursuant to Chapter 252, Florida Statutes;



   (m)   Have the power, jointly with the Mayor, to establish and
remove curfews to protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens and
residents of Weston during a state of emergency or state of local emergency;
and



   (n)   Have the power to exempt persons from curfews.



(Am. Ord. 2006-09, certified 11-20-2006)



Section 3.04.  Absence or disability of City Manager.--



   To perform his/her duties during his/her temporary absence or
disability, the City Manager may designate by letter filed with the City
Clerk, a qualified administrative officer of the City. In the event of
failure of the City Manager to make such designation, or should the person so
designated by the City Manager be unsatisfactory to the Commission, the
Commission may by resolution appoint an officer of the City to perform the
duties of the City Manager until s/he shall return or his/her disability
shall cease.



Section 3.05.  Bond of City Manager.--



   The City Manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the
Commission, and in such amount as the Commission may fix, said bond to be
conditioned on the faithful performance of his/her duties. The premium of the
bond shall be paid by the City.



Section 3.06.  City Clerk.--



   The City Manager shall appoint a City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give
notice of Commission meetings to its members and the public, shall keep
minutes of its proceedings and shall perform such other duties as the
Commission or City Manager may prescribe from time to time. The City Clerk
shall report to the City Manager.



Section 3.07.  City Attorney.--



   The Commission may from time to time appoint an individual attorney or
a law firm to act as the City Attorney under such terms, conditions and
compensation as may be established by the Commission from time to time. The
City Attorney shall report to the Commission. The City Attorney may be
removed by the Commission at any time.



Section 3.08.  Removal procedure.--



   The City Manager shall be removed from office only by a majority vote
of the full Commission.



Section 3.09.  Expenditure of City funds.--



   No funds of the City shall be expended except pursuant to duly approved
appropriations or for the payment of bonds, notes or other indebtedness duly
authorized by the City and only from such funds so authorized.



Section 3.10.  City boards and agencies.--



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the Commission shall establish or
terminate such boards and agencies as it may deem advisable from time to
time. The boards and agencies shall report to the Commission. Members of
boards and agencies shall be appointed by resolution.



Section 3.11.  Contracting for Traditional Municipal Services.--



   It was the original intent of the City to provide traditional municipal
services through public and private contract providers. Accordingly,
traditional municipal services shall be rendered through contract providers,
not City employees, unless approved by at least a 4/5 vote of the City
Commission. If the City Commission determines that any traditional municipal
service is to be provided through City employees, the City Manager shall,
pursuant to Section 3.03(a) of the Charter, be responsible for the hiring,
supervision and removal of all such employees. For purposes of this Section,
traditional municipal services shall mean the following: public safety,
public works, administrative services, community development and community
services.



(Ord. 2004-09, certified 11-2-2004)



ARTICLE IV.  LEGISLATIVE



Section 4.01.  Commission meeting procedure.--



   (a)   MEETINGS.--The Commission shall hold at least 11 regular
monthly meetings in each calendar year, at such times and places as the
Commission may prescribe. Special meetings may be held on the call of the
Mayor or the City Manager and upon no less than 24 hours’ notice to each
member and the public, or such shorter time as the City Manager shall deem
necessary in case of an emergency.



(Am. Ord. 2006-09, certified 11-20-2006)



   (b)   RULES AND MINUTES.--The Commission shall determine its own
rules of procedure and order of business and shall keep minutes that shall be
open for public inspection.



   (c)   QUORUM AND VOTING.--Any three members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and
may compel the attendance of absent members in a manner and subject to the
penalties prescribed by the rules of the Commission. All voting shall be by
roll call. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, no
action of the Commission shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the
affirmative votes of at least three members of the Commission. In the event
that there are less than three members of the Commission who are eligible to
vote on a particular matter due to vacancy or required abstention pursuant to
Florida law, then the remaining member or members of the Commission may vote
and approve such matter by unanimous vote.



(Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



Statutory reference:



   Ordinances, resolutions, and quorum, see Florida Statutes § 166.041



   Public meetings, see Florida Statutes § 286.011



Section 4.02.  Prohibitions.--



   (a)   APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS.--Neither the Commission nor any of
its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any
City administrative officers or employees whom the City Manager or any of
his/her subordinates is empowered to appoint, but the Commission may express
its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything
pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees.



   (b)   INTERFERENCE WITH ADMINISTRATION.--Except for the purpose of
inquiries and investigations made in good faith, the Commission or its
members shall deal with City officers and employees who are subject to the
direction and supervision of the City Manager solely through the City
Manager, and neither the Commission nor its members shall give orders to any
such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. It is the express
intent of this Charter that recommendations for improvement in City
government operations by individual Commissioners be made solely to and
through the City Manager. Commissioners may discuss with the City Manager any
matter of City business; however, no individual Commissioner shall give
orders to the City Manager.



   (c)   HOLDING OTHER OFFICE.--No elected City official shall hold any
appointive City office or employment while in office. No former elected City
official shall hold any compensated appointive City office or employment
until one year after the expiration of his/her term.



Section 4.03.  Emergency ordinances.--



   (a)   AUTHORIZATION; FORM.--To meet a public emergency affecting
life, health, property, or the public peace, the Commission may adopt, in the
manner provided in this Section, one or more emergency ordinances, but such
ordinances may not: enact or amend a land use plan or rezone private
property; levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend any municipal franchise; set
service or user charges for any municipal services; or authorize the
borrowing of money except as provided under the emergency appropriations
provisions of this Charter if applicable. An emergency ordinance shall be
introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except
that it shall be plainly designated in a preamble as an emergency ordinance
and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an
emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms.



   (b)   PROCEDURE.--Upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the
City Commission, an emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without
amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. After its
adoption, the ordinance shall be advertised and printed as prescribed for
other ordinances.



   (c)   EFFECTIVE DATE.--Emergency ordinances shall become effective
upon adoption or at such other date as may be specified in the ordinance.



   (d)   REPEAL.--Each emergency ordinance except emergency
appropriation ordinances shall automatically be repealed as of the 61st day
following its effective date, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the
ordinance under regular procedures, or, if the emergency still exists, in the
manner specified in this Section. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed
by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this
Section for adoption of emergency ordinances.



   (e)   EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS.--To meet a public emergency
affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Commission, by
resolution, may make emergency appropriations. To the extent that there are
no unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriation, the Commission may by
such emergency resolution authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which
may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals in any
fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year
succeeding that in which the emergency appropriations were made.



(Am. Ord. 2006-09, certified 11-20-2006)



Statutory Reference:



   Emergency ordinances, see Florida Statutes § 166.041



   Enactment or amendment of land use plan, see Florida Statutes §
163.3184



   Ordinances rezoning private property, see Florida Statutes § 166.041



Section 4.04.  Annual budget adoption.--



   The budget shall be adopted in accordance with applicable Florida
Statutes and any amendments thereto.



Statutory reference:



   Budget, see Florida Statutes § 166.241



Section 4.05.  Authentication, recording and disposition of ordinances;
resolutions and Charter amendments.--



   (a)   AUTHENTICATION.--The Mayor and the City Clerk shall
authenticate by their signatures all ordinances and resolutions adopted by
the Commission. In addition, when Charter amendments have been approved by
the electors, the Mayor and the City Clerk shall authenticate by their
signatures the Charter amendment, such authentication to reflect the approval
of the Charter amendment by the electorate.



   (b)   RECORDING.--The City Clerk shall keep properly indexed books
in which shall be recorded, in full, all ordinances and resolutions enacted
or passed by the Commission. Ordinances shall, at the direction of the
Commission, be periodically codified. The City Clerk shall also maintain the
City Charter in current form as to all amendments.



   (c)   PRINTING.--The Commission shall establish procedures for
making all resolutions, ordinances, technical codes adopted by reference, and
this Charter available for public inspection and available for purchase at a
reasonable price.



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of ordinances and resolutions, see Florida Statutes § 166.041



   Charter amendments, see Florida Statutes § 166.031



Section 4.06.  Tax levy and Assessments.--



   The City shall have the right to determine, order, levy, assess and
collect all taxes and assessments as are permitted by law, and as granted to
Community Development Districts, pursuant to Chapter 190, Florida Statutes,
including, without limitation, benefit special assessments, maintenance
assessments, excise, franchise, or privilege taxes and taxes on services and
utilities.



Statutory reference:



   Local improvements assessments, see Florida Statutes §§ 170.01 et seq.



Section 4.07.  Borrowing.--



   (a)   Subject to the referendum requirements of the State
Constitution, if applicable, the City may from time to time borrow money and
issue bonds or other obligations or evidence of indebtedness (collectively,
“Bonds”) of any type or character for any of the purposes for which the
City is now or hereafter authorized by law to borrow money, including for the
purpose of financing the cost of any capital project or other project and for
the purpose of refunding any and all previous issues of Bonds at or prior to
maturity. Such Bonds may be issued pursuant to one or more resolutions
adopted by a majority of the City Commission.



   (b)   In addition to and not in limitation of any borrowing
authority of the City, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the
Commissioners, the City may incur indebtedness to finance or refinance water
management improvements, pursuant to a general Bond resolution validated by
the Circuit Court payable from benefit special assessments to be determined,
ordered and levied by the Commission in accordance with a Commissioner’s
report approved by the Circuit Court, and may enter into any contract
necessary or desirable in connection therewith, in accordance with section
190.016, Florida Statutes, as amended, determined by the Commissioners to be
in the best interests of the City.



   (c)   The City may assume all outstanding indebtedness related to
facilities it acquires from other units of local government and be liable for
payment thereon.



Statutory reference:



   Bond validation by circuit courts, see Florida Statutes Chapter 75



   Bonds and Division of Bond Finance, see Florida Statutes §§ 159.01 et
seq., 218.369 et seq.



   Local bonds, see Florida Constitution Article VII, § 12



   Local improvement bonds, see Florida Statutes §§ 170.01 et seq.



   Municipal borrowing, see Florida Statutes §§ 166.101 et seq.



   Referendum required before issuing bonds, see Florida Statutes §§
100.201 et seq.



Section 4.08.  Independent Audit.--



   The City Commission shall provide for an independent annual audit of
all City accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems
necessary. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm
of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the
fiscal affairs of the City government or any of its officers.



Statutory reference:



   Audits, see Florida Statutes § 11.45



ARTICLE V.  ELECTIONS



Section 5.01.  Elections.--



   (a)   ELECTORS.--Any person who is a resident of the City, has
qualified as an elector of the State and registers to vote in the manner
prescribed by law shall be an elector of the City.



   (b)   NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS.--All elections for the offices of
Commissioner and Mayor shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis.



   (c)   ELECTION DATES.--Regularly scheduled elections shall be held
on the same date as the November general election date in even-numbered years.



   (d)   GENERAL ELECTION.-- The ballot for the general election shall
contain the names of all qualified candidates for Mayor if the Mayor’s term
is expiring and for each of the two Seats which are to be filled as a result
of two Commissioners’ terms expiring. The ballot shall instruct electors to
cast one vote for Mayor, if applicable, and one vote for each Seat, with a
maximum of one vote per candidate. The candidate for Mayor receiving the most
votes shall be the duly elected Mayor. The candidate receiving the most votes
for each Seat shall be the duly elected Commissioner for that Seat.



   (e)   SPECIAL ELECTIONS.--Special elections, when required, shall be
scheduled by the Commission at such times and in such manner as shall be
consistent with this Charter and State law.



   (f)   SINGLE CANDIDATES.--No election for Mayor or any Seat shall be
required in any election if there is only one duly qualified candidate for
Mayor or for any Seat.



   (g)   COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS.--The term of office of any elected
official shall commence at the first regularly scheduled City Commission
Meeting after receipt of certification of the election (the
“Certification”) or 20 days after the Certification is received,
whichever is earlier.



(Am. Ord. 2004-09, certified 11-2-2004; Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal elections, see Florida Constitution Article VI, § 6



   Municipal electors, see Florida Statutes §§ 101.022, 166.032



   Notice for local and special elections, see Florida Statutes § 100.151



   Registration and qualification as elector of state, see Florida
Statutes § 97.041



Section 5.02.  Initiative and referendum.--



   (a)   POWER TO INITIATE AND RECONSIDER ORDINANCES.--



      (1)   Initiative.--The electors of the City shall have power
to propose ordinances to the Commission and, if the Commission fails to adopt
an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject
it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to the
annual budget or capital program or any ordinance appropriating money,
levying taxes or setting salaries of City officers or employees, or in regard
to any development order, local comprehensive plan amendment or map amendment.



      (2)   Referendum.--The electors of the City shall have power
to require reconsideration by the Commission of any adopted ordinance and, if
the Commission fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or
reject it at a City election, provided that such power shall not extend to
the annual budget or capital program or any ordinance appropriating money,
levying taxes or setting salaries of City officers or employees.



   (b)   COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.--A minimum of ten electors may
commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the City Clerk
an affidavit (the “Affidavit”) stating they will constitute the
petitioners’ committee  (the “Committee”) and be responsible for
circulating the petition (the “Petition”) and filing it in proper form,
stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all
notices to the Committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed
initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered.
Promptly after the Affidavit is filed, the City Clerk may, at the
Committee’s request, issue the appropriate Petition blanks to the Committee
at the Committee’s expense. Petitioners’ proposed ordinance shall be
approved as to legal sufficiency by the City Attorney prior to circulation.



   (c)   PETITIONS.--



      (1)   Number of signatures.--Initiative and referendum
Petitions must be signed by at least ten percent of the total number of
electors registered to vote at the last regular City election.



      (2)   Form and content.--All pages of a Petition shall be
assembled as one instrument of filing. Each signature shall be executed in
ink and shall be followed by the printed name and address of the person
signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached throughout their
circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be
reconsidered.



      (3)   Affidavit of circulator.--Each page of a petition shall
have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator
thereof stating that s/he personally circulated the page, the number of
signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his/her presence,
that s/he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose
names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before
signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be
reconsidered.



      (4)   Filing deadline.--All initiative and referendum
petitions must be filed within 60 days of the date on which a proper
Affidavit is filed pursuant to subsection (b) of this Section.



   (d)   PROCEDURE FOR FILING.



      (1)   Certificate of City Clerk; amendment.--Within 20 days
after an initiative Petition is filed or within five days after a referendum
Petition is filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its
sufficiency (the “Certificate”), upon confirmation by the Supervisor of
Elections of a sufficient number of valid petition signatures. If
insufficient, the Certificate shall specify the particulars of the
deficiency. A copy of the Certificate shall be promptly sent to the Committee
by registered mail. Grounds for insufficiency are only those specified in
subsection (c) of this Section. A Petition certified insufficient for lack of
the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the Committee
files a notice of intention to amend it with the City Clerk within two
business days after receiving the copy of the Certificate and files a
supplementary petition (“Supplementary Petition”) with additional valid
signatures within ten days after receiving the copy of the Certificate. The
Supplementary Petition shall comply with the requirements of subsection (c)
of this Section. Within five days after a Supplementary Petition is filed,
the City Clerk shall complete a Certificate as to the sufficiency of the
Petition as amended  (“Amended Petition”), upon confirmation by the
Supervisor of Elections of a sufficient number of valid petition signatures,
and promptly send a copy of such Certificate to the Committee by registered
mail as in the case of an original Petition. If a Petition or Amended
Petition is certified sufficient, or if a Petition or Amended Petition is
certified insufficient and the Committee does not elect to amend or request
Commission review under paragraph (2) within the time required, the City
Clerk shall promptly present the Certificate to the Commission and such
Certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the
Petition.



      (2)   Commission review.--If a Petition has been certified
insufficient and the Committee does not file notice of intention to amend it
or if an Amended Petition has been certified insufficient, the Committee may,
within two business days after receiving the copy of such Certificate, file a
request that it be reviewed by the Commission. The Commission shall review
the Certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and
approve or disapprove it. The Commission’s determination shall then be a
final determination as to the sufficiency of the Petition.



   (e)   ACTION ON PETITIONS.



      (1)   Action by Commission.--When an initiative or referendum
Petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Commission shall
promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the
referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Commission fails to adopt a
proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within 45 days
or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within 30 days, it shall submit the
proposed or referred ordinance to the electors of the City. If the Commission
fails to act on a proposed initiative ordinance or a referred ordinance
within the time period contained in this paragraph, the Commission shall be
deemed to have failed to adopt the proposed initiative ordinance or failed to
repeal the referred ordinance on the last day that the Commission was
authorized to act on such matter.



      (2)   Submission to electors.--The vote of the City on a
proposed or referred ordinance shall be held  within 180 days from the date
the Commission acted or was deemed to have acted pursuant to paragraph (1) of
subsection (e) of this Section. If no regular election is to be held within
the period described in this paragraph, the Commission shall provide for a
special election, except that the Commission may, in its discretion, provide
for a special election at an earlier date than the described period. Copies
of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls.



      (3)   Withdrawal of petitions.--An initiative or referendum
Petition may be withdrawn at any time by filing with the City Clerk a request
for withdrawal signed by at least eight-tenths of the members of the 
Committee. Upon the filing of such request, the Petition shall have no
further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated.



   (f)   RESULTS OF ELECTION.--



      (1)   Initiative.--If a majority of the qualified electors
voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be
considered adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting
ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest
number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.



      (2)   Referendum.--If a majority of the qualified electors
voting on a referred ordinance vote for repeal, it shall be considered
repealed upon certification of the election results.



(Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



ARTICLE VI.  CHARTER AMENDMENTS



Section 6.01.  Charter amendments.--



   This Charter may be amended in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.



Statutory reference:



   Charter amendments, see Florida Statutes § 166.031



Section 6.02.  Procedure to amend.--



   (a)   INITIATION.--This Charter may be amended in two ways:



      (1)   By ordinance.--The Commission may, by ordinance, propose
amendments to this Charter and upon passage of the initiating ordinance shall
submit the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general
election held within the City or at a special election called for such
purpose.



      (2)   By petition.--The electors of the City may propose
amendments to this Charter by petition. Each petition proposing amendments to
this Charter shall be commenced, in the form, filed, certified as to its
sufficiency and/or withdrawn in the same manner as an ordinance proposed by
initiative.



   (b)   SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS.--Upon certification of the sufficiency
of a petition, the Commission shall submit the proposed amendment to a vote
of the electors at the next general election or at a special election in
accordance with state law.



   (c)   RESULTS OF ELECTION.--If a majority of the qualified electors
voting on a proposed amendment vote for its adoption, it shall be considered
adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting amendments
are adopted at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of
affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.



ARTICLE VII.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section 7.01.  Severability.--



   If any Section or part of Section of this Charter shall be held invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the
remainder of this Charter or the context in which such Section or part of
Section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire
Section or part of Section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect
with the Section or part of Section to which such holding shall directly
apply.



Section 7.02.  Conflicts of interest; ethical standards.--



   All Commissioners, officials and employees of the City shall be subject
to the standards of conduct for public officers and employees set by Federal,
State, County or other applicable law.



Statutory reference:



   Code of ethics for public officers and employees, see Florida Statutes
§§ 112.311 et seq.



Section 7.03.  City personnel system.--



   All new employments, appointments and promotions of City officers and
employees shall be made pursuant to personnel procedures to be established by
the City Manager from time to time.



Section 7.04.  Charitable contributions.--



   The City shall not make any charitable contributions, except as
provided in this Section. The City may make charitable contributions to an
entity that is exempt under the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC Sec. 501(c)(3),
and provides goods and/or services that directly and substantially benefit
individuals in the City, provided that the total amount of all contributions
to such entities shall not exceed $50,000.00 per year. The entity shall have
been established for a minimum of 365 days prior to the date of application,
and shall have provided goods and/or services to City residents for at least
365 days prior to the date of application. The requested funding shall be
required by federal or state law in order for the entity to obtain matching
funds. The documentation requirements and procedures for such charitable
contributions shall be established by Resolution of the City Commission.



(Am. Ord. 2004-09, certified 11-2-2004; Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



Section 7.05.  Charter revision.--



   (a)   The Charter will be reviewed in 2004 and at least every ten
years thereafter.



   (b)   A five-member Charter Review Board shall be appointed and
funded by the City Commission. Each City Commissioner, and the Mayor, shall
submit the name of one individual for appointment to the Charter Review
Board. Appointees by each Commissioner shall reside within the Residential
Area of that Commissioner. The appointee of the Mayor shall reside within the
City. The Charter Review Board shall be appointed at least 360 days before
the next scheduled election and complete its work and present any
recommendations for change no later than 180 days before the election.



   (c)   The City Commission shall hold a minimum of two public
hearings on the proposed changes to the Charter prior to placing the proposed
changes on the scheduled election ballot.



(Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



Section 7.06.  Variation of pronouns.--



   All pronouns and any variation thereof used in this Charter shall be
deemed to refer to masculine, feminine, neutral, singular or plural as the
identity of the person or persons shall require and are not intended to
describe, interpret, define or limit the scope, extent or intent of this
Charter.



Section 7.07.  Style and capitalization.--



   When a defined word is enclosed in quotes and in parentheses after the
definition, that word shall be treated as a defined term in the remainder of
this Charter, when capitalized.



Section 7.08.  Calendar day.--



   For the purposes of this Charter, a day shall mean a calendar day.



Section 7.09.  No Discrimination.--



   The City shall not adopt any measure or policy or otherwise
discriminate against any person due to age, race, religion, color, national
origin, physical or mental disability, creed, sexual orientation or sex.



Section 7.10.  Commission approval of site plans.--



   All multi-family and non-residential site plans, as well as any
amendments to such site plans (except minor amendments as defined by
ordinance), must be received at a public hearing and receive prior approval
from the City Commission pursuant to a procedure to be established by
ordinance.



(Am. Ord. 2002-46, certified 12-16-2002)



Section 7.11.  State Shared Revenues.--



   The City of Westonshall be entitled to participate in all Shared
Revenue Programs of the State of Florida. The provision of § 218.23, Florida
Statutes, shall be waived for the purpose of eligibility to receive revenue
sharing funds. The property taxes (including benefit and maintenance taxes
and assessments) levied by the Indian Trace Development District, the
Bonaventure Development District and Broward County within the boundaries of
the City of Weston, and all utility and service taxes levied by the City of
Weston, shall be included in the calculations of the minimum amount of
revenue to be raised for the City of Weston to qualify for revenue sharing
funds.



(Ord. 2002-22, certified 11-18-2002; Am. Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



Statutory Reference:



   Revenue Sharing Act, see Florida Statutes §§ 218.20 et seq.



Section 7.12.  Limitation on Economic Development Incentives.



   The City shall not grant economic development incentives to any person
or entity, unless the economic development incentive is part of a federal,
state or county program and is pursuant to an agreement that ensures that the
City will recoup at least the full amount of the City’s portion of the
incentive within seven years.



(Ord. 2014-15, certified 11-4-2014)



ARTICLE VIII. RESERVED



ARTICLE IX.  CONTINUATION, MERGER AND DISSOLUTION OF EXISTING DISTRICTS



Section 9.01.  Indian Trace Community Development District.--



   (a)   To the extent not inconsistent with this Charter, all
resolutions and policies of the Indian Trace Development District, a
dependent special taxing district created pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 190, Florida Statutes, shall remain in effect until amended, revised,
or repealed by the City Commission.



   (b)   The debts and obligations of the Indian Trace Development
District and the property taxes and benefit assessments therefor shall not be
assessed against any property not contained within the geographic boundaries
of the Indian Trace Development District. Taxes and assessments from
properties not within the boundaries of the Indian Trace Development District
shall not be used as security or payment for the obligations of the Indian
Trace Development District or any refinancing thereof.



Section 9.02.  [Reserved].



   Editor’s note:



      This Section 9.02 was repealed by Florida Law 2001-303. For more
information, see Florida Law 2001-303.



Section 9.03.  Continuance of rights, powers, privileges, property,
ordinances, resolutions, taxes, fees, offices, departments, boards, and
agencies of City.--



   (a)   All ordinances and resolutions passed by the City shall remain
in effect to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this Charter.



   (b)   All taxes and fees passed by the City shall remain in effect
to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this Charter.



   (c)   All offices, departments, boards, and agencies created and
established by the City shall continue to the extent that they are not
inconsistent with this Charter.



Section 9.04.  Time of taking effect.--



   Any proceeding, action, resolution or ordinance which was commenced or
the adoption of which was initiated prior to the effective date of this
Charter may be completed under the provisions of either the former Charter or
this Charter.



*Charter Review Board Note – The following provisions were deleted in that
they were superseded by Florida Statutes, were unnecessary or were obsolete:
Sections 4.04, 4.05 and 4.06 (superseded by Sections 166.021 and 166.241,
Florida Statutes); Section 7.09 (removed as unnecessary); Sections 8.01,
8.02, 8.04, 8.06, 8.09-8.11, and 8.14 (removed as obsolete); portions of
Sections 2.03, 2.04, 8.12, 8.13, and Section 9.01(a) (removed as unnecessary
and obsolete).



TITLE I:  COMPREHENSIVE PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      1.   DEFINITIONS



      2.   RULES FOR INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION



CHAPTER 1:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   1.01   Definitions



§ 1.01  DEFINITIONS.



   1.01(A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in Law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   1.01(B)   FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) definitions. 
Technical definitions for use in connection with FEMA may be found in Chapter
64.



   1.01(C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this Code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. Parentheticals following the defined term are included to
demonstrate the context for its use.



      ABANDONED (Motor Vehicles and Vessels).



      (1)   Any vehicle located on Public Property or Private
Property that does not have lawfully affixed thereto or displayed thereon a
valid, unexpired license plate that permits its operation upon the Highways
of the State of Florida.



      (2)   Any vehicle or part thereof that is left on Public
Property continuously without being moved for a period of 72 hours or more.



      (3)   Any vehicle or part thereof located on Public Property
illegally or in such a manner as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the
movement of pedestrian or other vehicular Traffic on a Public Right-Of-Way,
Street , or Highway.



      (4)   Any vehicle or part thereof that has remained on Private
Property without the consent of the Owner or Person in control of such
Private Property for a continuous period of 72 hours or more.



      (5)   Any “Inoperative Vehicle,” as defined herein.



      (6)   Any Vessel located on public or Private Property that
does not have affixed thereto or displayed thereon a valid, unexpired decal
that evidences its current registration.



      ABANDONMENT (Telecommunications).  The permanent cessation of
all uses of a Communications Facility; provided that this term shall not
include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical Structure where
the physical Structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not
limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where conduit
continues to be used, shall not be Abandonment of a facility in the Public
Rights-Of-Way.



      ACCESS CHANNEL (Telecommunications).  Any Channel on a cable or
video System set aside without charge by the cable or Video Service Provider
for noncommercial, public, educational, and/or local governmental use.



      ACCESSIBLE. Readily available to and usable by individuals with
disabilities and in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG).



      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A Structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the Principal Structure and which is located on the
same Premises as the main Building that includes, but is not limited to,
cabanas, carports, fences, garages, garden walls, garden Structures, patios,
permanent grills, pools and storage Buildings, but does not include any
Dwelling.



      ACCESSORY USE.  A use that is subordinate to, incidental to and
customarily associated with a main permitted use.



      ADDITION (Historic Preservation).  Any New Construction that
adds Mass to an existing Historic Resource.



      ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT NOVELTY STORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE.  An
Establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its
stock-in-trade, which shall be defined as 20% or more of the Gross Floor Area
of the Establishment, devoted to Adult Material.



      ADULT BOOTH.



      (1)   A small enclosed or partitioned area inside an Adult
Entertainment Establishment that is:



         (a)   Designed or used for the viewing of Adult Material
by one or more Persons; and



         (b)   Accessible to all persons, regardless of whether a
fee is charged for access.



      (2)   The term Adult Booth includes but is not limited to a
“peep show” booth, or other booth used to view Adult Material . The
term  Adult Booth does not include a foyer through which a Person can enter
or exit the Establishment , or a rest room.



      ADULT DANCING ESTABLISHMENT.  An Establishment where Employees
or independent contractors display or expose Specified Anatomical Areas to
others, regardless of whether the Employees or independent contractors
actually engage in dancing.



      ADULT DOMINATION/SUBMISSION PARLOR.  An Adult Entertainment
Establishment specializing in bondage, sadomasochism, humiliating activities
or other similar activities that depict, describe or relate to the Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any activities that depict, describe or
relate to specified sexual acts or Specified Anatomical Areas or that feature
topless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, the
modeling of clothing revealing or less than completely and opaquely covering
Specified Anatomical Areas, or similar activities.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   An Adult Theater, Adult Bookstore/Adult Novelty
Store/Adult Video Store, Adult Motel, Adult Domination and Submission Parlor,
Adult Dancing Establishment, or other Establishment or business operated for
Commercial Gain where an Employee, independent contractor, Operator, or Owner
exposes his or her Specified Anatomical Area for viewing by patrons,
including but not limited to massage Establishments, whether or not licensed
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 480, tanning salons, modeling studios, or lingerie
studios.



      (2)   Excluded from this definition are Educational
Institutions where the exposure of Specified Anatomical Areas is associated
with a curriculum or program.



      (3)   An Establishment that possesses an Adult Entertainment
license is presumed to be an Adult Entertainment Establishment.



      ADULT MATERIAL.  One or more of the following, regardless of
whether it is new or used:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter,
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, slides, or other
visual representations; recordings, other audio matter; and novelties or
devices that have, as their primary or dominant theme, subject matter
depicting, exhibiting, illustrating, describing, or relating to Specified
Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas ; or



      (2)   Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that
are designed for use in connection with Specified Sexual Activities ,
excluding bona fide birth control devices.



      ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  An enclosed Building, or a
portion thereof with at least one seat, or viewing booth or area, regularly
used for presenting Adult Material, for observation by patrons therein. The
viewing or Adult Booth referenced in this definition is defined as a small
enclosed or partitioned area inside the theater designed or used for the
viewing of Adult Material by one or more Persons, regardless of whether a fee
is charged for access.



      ADULT MOTEL.  A Hotel, Motel, boardinghouse, rooming house, or
other place of temporary lodging that includes the word “adult” in a name
it uses or otherwise advertises the presentation of Adult Material as a
primary inducement for patronage.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER OR AN ADULT THEATER.  An enclosed
Building with each viewing room having a capacity of 50 or more Persons
regularly used for presenting Adult Material for observation by patrons
therein, containing no partitions between seats.



      AFFORDABLE HOUSING.  Housing for which monthly rents or monthly
mortgage payments (including taxes and insurance) do not exceed 30% of an
amount representing the percentage (very low = 50%; low = 80%; moderate =
120%) of the median income limits, as published by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for family size for the households.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Any beverage as described in F.S. §
561.01(4).



      ALTERATION (Historic Preservation).  Any act or process that
alters any of the following aspects of a Historic Resource:



      (1)   The Exterior architectural appearance;



      (2)   Any interior or Exterior feature that has been
designated as a Historic Resource;



      (3)   Any interior structural feature that is visible from a
public right-of-way or a navigable waterway; or



      (4)   When located within a nonresidentially zoned designated
Historic District, the introduction, placement, or replacement of accessories
or other personal property, including, but not limited to, furniture placed
outdoors, pushcarts, and mobile or nonmobile vending machines or trolley cars
placed on private property.



      ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE (Telecommunications).  A design
mounting Structure that camouflages or conceals the presence of an Antenna or
Telecommunications Tower, for example, Flag poles, man-made trees, clock
towers, bell steeples, light Poles, UtilityPoles and similar alternative
designs.



      AMUSEMENT ARCADE. A place or facility where pinball or other
similar electronic games are played for amusement only, including game rooms
and billiard centers.



      AMUSEMENT CENTER.  A Building or complex of Buildings where
activities relating to games or recreation are conducted or held. Accessory
uses may include the preparation and serving of food, or the sale of
equipment related to the enclosed uses.



      ANIMAL.  Every living vertebrate other than a human being.



      ANTENNA (Telecommunications).  A transmitting and/or receiving
device mounted on a Telecommunications Tower, Building or Structure and used
in Wireless Communications Services that radiates or captures electromagnetic
waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless
communications signals and other communications signals including directional
Antennas such as panel and microwave dish Antennas and omni-directional
Antennas such as Whips, but excluding radar Antennas, amateur radio Antennas
and satellite earth stations.



      APPLICABLE CODES (Telecommunications).  Uniform building, fire,
electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national
code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to
address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons, or local
Codes or ordinances adopted to implement F.S. § 337.401(7). The term
includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance that may require a
new Utility Pole that replaces an existing Utility Pole to be of
substantially similar design, material, and color or that may require
reasonable spacing requirements concerning the location of ground-mounted
equipment. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance
that may require a Small Wireless Facility to meet reasonable location
context, color, stealth, and concealment requirements.



      APPLICANT.  Any individual or entity requesting action of the
City and all Persons representing such individual or entity (including, but
not limited to, all attorneys, architects, Landscape Architects, Engineers
and lobbyists), and any individual who, directly or indirectly, owns or
controls more than 5% of any such entity requesting action of the City .



      ARCHAEOLOGICAL MATERIALS (Historic Preservation).  Human
skeletal materials or human- manufactured objects, or natural objects altered
by human activity, found on or beneath the surface of the ground and shall
include, but not be limited to, pottery, basketry, bottles, weapons, weapon
projectiles, tools, structural and Building ruins, graves, any earthen
mounds, middens or landscape features of human manufacture, or any portion or
piece of any of the foregoing items. Unmarked human remains and associated
burial artifacts and materials that are 75 years of age or more are
considered Archaeological Materials for the purpose of this chapter.
Structures, and nonfossilized and fossilized Paleontological Resources, or
any portion or piece thereof, shall not be considered Archaeological
Materials under this chapter, unless found within an Archaeological Site,
Archaeological Zone, or during an Archaeological Salvage Excavation. Except
as specified in this paragraph, no item shall be treated as a Historic
Resource under this chapter unless such item is at least 100 years of age.



      ARCHAEOLOGICAL SALVAGE EXCAVATION.  A process conducted on a
cultural resource site, or a portion of a site, by the systematic removal of
prehistoric or historic cultural remains in order to acquire fundamental
information necessary for understanding a site within the proper historic
context. This process requires the appropriate regulatory approval, field
survey, excavation, artifact analysis, and curation reports.



      ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE.  A location that has yielded or may be
likely to yield information important in history or prehistory, and is a site
that contains physical evidence of past human activity. An Archaeological
Site may be identified using On-Site investigations or site predictive
models. Archaeological Sites are evidenced by the presence of artifacts on or
below the ground surface indicating the past use of a location by people. A
designated Archaeological Site is one that meets these criteria, has been
designated by the County Commission, and appears on the Broward County Land
Use Plan Map Series or is listed on the Florida Master Site File.



      ARCHAEOLOGICAL ZONE (Historic Preservation).  An area that has
yielded or is likely to yield largely subsurface information on the
prehistory or history of the County based on prehistoric or historic
settlement and land use patterns within the County, as determined in
consultation with the Broward County Archaeologist and the State of Florida
Division of Historical Resources. These zones will tend to conform to certain
natural physiographic features that were the focal points for prehistoric and
historic activities. Archaeological Zones shall be recorded on a Map of
Broward County Archaeological Zones to be maintained and amended as necessary
by the Historic Preservation Officer.



      ARCHITECTURAL EMBELLISHMENT.  A two or three-dimensional
architectural decoration added to a Building or Building site.



      ARRAY (Telecommunications).  A group of up to 12 Antennas that
are either:



      (1)   Mounted or side mounted on the rooftop of a Building or
rooftop Structure (s); or



      (2)   Directly or indirectly mounted on a Telecommunications
Tower .



      ARTERIAL ROAD.  A road having the meaning given in F.S. §
334.03(1).



      ASSESSED PROPERTY.  All or any portion of Parcels Of Land
included on the Assessment Roll.



      ASSESSMENT or SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.  Any Assessment or Special
Assessment, or revolving fund or funds levied against benefitted property out
of which may be paid the cost, or a portion thereof, of any improvement to
the property.



      ASSESSMENT ROLL.  The non-ad valorem Assessment roll relating to
a Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment approved by the Assessment
resolution.



      ASSOCIATION.  A group or organization comprised of Owners or
Tenants occupying a common deeded property, zoned as either commercial or
residential, established to provide for the management and maintenance of
that property.



      ASSOCIATION PROPERTY.  That property, both real and personal, in
which title or ownership is vested in the Homeowners’ Association for the
use and benefit of its members. Association Property shall include, but shall
not be limited to, private parks, private roads, water bodies, Landscaping
easements, wall easements, etc. In the case of a rental apartment Building or
complex, this term shall refer to all areas other than the interiors of the
residential Dwelling Units.



      ATTACHMENT (Telecommunications).  The physical attachment(s) of
a Cable System, as defined by City Code, to a legally maintained Utility,
electricity, telephone, power or light Pole consisting of cables, wires, and
supporting hardware required to support the provision of Cable Services.



      AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE (Solid Waste).  A Litter storage
and collection receptacle established for private use and operated in
conformity with the City Code.



      AUTOMATED CART (Solid Waste).  The wheeled portable
receptacle(s) provided by the City’s designated contractor that shall be
used for household collection, storage and curbside placement of Household
Waste.



      AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR DEVICE.  A defibrillator device
that:



      (1)   Is commercially distributed in accordance with the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act;



      (2)   Is capable of recognizing the presence or absence of
ventricular fibrillation, and is capable of determining without intervention
by the user of the device whether defibrillation should be performed; and



      (3)   Upon determining that defibrillation should be
performed, is able to deliver an electrical shock to an individual.



      AXLE LOAD.  The total load transmitted to the road by all wheels
whose centers are included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.



      BACKHAUL NETWORK (Telecommunications).  The lines that connect
personal wireless service facilities to one or more cellular telephone
switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched
telephone network.



      BAR, COUNTRY CLUB.  A Bar housed completely within a country
club facility with at least one 18-hole golf course.



      BAR, HOTEL.  A Bar operated in connection with a Hotel or
apartment Hotel.



      BAR, LOUNGE, or TAVERN.  Any place devoted primarily to on-site
consumption of Alcoholic Beverages.



      BAR AREA.  The portion of a Restaurant dedicated to the serving
of Alcoholic Beverages to patrons, including the Gross Floor Area used for
customer service, preparation of Alcoholic Beverages, bottle displays,
refrigerated cases, and storage compartments.



      BATTERY CHARGING STATION. An electrical component assembly or
cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries
within Electric Vehicles.



      BDD.  The Bonaventure Development District.



      BIKEWAY.  Any road, path, or way that is specifically designated
as being open to nonmotorized vehicular travel, regardless of whether such
facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be
shared with other transportation modes.



      BLEED DOWN MECHANISM (Engineering Standards).  A weir with a
notch or an orifice through which Stormwater is discharged at a controlled
rate.



      BOTTLE CLUB.  A Commercial Establishment operated for a profit,
whether or not a profit is actually made, wherein patrons consume Alcoholic
Beverages which are brought onto the Premises and not sold or supplied to the
patrons by the establishment, whether the patrons bring in and maintain
custody of their own Alcoholic Beverages or surrender custody to the
establishment for dispensing on the Premises, and which is located in a
Building or other enclosed permanent Structure.



      BREAST HEIGHT (Tree Preservation).  A height of four and
one-half feet above the top of the rootball.



      BROADCASTING FACILITY (Telecommunications).  Any
Telecommunications Tower or Antenna built primarily for the purpose of
broadcasting AM, FM or television signals.



      BUILDING.  Any Structure that has a Roof and walls.



      BUILDING CODE.  The codes promulgated pursuant to F.S. Chapter
553, Part IV, otherwise known as the Florida Building Code, including Broward
County Amendments.



      BUILDING PERMIT.  Any permit required by the Building Code.



      BUSINESS (Business Tax).  The work, vocation, profession,
occupation, commercial enterprise or trade in which a Person is engaged, and
all activities and matters together with all devices, machines, vehicles and
appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted, either directly or
indirectly, on or from any Premises in the City. Business does not include
nonprofit Charitable Institutions, nonprofit Educational Institutions, or
nonprofit Religious Institutions. Business also does not include a Person
that solely manages Personal Investments from a Residential Property.



      BUSINESS RELATIONSHIP.  A member of the City Commission or a
City Advisory Board has a Business Relationship with a Person or an entity if
any of the following exist:



      (1)   The member of the City Commission or City Advisory Board
has any ownership interest, directly or indirectly, in excess of 1% in the
entity;



      (2)   The member of the City Commission or City Advisory Board
is a partner, co-shareholder or joint venturer with the Person in any
business venture;



      (3)   The entity or Person is a client of the member of the
City Commission or City Advisory Board, or a client of another professional
working from the same office and for the same employer as the member of the
City Commission or City Advisory Board;



      (4)   The member of the City Commission or City Advisory Board
is a client of the entity or the Person;



      (5)   The entity or Person is a customer of the member of the
City Commission or City Advisory Board (or his or her employer) and transacts
more than 5% of the business in a given calendar Year of the member of the
City Commission or City Advisory Board (or his or her employer) or more than
$25,000.00 of business in a given calendar Year; or



      (6)   The member of the City Commission or City Advisory Board
is a customer of the entity or the Person and transacts more than 5% of the
business in a given calendar Year of the entity or Person or more than
$25,000.00 of business in a given calendar Year.



      BUSINESS TAX.  The fee charged by the City for the privilege of
engaging in any Business within the City, but does not include any fees or
licenses paid to any board, commission, or officer for permits, registration,
examination, or inspection.



      BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT.  A document issued by the City that bears
the words “Business Tax Receipt” and evidences that the Person in whose
name the document is issued has complied with the provisions of Chapter 40 by
paying the required Business Tax.



      CABLE SERVICE (Telecommunications).



      (1)   The one-way transmission to Subscribers of Video
Programming or any other programming service.



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of such Video Programming or other programmed service.



      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER (Telecommunications).  A Person that
provides Cable Service over a Cable System.



      CABLE SYSTEM (Telecommunications).



      (1)   Any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths or other transmission lines or forms of terrestrial transmission and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide Cable Service which includes Video Programming and which
is provided to multiple Subscribers within the City.



      (2)   Such term does not include:



         (a)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations.



         (b)   A facility that serves only Subscribers in one or
more multiple-unit Dwellings under common ownership, control, or management,
unless such facility or facilities use any Public Right-Of-Way.



         (c)   A facility that serves Subscribers without using
any Public Right-Of-Way.



         (d)   A facility of a common Carrier that is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title 11 of the federal Communications
Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System
other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. 541(c) to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of Video Programming directly to Subscribers, unless
the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on demand services.



         (e)   An open video System that complies with 47 U.S.C.
573; or



         (f)   Any facilities of any electric Utility used solely
for operating its electric Utility systems.



      CALIPER (Tree Preservation).  The diameter of the Tree trunk(s)
measured at Breast Height.



      CAMOUFLAGED FACILITY (Telecommunications).  A facility that is
disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed Structure, or placed
within an existing or proposed Structure in a manner that makes it not
readily identifiable as a Wireless Communications Facility. A Camouflaged
Facility may or may not have a secondary function (e.g., bell tower, spire,
Flag pole, etc.). This term shall be synonymous with Stealth Facility.



      CANOPY COVERAGE (Tree Preservation).  The areal extent of ground
within the Dripline of a Tree.



      CAPACITY (Utilities).  Refers to the maximum service volume at
the adopted level of service standard.



      CARNIVAL.  Any commercial enterprise where the revenue realized
flows to private Owners or operators as intended profit and where such
enterprises have as any part of their operation sideshows, games of chance,
hawkers, barkers, rides, games, and refreshments operated by vendors the
majority of whom are nonresident, transitory, and employees of such
commercial enterprises.



      CARRIER (Telecommunications).  A company licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) that provides wireless services. A Tower
builder or Owner is not a Carrier unless licensed to provide Personal
Wireless Services.



      CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA)  (Historic Preservation). 
A certificate issued by the City Commission indicating approval of plans for
specified Alteration, rehabilitation, Construction, reconstruction, removal,
Relocation, or Demolition of a Historic Resource.



      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.  The written certification issued by
the City that a structural improvement is ready for occupancy for its
intended use.



      CERTIFICATE TO DIG (CTD)  (Historic Preservation). A certificate
issued by the City Commission indicating approval of plans for specific
digging projects that are anticipated to yield known or as yet unknown
Archaeological or Paleontological Materials in an Archaeological or
Paleontological Zone or site designated as a Historic Resource.



      CERTIFIED LAND USE PLAN.  The City’s local land use plan that
has been certified by the Broward County Planning Council as being in
substantial conformity with the County Land Use Plan.



      CHANGE ORDER (Acquisitions).  A written modification to a
contract or purchase order, which amends one or more of the following: the
scope of services, contract cost, contract time or the contract quantity(ies).



      CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS (Business Tax).  Nonprofit corporations
operating physical facilities in this State at which are provided charitable
services, a reasonable percentage of which are without cost to those unable
to pay.



      CHILD CARE.  The care, protection, and supervision of a child,
for a period of less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis, which
supplements parental care, enrichment, and health supervision for the child,
in accordance with his or her individual needs, and for which a payment, fee,
or grant is made for care.



      CHILD CARE FACILITY.  Any Child Care center or Child Care
arrangement that provides Child Care for more than five children unrelated to
the operator and that receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the
children receiving care, wherever operated, and whether or not operated for
profit. The following are not included within this definition:



         (a)   Public Schools and nonpublic schools and their
integral programs, except as provided in F.S. § 402.3025;



         (b)   Summer camps having children in full-time
residence;



         (c)   Summer day camps;



         (d)   Bible schools normally conducted during vacation
periods; and



         (e)   Operators of transient establishments, as defined
in F.S. Chapter 509 which provide Child Care services solely for the guests
of their establishment or resort, provided that all Child Care personnel of
the establishment are screened according to the level 2 screening
requirements of F.S. Chapter 435.



      CITY (Entity).  The elected officials, employees and/or
authorized agents of the City of Weston, Florida.



      CITY (Location).  The geographical area within the boundaries
set forth in the City Charter, including the Indian Trace Development
District and Bonaventure Development District.



      CITY ATTORNEY.  An individual attorney or a law firm appointed
by the City Commission pursuant to § 3.07 of the City Charter.



      CITY COMMISSION. The body vested with all legislative powers of
the City pursuant to § 2.01 of the City Charter.



      CITY ENGINEER.  The designee of the City Manager or the
consulting engineering firm engaged by the City for engineering services, or
an employee of that firm who is registered to practice engineering in the
State.



      CITY MANAGER.  The individual employed by the City pursuant to
§ 3.01 of the City Charter who shall be the chief executive officer and
chief administrative officer of the City .



      CITY UTILITY POLE (Telecommunications).  A Utility Pole owned by
the City and located in the Public Right-of-Way.



      CLEAR TRUNK (Tree Preservation).  The distance between the top
of the root ball along the vertical trunk or trunks of a Tree to the point at
which lateral branching or fronds begin.



      THE CODE, or CITY CODE.  The Code of Ordinances of the City.



      CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any employee or other agent of the
City designated by the City Manager, whose duties are to ensure compliance
with the Code.



      COLLECTOR ROAD. A road having that meaning given in F.S. §
334.03(4).



      COLLOCATION (Telecommunications).  The situation when a second
or subsequent wireless provider uses an existing Structure to locate a second
or subsequent Antenna. The term includes the ground, platform, or Roof
installation of equipment enclosures, cabinets, or Buildings, and cables,
brackets, and other equipment associated with the location and operation of
the Antennas.



      COLLOCATION OR COLLOCATE (Telecommunications-Small Wireless
Facilities in Public Rights-Of-Way).  To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace one or more Wireless Communications Facilities on, under,
within, or adjacent to a Wireless Support Structure or Utility Pole. The term
does not include the installation of a new Utility Pole or Wireless Support
Structure in the Public Rights-of-Way.



      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  A business, location, or place that
conducts or allows to be conducted on its Premises an activity for Commercial
Gain.



      COMMERCIAL GAIN.  Operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be
presumed for an establishment that has received a Business Tax Receipt. For
the purpose of this Code, operation for commercial or pecuniary gain shall
not depend on actual profit or loss.



      COMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:



      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product,
services, commodity, or thing;



      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
Commercial Establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;



      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the
terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a
collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to
such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when
either of the same is held, given, or takes place in connection with the
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules
of decency, good morals, public peace, safety, and good order; provided, that
nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding,
giving, or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition,
or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be
required by any Law of this State, or under any ordinance of this City or
municipality located within Broward County; or



      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than
advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private
benefit and gain of any Person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



      COMMERCIAL MAIL RECEIVING AGENCY (CMRA).  A business that rents
or leases, for a fee, mailboxes or other mail receiving capabilities to the
general public or otherwise allows the public to receive mail or packages at
a location other than the consumer’s home or place of employment.



      COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICES (Telecommunications).  Per §
704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, any of several technologies using
radio signals at various frequencies to send and receive voice, data and
video.



      COMMERCIAL TRASH (Solid Waste).  Every waste accumulation of
dust, paper, paper cartons, cardboard cartons, excelsior, rags, or other
accumulations that are usually attendant to the operations of a business or
Commercial Establishment.



      COMMON AREA.  The portion of land(s) within a Development that
is owned by an Association of the property Owners within the Development or
the Owner of the Development and is available for use by, or the benefit of,
the occupants of the Development.



      COMMUNICATIONS ACT (Telecommunications). The Communications Act
of 1934, 47 U.S.C. 151 et seq.



      COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES PROVIDER (Telecommunications).  Any
Person operating one or more Communications Facilities located within the
City, who is engaged, directly or indirectly, in the business of leasing,
licensing, subleasing, subletting or hiring to one or more Communications
Service Providers all or a portion of the tangible personal property used in
a Communications Facility.



      COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (Telecommunications).  Any permanent or
temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables,
wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, Antennae, converters, splice boxes,
cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers,
appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be
placed or maintained in the Public Rights-Of-Way of the City and used or
capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute,
provide or offer Communications Services.



      COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (Telecommunications).  The transmission,
conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information
or signals to a point, or between or among points, by or through any
electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or
method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used
for such transmission or conveyance. Personal Wireless Services, as defined
under federal Law, 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(C), and includes but is not limited
to, cellular personal Communications Services, specialized mobile radio,
enhanced specialized mobile radio, and paging service, and Personal Wireless
Service providers, to the extent allowed by applicable Law, may be subject to
other ordinances of the City and may require separate authorization from the
City for placement of facilities within the City.



      COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES PROVIDER (Telecommunications).  Any
Person making available or providing Communications Services through the
placement or maintenance of a Communications Facility in Public
Rights-Of-Way, including, but not limited to, Cable Service and Video Service
Providers and certificate holders, Communications Facilities Providers, and
Pass-Through Providers.



      COMMUNITY CENTER.  A Building or group of Buildings used for
social, cultural, and educational activities and designed to accommodate and
serve significant segments of the community.



      COMPUTER SIMULATION (Simulated Gambling Device).A simulation by
means of a computer, computer system, video display, video system or any
other form of electronic video presentation.



      CONCURRENCY.  The requirement that necessary public facilities
and services to maintain the City’s adopted level of service standards, as
set forth in the City ’s Comprehensive Plan, when the impacts of
Development occur.



      CONFINED SPACE RESCUE.  Rescue from areas not intended for
continual employee occupancy, that have limited means of egress, and have the
potential for physical, chemical, or atmospheric engulfment.



      CONSTRUCTION.  The placement, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or demolition of a Building or Structure on land, the
placement of concrete, asphalt, similar materials on land, or grading or
earthwork of land.



      CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS (Solid Waste).  All waste,
Garbage, Refuse, and Debris resulting from the Construction or demolition of
Buildings, including sand, stone, brick, wood, concrete, or plaster block,
paving, Roofing, pipe shingles, Lawn renovating Debris, sod, dead sod, limbs,
and Tree stumps.



      CONSTRUCTION WASTE (Solid Waste).  Refuse generated from
Construction, destruction, renovation, repair or alteration of Building and
Structures except Debris comprised solely of material generated by
excavation, Land Clearing or Tree Removal.



      CONSUMPTION OFF THE PREMISES.  The selling of beers, wines,
etc., in the original unbroken containers to be taken by the purchaser off
the Premises where sold before being consumed.



      CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES.  Consumption of all beers, wines,
or Alcoholic Beverages of every kind on the Premises where sold, or the right
to sell such beverages by the drink or bottle.



      CONTAINER (Solid Waste).  Any detachable container designed or
intended to be mechanically serviced and varying in size from two to 40 cubic
yards.



      CONTAINER CONTRACTOR (Solid Waste).  The Person , firm, or
corporation designated by the City to provide Garbage and Trash collection
services pursuant to this Code.



      CONTINUING CONTRACT (Acquisitions).  This term has the meaning
given in F.S. § 287.055.



      CONTRACTOR (Lobbyist Regulation).  Any Person or entity having a
contract with the City.



      CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE  (Historic Preservation).  A Building,
site, Structure, or object that adds to the historic, architectural,
archaeological, or paleontological significance of a Historic District.



      CONVENIENCE BUSINESS.



      (1)   Any place of business that is primarily engaged in the
retail sale of groceries, or both groceries and gasoline, and that is open
for business at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The
term Convenience Business does not include:



         (a)   A business that is solely or primarily a
Restaurant .



         (b)   A business that always has at least five employees
on the Premises after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.



         (c)   A business that has at least 10,000 square feet of
retail floor space.



      (2)   The term Convenience Business does not include any
business in which the Owner or members of his or her family work between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.



      CONVENIENCE STORE.  An establishment engaged in the retail sale
of food, beverages, and other frequently or recurrently needed items for
household use or consumption.



      COVERED INDIVIDUAL (Lobbyist Regulation). Any member of the City
Commission.



      CUBICLE.  Work space measuring less than 36 square feet.



      CUL-DE-SAC.  Minor Street intersecting another Street at one end
and terminating at the other end with a circular vehicular turn-around.



      CURFEW (Emergency Management).  An order prohibiting or
restricting pedestrian and vehicular movement, Standing and/or Parking,
during certain designated hours and throughout the entire City or portions
thereof.



      CUSTOMER.



         CUSTOMER, COMMERCIAL/OFFICE (Utilities).  A
non-governmental Customer that is neither a Residential Customer nor an
Industrial Customer.



         CUSTOMER, INDUSTRIAL (Utilities).  A Customer that obtains
a Utility service for the purpose of manufacturing, producing, assembling, or
processing one or more products, and either the average quantity of service
required for that purpose exceeds 25,000 gallons per day, or the type of
Sewage generated by that purpose, prior to any Pretreatment, is such that
without Pretreatment the conditions of Significant Industrial User, as
defined herein, would be applicable.



         CUSTOMER, RESIDENTIAL (Utilities).  The Owner of property
where Utility service is obtained for use in Dwelling Units in which each
occupant normally retains control of the unit for at least one month at a
time.



         CUSTOMER, SOLID WASTE (Solid Waste).  Any Person, firm,
corporation, Association, or other entity that contracts with a Hauler for
the collection and disposal of Solid Waste from any real property located
within the City.



         CUSTOMER, UTILITY (Utilities).  The Person responsible for
payment of the security deposit and monthly service charges. This shall be
either the Owner of the property or an individual or corporate entity
authorized by the Owner to open the Utility account.



      DEBRIS.  All types of waste, Garbage, Construction and
Demolition Debris, Recyclable Materials, Rubbish and Trash.



      DEMOLITION  (Historic Preservation).  Any act that destroys in
whole or in part a Historic Resource.



      DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT (Historic Preservation). Improper or
inadequate maintenance of a Historic Resource that results in its substantial
deterioration and threatens the continued preservation of the Historic
Resource.



      DESIGNATED SMOKING GUEST ROOMS AT PUBLIC LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS
(Prohibited Acts). The sleeping rooms and directly associated private areas,
such as bathrooms, living rooms, and kitchen areas, if any, rented to guests
for their exclusive transient occupancy in public lodging establishments,
including hotels, motels, vacation rentals, transient apartments, transient
lodging establishments, roominghouses, boardinghouses, bed and breakfast
inns, and the like; and designated by the person or persons having management
authority over such public lodging establishment as rooms in which smoking or
the use of Nicotine Vaporizers may be permitted.



      DETENTION AREA (Engineering Standards).  An area designed to
delay Stormwater runoff prior to discharge into receiving waters.



      DEVELOPER’S AGREEMENT.  An agreement between a developer and
the City that establishes the developer’s responsibility regarding project
phasing, the provision of public and private facilities, and improvements and
any other mutually agreed to terms and requirements.



      DEVELOPMENT.  The term has the meaning given in F.S. § 380.04.



      DEVELOPMENT ORDER.  An order authorizing the granting, denying,
or granting with conditions of an application for a Development Permit.



      DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  This term has the meaning given in F.S. §
163.3164(8).



      DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A type of plan that becomes part of the
zoning for a property that reflects the location of Buildings, easements,
Parking arrangements, public access, Street pattern, Landscape, signage and
other similar features.



      DEVICE (Simulated Gambling Device). Any mechanical or electrical
contrivance, computer, terminal, video or other equipment that may or may not
be capable of downloading Games from a central server system, machine,
computer or other device of equipment. The term “device” also includes
any associated equipment necessary to conduct the operation of the device.



      DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) (Tree Preservation).  The diameter
of the Tree trunk(s) measured at four and one-half feet above the top of the
rootball.



      DISASTER.  A natural or human-caused event or occurrence that
results in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage
to or loss of property.



      DISASTER DEBRIS.  Vegetative Debris and Structural Debris caused
by a Disaster.



      DISCHARGE (Hazardous Substances).  Any intentional or
unintentional act or failure to act that results in the releasing, spilling,
pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping of a Hazardous Substance, or
substantial threat of Discharge, upon any real or personal property located
within the City, and which in the determination of the Fire Chief or
designee, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to life, health, safety, or
welfare of persons or property within the City.



      DISTRIBUTION MAIN (Utilities).  Any pipe in a Potable Water
system by which Potable Water is carried from the Treatment Plant to one or
more water Service Laterals.



      DISTRICT, WATER MANAGEMENT.  The South Florida Water Management
District.



      DRAINAGE FACILITIES.  A system of water bodies, Structures and
pipes designed to collect, convey, hold, divert or discharge Stormwater.



      DRIPLINE (Tree Preservation).  The peripheral limits of the
horizontal crown of a Tree spread vertically to the ground; provided,
however, that the same shall not be less than a circle with a five-foot
radius measured from the center of the Tree.



      DRIPLINE ENCROACHMENT (Tree Preservation).  Any activity that
has the effect of causing soil compaction, injury to lower limbs, grade
change, contamination of soil, or damage to the root system. Specifically,
this definition shall include acts such as Parking of vehicles, use of heavy
earth moving or grading equipment, placement of Construction materials,
excavation and filling, trenching and the exposure of paints, oils, or
chemicals within a Tree’s Dripline. Specifically excluded from this
definition are routine maintenance activities such as mowing or walking
within the Tree’s Dripline.



      DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY.  Any place of business that serves,
sells or otherwise makes available its services or products to patrons while
they remain in their Motor Vehicle.



      DUPLEX.  Two Dwelling Units attached by a common party or
firewall in one Building.



      DWELLING.  Any Building or Structure that is wholly or partly
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, including but not
limited to houses, Townhouses, condominiums, apartments and mother-in-law
units.



      DWELLING UNIT.  Any Building or Structure that is wholly or
partly used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, including but not
limited to houses, Townhouses, condominiums, apartments and mother-in-law
units.



      ECOLOGICAL COMMUNITY.  Any one of the native vegetative plant
communities determined pursuant to Chapter 5, Article XII, “Natural
Resource Areas,” Broward County Code of Ordinances.



      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION (Land Use and Adult Business).  A
Premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning, whether
public or private, which conducts regular classes, courses of study, or both,
required for accreditation by or membership in the State Department of
Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools,
or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. The term Educational
Institution includes a Premises or site upon which there is a day care
center, nursery school, pre-kindergarten, Elementary School, middle school,
high school; professional institution, or an institution of higher education,
including a community college, junior college, or four-year college or
university; libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public; or
special institution of learning.



      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (Business Tax).  State tax-supported or
parochial, church and nonprofit Private Schools, colleges, or universities
conducting regular classes and courses of study required for accreditation by
or membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, the
Department of Education, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools.
Nonprofit libraries, art galleries, and museums open to the public are
defined as Educational Institutions and eligible for exemption.



      EFFECTIVELY DESTROY (Tree Preservation).  To cause, suffer,
allow, or permit any act that will cause a Tree to die or go into a period of
unnatural decline within a period of one Year from the date of the act. Acts
which may Effectively Destroy a Tree include, but are not limited to, damage
inflicted upon the root system by heavy machinery, excessive trimming,
changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk, damage
inflicted on the Tree permitting infection or pest infestation, application
of herbicides or other chemical agents or intentional fire damage to the Tree
permitting infection or pest infestation, the infliction of a trunk wound
that is 50% or greater of the circumference of the trunk, or the removal of
sufficient canopy to cause the unnatural decline of the Tree.



      ELECTED OFFICIAL (Lobbyist Regulation).   Any member of the City
Commission.



      ELECTRIC VEHICLE. Any vehicle that operates either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid or an off-board source that
is stored on-board for motive purposes.



      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING LEVEL. The standardized indicators of
electrical force, or voltage, at which an Electric Vehicle’s battery is
recharged which include the following specifications:



         (1)   Level 1 requires a 15 or 20-amp breaker on a
120-volt AC circuit and standard outlet;



         (2)   Level 2 requires 40 to 100-amp breaker on a
240-volt AC circuit; or



         (3)   Level 3 requires a 60-amp or higher dedicated
breaker on a 480-volt or higher three- phase circuit with special grounding
equipment. A Level 3 charging shall use an off-board charger to provide the
AC to DC conversion, delivering DC directly to the car battery.



      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS. A parking space that is
served by Battery Charging Station equipment that has as its primary purpose
the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a
battery or other energy source device in an Electric Vehicle.



      EMERGENCY.  An unplanned or unexpected event that requires
immediate action in order to prevent or remedy a service outage; or to
prevent or remedy a situation that presents an immediate danger to human
life, health or safety or a significant loss or damage to property, and where
failure to take immediate action would enhance the risk of loss or prolong
the delay in restoring service to Customers. Routine repairs and planned
refurbishment do not constitute Emergencies.



      EMERGENCY PERTAINING TO ACTS OF VIOLENCE.  Any act of violence
or a flagrant and substantial defiance of, or resistance to, a lawful
exercise of public authority and that on account thereof, there is reason to
believe that there exists a clear and present danger of a riot or other
general widespread disobedience of the Law, and substantial injury to persons
or to property, all of which constitute an imminent threat to public peace or
order and to the general welfare of the residents and citizens of the City,
or parts thereof.



      EMERGENCY PERTAINING TO DISASTER.  Any occurrence, or threat
thereof, whether natural, technological, or man-made, in war or in peace,
which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population
or substantial damage to or loss of property.



      EMPLOYEE (Adult Business).  A Person who works or performs in an
Adult Entertainment Establishment, irrespective of whether the Person is paid
a salary or wage by the Owner or manager of the Premises. Employee shall
include a person who pays a form of consideration to an Owner or manager of
an Establishment for the privilege of working, performing, or exposing his or
her Specified Anatomical Areas within the Establishment.



      ENCLOSED INDOOR WORKPLACE (Prohibited Acts). Any place where one
or more persons engages in Work, and which place is predominantly or totally
bounded on all sides and above by Physical Barriers, regardless of whether
such barriers consist of or include, without limitation, uncovered openings;
screened or otherwise partially covered openings; or open or closed windows,
jalousies, doors, or the like. A place is “predominately” bounded by
Physical Barriers during any time when both of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   It is more than 50 percent covered from above by a
Physical Barrier that excludes rain; and



      (2)   More than 50 percent of the combined surface area of its
sides is covered by closed Physical Barriers. In calculating the percentage
of side surface area covered by closed Physical Barriers, all solid surfaces
that block air flow, except railings, must be considered as closed Physical
Barriers. This section applies to all such Enclosed Indoor Workplaces and
enclosed parts thereof without regard to whether Work is occurring at any
given time.



This term does not include any facility owned or leased by and used
exclusively for noncommercial activities performed by the members and guests
of a Membership Association, including social gatherings, meetings, dining,
and dances, if no person or persons are engaged in Work.



      ENCOUNTER STUDIO (Adult Business).  All Establishments offering
nude encounter sessions, encounter sessions between males and females, nude
dance encounter sessions, and sexual consultations.



      ENCROACHMENT.  The protrusion of a use, plant growth, fill,
excavation, Buildings, permanent Structures or Development into a space or
area where it is not permitted.



      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  A police Officer, a police service aide, a
Code Enforcement Officer, or any other Person designated by Law, or by the
City Manager to enforce the Code.



      ENGINEER.  A person registered to engage in the practice of
engineering under F.S. §§ 471.001-471.037, and includes the terms
“professional Engineer “and “registered Engineer.”



      ENGINEER OF RECORD. A Florida professional Engineer who is
responsible for the preparation, signing, dating, sealing and issuing of any
engineering document(s) for any engineering service or creative work.



      ENVIRONMENT.  Includes, but is not limited to, ambient air,
surface water, land surface, subsurface soil strata, or groundwater.



      ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION. Any federal, State, county, or local
Law relating to pollution or protection of the Environment. It includes, but
is not limited to, any federal, State, county, or municipal statute or
regulation that pertains, in whole or part, to any existing or potential
emission, Discharge, or release of any pollutant, contaminant, chemical,
toxic waste, hazardous waste, or Solid Waste into the Environment. The term
Environmental Regulation also includes, without limitation, any such statute
or regulation relating to the manufacture, processing, distribution, use,
treatment, storage, disposal, transport, or handling of any pollutant,
contaminant, chemical, toxic waste, hazardous waste, or Solid Waste.



      ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS.  Those lands identified and
mapped under the 1989 Environmentally Sensitive Lands (ESL) Bond Program that
are considered to be ecologically valuable.



      EQUIPMENT FACILITY (Telecommunications).  A room, cabinet,
shelter, pedestal, build-out of an existing Structure, Building, or similar
Structure used to house ancillary equipment for a Telecommunications Tower or
Antenna. Each such cabinet, shelter, or Building shall be considered a
separate Equipment Facility.



      EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL CONNECTION (ERC) (Utilities).  A unit of
measurement used to identify the annual average water consumption for an
average Customer in each of the various categories of Customer of the
City’s Utilities. One ERC is defined to be the annual average consumption
per unit for all Single-Family Residences in the City. From time to time, the
City shall review consumption data, primarily within the City but when
necessary from data available in technical literature, and establish for each
category of Customer the ERC value of that category.



      ESSENTIAL SERVICES (Telecommunications).  Those services
provided by the City and other governmental entities that directly relate to
the health and safety of its residents, including fire, police and rescue.



      ESTABLISHMENT (Adult Business).  The Site or Premises on which
the Adult Entertainment Establishment is located, including the interior of
the Establishment, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or
operations are being conducted for Commercial Gain.



      EXCAVATE or EXCAVATION.  To dig into or in any way remove or
physically disturb or penetrate any earth or water body.



      EXCAVATION WITH BLASTING.  The taking of natural materials or
deposits from their natural state and location aided by the use of explosive
materials or other techniques designed to fracture rock by vibration or
compression. Excavation with Blasting shall not mean the taking of natural
materials or deposits from their natural state and location by use of digging
or scraping machinery.



      EXISTING STRUCTURE (Telecommunications).  A Structure that
exists at the time an application for permission to place an Antenna on a
Structure is filed with the City. The term includes any Structure that can
structurally support the attachment of an Antenna in compliance with
applicable codes.



      EXTERIOR  (Historic Preservation).  All outside surfaces or
elements of a Building or structure.



      EXTERIOR LIGHTING.  Illumination emanating from any source,
including walkways, marquees, and hallways exposed toward the property line.



      EXTERMINATION.  The control of insects, rodents or vermin or
other pests by destroying their nesting places, by removing or making
inaccessible those materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved methods.



      EXTRAORDINARY CONDITIONS (Telecommunications).  Subsequent to a
hurricane, flood, or other natural hazard or subsequent to a defective
finding on a previous inspection.



      FAÇADE. The entire Building wall, including wall face, Parapet,
fascia, windows, doors, canopy, and Roof on any complete elevation.



      FAMILY.  One Person or a group of two or more Persons living
together and interrelated by bonds of consanguinity, marriage or legal
adoption, or a group of Persons not more than three in number who are not so
interrelated, occupying the whole or part of a Dwelling Unit as a separate
housekeeping unit with a single set of culinary facilities. The Persons thus
constituting a Family may also include gratuitous guests and domestic
servants. Any Person under the age of 18 years whose legal custody has been
awarded to the State Department of Children and Family Services (DCF) or to a
child-placing agency licensed by DCF, or who is otherwise considered to be a
foster child under the laws of the State, and who is placed in foster care
with a Family, shall be deemed to be related to and a member of the Family
for the purposes of this Chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to
include any roomer or boarder as a member of a Family.



      FILED FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION (Lobbyist Regulation).   The form is
completed legibly and is filed with the City, with a copy of the form or all
information contained thereon inputted into the City's governmental database,
which database shall be searchable by internet.



      FINAL DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY (Lobbyist Regulation).



      (1)   The City Commission;



      (2)   The Mayor;



      (3)   Final decision-making bodies under the jurisdiction of
the City Commission;



      (4)   Any employee, official, or committee of the City that
has authority to make a final decision to select a vendor or provider in
connection with a public procurement by the City; and



      (5)   Any other quasi-judicial boards, appointed boards, and
commissions of the City.



      FINAL ENGINEERING INSPECTION. The last on-site inspection
performed by the City Engineer or his or her designee for the purpose of
determining that the constructed improvements are in accordance with the City
’s engineering standards and Code.



      FIRE CODES (Fire and Safety). Florida Fire Prevention Code
(FFPC), Broward County Local Fire Code Amendments (BCLA), National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), Florida Administrative Code (FAC) 60A Rules
and State Fire Marshal’s Uniform Rules and Regulations are referred to
collectively as the Fire Codes.



      FIRE FLOW.  The rate of flow and pressure necessary to provide
an adequate capability to fight a fire.



      FISCAL YEAR.  The period of time beginning on October 1 of any
year and ending September 30 of the following year.



      FLAG.  A piece of fabric with a color or pattern that represents
a government, or other noncommercial organization or idea.



      FLORIDA MASTER SITE FILE (FMSF)  (Historic Preservation).  An
archive and database of all known archaeological and historical sites and
districts recorded within the State of Florida, as maintained by the Florida
Department of State, Division of Historical Resources.



      FLORIDA SITE FILE.  A comprehensive listing of all recorded
cultural resources, including those listed in the National Register,
maintained by the Department of State, Division of Historical Resources.



      FOOTCANDLE.  The amount of illumination provided by one lumen
uniformly distributed on one square foot of surface.



      FORCE MAIN (Utilities).  A pipe in a Sewer System in which flow
is caused by the force of one or more pumps.



      FORM 1583.  The standard application form that the United States
Postal Service requires to be completed by renters of mailboxes, which
includes personal identification data of the renter including, but not
limited to, name, address, date of birth, telephone number, and driver’s
license number (Domestic Mail Manual, § 2.0: Delivery to Another).



      FRANCHISE (Telecommunications).  An initial authorization or
renewal of an authorization, regardless of whether the authorization is
designated as a Franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract,
certificate, agreement, or otherwise, to construct and operate a Cable System
or Video Service Provider network facilities in the Public Right-Of-Way.



      FRONTAGE.  That side of the property line abutting a legally
accessible Right-Of-Way. On a corner lot, the Frontage may be designated by
the Owner, subject to the approval by the City Manager who will determine
whether it is consistent with the orientation of the other lots and
improvements on the same side of the accessible Right-Of-Way.



      FRONTAGE WALL FACE.  The BuildingFaçade, excluding Parapet,
fascia, soffit, mansard, and Roof, which faces the legally accessible
Right-Of-Way.



      FUEL STATION.  A retail place of business engaged in the retail
sale of motor fuels and may include accessory activities such as the sale of
vehicle accessories or supplies, the lubrication of Motor Vehicles, the minor
adjustment or minor repair of Motor Vehicles, the sale of convenience food
items, or an accessory Restaurant.



      GAME (Simulated Gambling Device).Slot Machines, poker, bingo,
craps, keno, any other type of game ordinarily played in a casino, a game
involving the display of the results of a raffle, sweepstakes, drawing,
contest or other promotion, lotto, sweepstakes, and any other game associated
with gambling, but the term “game” does not necessarily imply gambling as
that term may be defined elsewhere.



      GARBAGE (Solid Waste). Putrescible Animal and vegetable wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, consumption, decay, and
storage of food. The term Garbage shall include combustible waste such as
paper, rags, and boxes used in connection with the distribution or storage of
food and glasses, bottles, tin cans, or other disposable receptacles of food
or food products.



      GARDEN APARTMENT.  Three or more attached Dwelling Units in a
two- or three-StoryBuilding with each unit being only one Story.



      GEOGRAPHIC SEARCH AREA (Telecommunications).  That initial
circular area that has a radius of no less than one mile designated by a
wireless provider or operator for a new Tower. The Geographic Search Area
shall be determined based upon engineering considerations including grids,
frequency coordination and levels of service consistent with good engineering
practices.



      GOLF CART.  A Motor Vehicle that is designed and manufactured
for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that
is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 mph, including vehicles modified to
have a cargo platform or bin to transport parcels or a hitch to tow a Trailer.



      GOOD STATE OF REPAIR (Vehicles and Vessels).  Fully functioning
as originally intended, maintained in accordance with federal, State and
local Laws, rules and ordinances, clean, safe and reasonably comfortable for
ordinary intended use.



      GOVERNMENT PARCEL.  A parcel owned by the United States of
America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the State of
Florida or any agency thereof, a county, a special district, school district
or a municipal corporation.



      GPD (Utilities).  Gallons per day.



      GPM (Utilities).  Gallons per minute.



      GRAVITY MAIN (Utilities).  A pipe in a Sewer System in which
flow is caused by force of gravity.



      GREASE TRAPS.  Interceptors that collect grease and oil waste
from facilities producing greasy wastes.



      GROSS SQUARE FOOTAGE (GROSS FLOOR AREA).  The sum (in square
feet) of the area of each floor level, measured from principal outside faces
of exterior walls, including, but not limited to, basements, corridors,
hallways, utility areas, elevators, storage rooms, stair cases, mezzanines,
areas that are Roofed but not enclosed and all other areas that have floor
surfaces with clear standing head room at a minimum of six feet, six inches.



      GROUND COVER.  Dense, low-growing plants that substantially
cover the ground and generally do not exceed a height of 24 inches at
maturity, but not including sod.



      GUYED TOWER (Telecommunications).  A Telecommunications Tower
that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors.



      HABITABLE ROOM.  A fully enclosed space, or portion thereof,
intended to be used or usable for living, sleeping, cooking or eating
purposes.



      HATRACKING (Tree Preservation).  To sever the leader or leaders
or to Prune a Tree by stubbing of mature wood.



      HAULER (Solid Waste).  Any Person, firm, corporation, or other
entity which is engaged in the business of collecting and/or disposing of
Solid Waste.



      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE OR TECHNICAL RESCUE INCIDENT (Cost
Recovery).  Any Technical Rescue, Confined Space Rescue, Rope Rescue, High
Angle Rescue, aerial rescue, Structural or Trench Collapse Rescue, Hazardous
Substance abatement efforts, and other similar incidents occurring within the
corporate boundaries of the City, or other jurisdictions where mutual aid
services are provided by the City, and which, in the determination of the
City Manager, pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health,
safety, or welfare of persons, entities or property within the City.



      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. Any substance, material, biological
organism, bacterium or virus in a quantity or form which poses an
unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety, or welfare of
persons, entities or property within the City, and shall include, but not be
limited to, those Hazardous Substances listed in the “N.F.P.A. Guide on
Hazardous Materials” or the E.P.A.’s list of extremely Hazardous
Substances, or the “Florida Substance List” promulgated by the Department
of Labor and Employment Security, or as listed in any other applicable
federal, State, or local Laws or regulations.



      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES COSTS (Cost Recovery).  All those necessary
and reasonable expenses incurred by the City in connection with
investigating, mitigating, minimizing, cleaning, removing, or abating
Discharges of Hazardous Substances. Such costs shall include, but are not
limited to:



      (1)   Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed,
and expended as a result of the Discharge .



      (2)   Full cost recovery for compensation of City employees
for the time devoted specifically to the Discharge .



      (3)   Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the
Discharge .



      (4)   Replacement costs for equipment that is contaminated
beyond reuse or repair as a result of the Discharge .



      (5)   Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the
Discharge .



      (6)   Special technical services specifically required as a
result of the Discharge .



      (7)   Other special services specifically required as a result
of the Discharge .



      (8)   Laboratory costs for purposes of analyzing samples taken
during the Discharge .



      (9)   Costs associated with the services, supplies, and
equipment procured for a specific evacuation.



      (10)   Cost of disposal of any Hazardous Substances.



      HEALTH SPA.  All health studios, exercise salons, relaxation
spas, health salons, health clubs, and adult relaxation spas.



      HEAVY EQUIPMENT (Tree Preservation).  Light rubber-wheeled
equipment, which shall be a maximum of 48 inches wide, tire to tire, with a
maximum weight of 3,500 pounds, which will not damage Tree roots.



      HEDGE.  A Landscape barrier consisting of a continuous, dense
planting of Shrubs installed a minimum height of 24 inches, 24-inch spread
and spaced at two feet on center (O.C.). Hedges shall be planted with
branches touching so as to create a solid screen with no visual spaces
between plants at the time of installation. Plant spacing shall be adjusted
according to plant sizes so long as a solid screen is achieved.



      HEIGHT (Structure).  The vertical distance from the nearest
crown of the adjacent road to the highest point of the Structure being
measured.



      HEIGHT OF SIGN.  The vertical distance measured from the nearest
crown of the adjacent Roadway to the top of the Sign Face or Sign Structure,
whichever is greater.



      HIGH ANGLE RESCUE.  Rescue from exterior Environments located in
greater than a 60 degree inclination.



      HIGH RISE.  Three or more attached Dwelling Units in a Building
with nine or more residential Stories (exclusive of Parking levels).



      HISTORIC DISTRICT  (Historic Preservation).  An area designated
by the City Commission, located within defined geographic boundaries, which
contains two or more Contributing Resources and which may contain
Noncontributing Resources and vacant land within its boundaries.



      HISTORIC RESOURCE  (Historic Preservation).  A Building,
structure, object, site, or other real or personal property, excluding living
things, of historic, architectural, archaeological, or paleontological value,
including an individual resource, Contributing Resource, or Noncontributing
Resource, or vacant land within a Historic District that is individually
designated by the City Commission as a Historic Resource.



      HOME OCCUPATION.  Any business that is conducted from a
Residential Property within the City.



      HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION.  A Homeowners’ Association or
Condominium Association as defined in F.S. §§ 720.301(9) and 718.103(2).



      HOSPITAL.  A health care institution licensed by the Agency for
Health Care Administration as a Hospital under F.S. Chapter 395 that:



      (1)   Offers services more intensive than those required for
room, board, personal services, and general nursing care, and offers
facilities and beds for use beyond 24 hours by individuals requiring
diagnosis, treatment, or care for illness, injury, deformity, infirmity,
abnormality, disease, or pregnancy; and



      (2)   Regularly makes available at least clinical laboratory
services, diagnostic X-ray services, and treatment facilities for surgery or
obstetrical care, or other definitive medical treatment of similar extent,
except that a critical access hospital, as defined in F.S. Chapter 408.07,
shall not be required to make available treatment facilities for surgery,
obstetrical care, or similar services as long as it maintains its critical
access hospital designation and shall be required to make such facilities
available only if it ceases to be designated as a critical access hospital.



      HOTEL/MOTEL.  An establishment requiring a license by the State
of Florida that is used, maintained or advertised as a place where furnished
sleeping accommodations are supplied for short term rent to guests or Tenants
with no unit therein occupied by the Owner, same Tenant or group of Tenants
in excess of 90 days within any 12-month period.



      HOTEL UNIT.  Any Dwelling Unit contained within a Hotel/Motel.



      HOUSEHOLD WASTE (Solid Waste).  The Rubbish and Garbage
ordinarily generated by a Residential Property on a daily basis. This
definition excludes waste that requires special handling or management such
as discarded appliances, waste tires, used oil, lead-acid batteries,
Construction and Demolition Debris, ash residue, yard Trash, biological
wastes and hazardous waste as defined in F.S. § 403.703.



      HURRICANE SEASON.  From June 1 to November 30 of each calendar
Year.



      HURRICANE WATCH.  An announcement that hurricane conditions
(sustained winds of 74 mph or higher) are possible within the specified
coastal area. Because hurricane preparedness activities become difficult once
winds reach tropical storm force, the Hurricane Watch is issued 48 hours in
advance of the anticipated onset of tropical-storm-force winds.



      IMPERVIOUS AREA.  An area covered by a material that does not
permit infiltration or percolation of water directly into the ground.



      INDIVIDUAL PROFESSIONAL ENTITY (Business Tax).  Any Business
consisting of only one individual who is required to maintain an active and
valid state or federal license, permit, or certificate from any state or
federal agency, any state or federal licensing boards, any non-profit
professional standards certification organizations or the Florida Bar in
order to engage in his or her profession, and which utilizes the address of a
separate taxed Business within the City. An individual who is employed by the
separate taxed Business is not deemed to be a Business or an Individual
Professional Entity.



      INSPECTOR.  Any Person who is authorized by the City Manager to
conduct inspections pursuant to the Code.



      INTEGRITY  (Historic Preservation).  The authenticity of a
resource’s historic identity, evidenced by the survival of physical
characteristics that existed during the resource’s historic or prehistoric
period.



      INTERCONNECTION (Telecommunications).  The electronic connection
of two or more Cable Systems for the purpose of sharing access programming.



      INTERESTED PERSON.  Any Person who speaks for or against any
resolution or ordinance before the City Commission or for or against any
matter before any City Advisory Board and who has a direct financial interest
in the action (including, but not limited to, vendors, bidders and
proposers), except that Owner occupied Residential PropertyOwners shall not
be deemed to have a direct financial interest in land use decisions that may
affect the value of their property.



      INTERFERENCE (Utilities).  A discharge which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or
disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use, or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the
operations permit or of the prevention of Sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations:
§ 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.



      INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT (Solid Waste). That certain Interlocal
Agreement dated November 25, 1986, by and among Broward County and the
contract communities, as amended or supplemented from time to time pursuant
to the provisions of the Interlocal Agreement.



      INTERMEDIATE DRIVEWAY.  A driveway that provides for a maximum
average daily trip volume of 2,000 vehicles and/or a maximum average peak
hour volume of 200 vehicles.



      IRRIGATION.  A system of piping and sprinkler heads, including
valves and pumps, its use being to convey rust free water to Landscaped areas.



      ITDD.  The Indian Trace Development District.



      LAND CLEARING.  The removal of Trees, Shrubs, and/or undergrowth
by stripping or any other process, with the intention of preparing real
property for non-agricultural Development purposes. This definition shall not
include: the selective removal of non-native Tree and Shrub species when the
soil is left relatively undisturbed; removal of dead or nuisance Trees; or
normal mowing operations.



      LANDSCAPE or LANDSCAPING.  Consists of any of the following or a
combination thereof: material such as, but not limited to, grass, Ground
Covers, sods, decorative rock Mulch, berms, Shrubs, Vines, Hedges, Trees, or
palms; but excluding sand, gravel, pavers, or pavement.



      LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT.  A Person licensed to practice Landscape
Architecture under F.S. Chapter 481, Part II (Landscape Architecture), and
includes the term “registered Landscape Architect”.



      LANDSCAPE FEATURES.  Landscape features shall include, but are
not limited to, fences, walls, curbs, fountains and walkways.



      LAP DANCE, STRADDLE DANCE, FACE DANCE, FRICTION DANCE or FLASH
DANCE. Also known as a Straddle Dance, Face Dance, Friction Dancing, or Flash
Dance, shall mean the use by an Employee or independent contractor, whether
clothed or partially or totally nude, of a part of his or her body to touch,
massage, rub, stroke, caress, or fondle the genital or pubic area of a Person
while at the Establishment, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of
an Employee or independent contractor by a Person while at the Establishment.
It shall be a Lap Dance regardless of whether the “touch” or
“touching” occurs while the Employee or independent contractor is
displaying or exposing a Specified Anatomical Area. It shall also be a Lap
Dance regardless of whether the “touch” or “touching” is direct or
through a medium. However, incidental touching shall not constitute Lap
Dancing.



      LARGE STUMP OR LIMB.  A Tree stump or limb with a diameter of at
least 24 inches at the widest part.



      LAST PASS (Emergency Management).  The final removal of Disaster
Debris by the City and/or its agents.



      LATTICE TOWER (Telecommunications).  A Telecommunications Tower
that is constructed to be self-supporting by lattice type supports and
without the use of guy wires or other supports.



      LAW.  All duly enacted and applicable federal, State, county,
and City Laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and orders.



      LAWN. That portion of a lot or parcel planted with turf/grass,
excluding Swales.



      LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL (Telecommunications).  A Channel
designated in accordance with § 612 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.
532, for commercial use by Persons unaffiliated with the franchisee.



      LIFT STATION (Utilities).  Sewage pumping system designed to
service locations where sanitary Sewer gravity flow is not possible without
excessive depth or where there is insufficient head for gravity flow through
a publically owned treatment system or plant.



      LIQUID NICOTINE.  Any liquid product composed either in whole or
in part of pure nicotine which can be used with Nicotine Vaporizers.



      LIQUOR.  The term has the meaning given in F.S. § 565.01.



      LITTER.  Garbage, Refuse, Rubbish, Trash and Construction and
Demolition Debris, and all other waste material which, if thrown, deposited
or dumped as prohibited in §§ 52.25 et seq., tends to create a danger to
public health, safety, and welfare.



      LOBBYING OR LOBBYING ACTIVITIES (Lobbyist Regulation).   A
communication, by any means, from a Lobbyist to a Covered Individual
regarding any item that will foreseeably be decided by a final
decision-making authority, which communication seeks to influence, convince,
or persuade the Covered Individual to support or oppose the item.  Lobbying
does not include communications:



      (1)   Made on the record at a duly-noticed public meeting or
hearing; or



      (2)   From an attorney to an attorney representing the City
regarding a pending or imminent judicial or adversarial administrative
proceeding against the City.



      LOBBYIST (Lobbyist Regulation).   A person who is retained, with
or without compensation, for the purpose of Lobbying, or a person who is
employed by another person or entity, on a full-time or part-time basis,
principally to Lobby on behalf of that other person or entity.  Lobbyist
does not include a person who is:



      (1)   An Elected Official, employee, or appointee of Broward
County or of any municipality within Broward County communicating in his or
her official capacity.



      (2)   An individual who communicates on his or her own behalf,
or on behalf of a person or entity employing the individual on a full-time or
part-time basis, unless the individual is principally employed by that person
or entity to Lobby.



      (3)   Any employee, officer, or board member of a Homeowners'
Association, condominium Association, or neighborhood Association when
addressing, in his or her capacity as an employee, officer, or board member
of such Association, an issue impacting the Association or its members; or 



      (4)   Any employee, an officer, or a board member of a
nonprofit public interest entity (e.g., Sierra Club, NAACP, ACLU) when
addressing an issue impacting a constituent of that entity.



      LOCAL STREET.  A Street having that meaning given in F.S. §
334.03(15).



      LOGO.  A symbol used to identify an entity, product or service.



      LOITER or LOITERING. To stand around or move slowly about, to
spend time idly, to saunter, to delay.



      LOOSE CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.Garbage, Construction Waste or Trash
left loose or unsecured at a Construction site.



      LOOSE CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS (Emergency Management).  All
Construction materials, including but not limited to loose or unsecured wood,
bricks, blocks, metals and tiles, that are placed at a Construction site, and
which materials are not being currently used in the Construction at the site.



      LOOSE VEGETATIVE DEBRIS.  Vegetative Debris made up of small
particles, including but not limited to leaves, needles, grass, moss, bark,
and Mulch.



      LOT.  A parcel or tract of land designated and identified as a
single unit of area.



      LOW INCOME PERSON.  One or more natural Persons or a family, not
including students, that has a total annual anticipated income for the
household that does not exceed 80% of the median annual income, as published
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for family
size for the county. While occupying a rental unit, a Low Income Person’s
annual anticipated gross income may increase to an amount not to exceed 140%
of 80% of the applicable median income adjusted for family size.



      MACHINERY (Land Development).  Any motorized intake vents,
motorized exhausts, heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment or
units, solar collectors and all other similar types of mechanical equipment.



      MAJOR DRIVEWAY.  A driveway that provides for a maximum average
daily trip volume of 5,000 vehicles and/or a maximum average peak hour volume
of 500 vehicles.



      MANUFACTURING FACILITY (Business Tax).  A Structure or location
used primarily for the production or alteration of merchandise or commodities.



      MAP OF ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS.  The Conservation Map
prepared as part of the City Comprehensive Plan that identifies areas of
native communities or conservation areas within the City.



      MARIJUANA (Medical Marijuana). Any strain of cannabis or
Marijuana, in any form, that is authorized by State law to be dispensed or
sold in the State of Florida. Also referred to as “Medical Marijuana.”



      MASS  (Historic Preservation).  The envelope or cubic footage
of the structure, including, but not limited to, all habitable space,
garages, attics, storage areas, and porches.



      MASSAGE FACILITY.  A Florida Licensed Massage Establishment
providing Florida Licensed Massage Therapists whose services are Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork. The establishment may include hydrotherapy, steam, and
sauna facilities and services.



      MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A comprehensive Development Plan that
includes current and proposed property uses, proposed land Development and
zoning criteria, and the layout of design and infrastructure components.



      MEDIAN.  The area between RoadwayTraffic Lanes.



      MEDICAL MARIJUANA RETAIL CENTER. A retail establishment, licensed
by the Florida Department of Health as a “Medical Marijuana Treatment
facility,” “Medical Marijuana Treatment Center,” “dispensing
organization,” “dispensing organization facility” or similar use, that
sells and dispenses Medical Marijuana.



      MEDICAL WASTE (Solid Waste).  Isolation wastes, infectious
agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body
parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.



      MEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATION (Prohibited Acts). A charitable,
nonprofit, or veterans’ organization that holds a current exemption under
Section 501(c)(3), (4), (7), (8), (10), or (19) or Section 501(d) of the
Internal Revenue Code.



      MID RISE.  Three or more attached Dwelling Units in a Building
with four to eight residential stories (exclusive of Parking levels).



      MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY (Telecommunications).  A Small Wireless
Facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in
width, and 12 inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer
than 11 inches.



      MICROCELL FACILITY (Telecommunications).  A Telecommunications
Facility consisting of an Antenna and related equipment that is located
either on a Telecommunications Tower or affixed to a Structure in some
fashion for the provision of wireless Services.



      MICROWAVE DISH ANTENNA (Telecommunications).  A dish-like
Antenna used to link Telecommunications sites together by wireless
transmission and/or receipt of voice or data.



      MINOR DRIVEWAY.  A driveway that provides for a maximum average
daily trip volume of 400 vehicles and/or a maximum average peak hour inbound
right-turn volume of 40 vehicles.



      MOBILE HOME.  Has the same meaning given in F.S. § 320.01(2),
and includes only those Mobile Homes in which permanent residential
habitation is permitted by applicable land Development regulations.



      MOBILE VENDING VEHICLE.  Any vehicle, cart, or apparatus, a
designated space for which is not shown on an approved site plan, used for
the sale, or offer for sale, of goods or services, not including Refueling
From Tank Vehicles.



      MOBILE VENDOR.  Any Person engaged in the selling, or offering
for sale, of goods or services from a Mobile Vending Vehicle, not including
Refueling From Tank Vehicles.



      MODERATE INCOME PERSON.  One or more natural Persons or a
family, not including students, that has a total annual anticipated income
for the household that does not exceed 120% of the median annual income, as
published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted
for family size for households within the county. While occupying a rental
unit, a Moderate Income Person’s annual anticipated gross income may
increase to an amount not to exceed 140% of 120% of the applicable median
income adjusted for family size.



      MODULAR NEWSRACK.  A connected grouping of two to six Newsracks
within a single unit or Structure.



      MONOPOLE TOWER (Telecommunications).  A Telecommunications Tower
consisting of a single Pole or spire self-supported on a permanent
foundation, constructed without guy wires, ground anchors, or other supports.



      MULCH.  Nonliving organic, arsenic free material customarily
used in Landscape design to enrich the soil, control weeds, retard erosion
and retain moisture.



      NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES  (Historic Preservation).
The list of historic properties significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, and culture, maintained by the
Secretary of the Interior, as established by the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.).



      NEIGHBORHOOD FACILITY.  A facility intended to serve or
accommodate the needs of a specific segment of a community or area.



      NEW CONSTRUCTION  (Historic Preservation).  Any new Building,
structure, object, or Addition to a Historic Resource.



      NEWSRACK.  A self-service, non-coin-operated or coin-operated
box, container, storage unit, pocket, compartment, or other dispenser
installed, used, or maintained for the display, sale, or distribution of a
particular newspaper or other news periodicals.



      NICOTINE VAPORIZER.  Any electronic or battery-operated device
that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances
and includes those composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, and battery or
electronic circuits that provide a vapor of Liquid Nicotine and/or other
substances to the user.  This term shall include such devices whether they
are manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette,
an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an
electronic hookah, an e-cigarette, an e-cigar, e-cigarillo, an e-pipe and
e-hookah or under any other product name.



      NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any printed or written matter, any
sampler or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature, excluding Commercial Handbills.



      NONCONTRIBUTING RESOURCE  (Historic Preservation).  A resource
within a Historic District that is not historically or architecturally
compatible with Contributing Resources within the district.



      NON-TECHNICAL RESCUE.  Rescue from exterior Environments located
in less than a 40 degree inclination, which may be handled by first arriving
units having sufficient equipment and training to assist the victims.



      NONVEHICULAR ACCESS LINE or NONVEHICULAR INGRESS AND EGRESS
LINE.  A line illustrated on a Plat that prohibits installation of driveways
for regular use by Motor Vehicles.



      NON-WATER MANAGEMENT AREA.  Any portion of a Development that is
not a functional part of the “Surface Water Management System” and is not
designed for the normal impoundment, storage, or conveyance of surface water
or Stormwater.



      NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit program is administered by the U. S. Environmental Protection
Agency and delegated to Florida Department of Environmental Protection. This
program requires permits for Stormwater discharges into waters of the United
States from industrial activities; and from large and medium municipal
separate Stormwater systems.



      OATH.    An affirmation in all cases in which, by Law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an Oath, and in such cases the words Swear
and Sworn shall be equivalent to the words Affirm and Affirmed.



      OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL.  A property or portion thereof
providing executive, management, administrative, or professional services,
but not involving medical or dental services or the sale of merchandise,
except as an incidental use. This definition also includes a property or
portion thereof from where a Person handles and manages his or her personal
business affairs or activities.



      OFFICE, CUBICLE.  An establishment in which a minimum of 25% of
the gross floor area of the business is comprised of cubicles.



      OFFICE, EXECUTIVE SUITE.  The use, by independent entities, of
office space with a sharing of amenities such as conference rooms, lobby,
phone system, copiers, network facilities, and clerical support.



      OFFICE, MEDICAL.  An establishment where patients, who are not
lodged overnight, are examined and/or treated by Persons practicing any form
of physical or mental healthcare or therapy, whether such Persons be medical
doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists, naturopaths, optometrists,
psychologists, therapists, dentists, or any such profession, the practice of
which is lawful in the State of Florida.



      OFFICER.  Any LawEnforcement Officer as defined in F.S. §
943.10, any Code Enforcement Officer or any Animal care Officer.



      OFF-SITE.  Any location outside the property limits.



      OFF-STREET LOADING AREA.  An area provided for the temporary
Parking of trucks being loaded or unloaded that is not within the Public
Right-Of-Way.



      ON-SITE.  Refers to any location within the property limits.



      ONGOING CONTRACT (Acquisitions). Contracts without a specific
term that may be terminated at the will of the City Commission.



      OPERATOR (Adult Businesses).  A Person who engages or
participates in an activity that is necessary to or that facilitates the
operation of an Adult Entertainment Establishment, including but not limited
to the licensee, manager, Owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, dancer, disc
jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, movie projectionist, or supervisor. The
term is not meant to include repair people, janitorial personnel or the like
who are only indirectly involved in facilitating the operation of the Adult
Entertainment Establishment.



      OPERATOR (Lodging Establishments).  Any Person who, alone or in
conjunction with others, has charge or control of a Dwelling or Hotel, or any
part of a Dwelling or Hotel.



      ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE  (Historic Preservation). 
Minimal work conducted on a Historic Resource which specifically stems
deterioration and exactly replicates the existing material of the resource in
form and substance.



      OUTDOOR.  An item shall be considered Outdoors if it is not
fully enclosed with four walls and a solid Roof.



      OUTPARCEL.  A portion of a tract of nonresidential land intended
to be developed with a freestanding Building and accessed from the same
entrance from a Public Right-Of-Way as the main tract.



      OVERBUILD (Telecommunications).  A Cable System constructed to
serve Subscribers already served by an existing Cable System.



      OVERLASH (Telecommunications).  To place an additional Antenna,
cable, wire or Communications Facility onto an attachment by a Registrant or
Communications Services Provider.



      OVERLIFT (Tree Preservation).  The removal of the majority of
the inner lateral branches and foliage thereby displacing weight and mass to
the ends of the branches. The alteration of the Tree’s live crown ratio
will be considered as evidence of Overlifting.



      OVERSIZED FACILITY (Utilities).  A pipe or pumping facility that
satisfies all of the following:



      (1)   It is constructed in order to serve a new Development
and is located in a subportion of a CityUtility system which connects the
individual lots of the Development to a portion of the system indicated in
the master plan.



      (2)   The developer has contributed to its Construction,
either by constructing it him- or herself or by making total or partial
reimbursement of the costs of Construction by others.



      (3)   The City has determined that adequate service to future
nearby Developments will not be possible unless the current facility is
constructed larger than would be required to service only the current
Development . In determining the size that would be required to service only
the current Development , the City utilizes generally accepted design
criteria and shall apply all of the provisions of this Chapter, such as
required minimums, looped distribution mains, Fire Flows, and the like.



      OWNER.



         OWNER.  For general purposes, Owner means any Person who
alone or jointly with others, has any legal or equitable title or interest,
with or without having actual possession thereof.



         OWNER (Land Development and Licenses).  For the purpose of
applications for Development Permits and licenses: Owner shall mean the
actual current title holder of the property and may also include an agent of
the Owner who provides written evidence (including, but not limited to, a
binding power of attorney), satisfactory to the City Attorney, that he or she
has the authority to bind the title holder of the property.



         OWNER (Notice).  For the purpose of providing notice:
Owner shall mean the Person or Persons reflected as the property Owner in the
most recently certified real property ad valorem Tax Rolls of Broward County,
which have been provided to the City by Broward County. Additionally, in the
case of multiple or joint ownership, notice to one Owner shall be considered
for the purposes herein as notice to all multiple or joint Owners.



         OWNER (Solid Waste).  For purposes of Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment, Owner shall mean the Person reflected as the
Owner of Assessed Property on the Tax Roll.



         OWNER (Vehicle or Vessel).  The last known record title
holder to a vehicle or Vessel according to the records of the Florida
Department of Motor Vehicles or the Department of Environmental Protection.



      PACKAGE STORE.  An establishment that is licensed to sell all
Alcoholic Beverages, in sealed containers and for Consumption Off The
Premises only.



      PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINIC.  A type of Medical Office providing a
variety of personal services by an On-Site physician who is currently
licensed by either the Florida Board of Medicine or Board of Osteopathic
Medicine and his or her staff, which, individually or collectively, are
intended to reduce or manage pain.



      PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCE (Historic Preservation).  Any
vertebrate fossils, including bones, teeth, natural casts, molds,
impressions, and other remains of prehistoric fauna, preserved in or on the
earth’s crust, that are of paleontological interest and that provide
information about the history of life on earth, except that the term does not
include:



      1.   Any materials associated with an archaeological resource,
as defined in Section 3(1) of the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of
1979, 16 U.S.C. 470bb(1); or



      2.   Any cultural item, as defined in Section 2 of the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 25 U.S.C. 3001.



      PALEONTOLOGICAL SITE  (Historic Preservation).  A location that
has yielded or is likely to yield information important to the understanding
and scientific study of Paleontological Resources. A Paleontological Site is
evidenced by the presence of paleontological materials on or below the ground
surface indicating past use of a location by humans.



      PALEONTOLOGICAL ZONE  (Historic Preservation).  An area likely
to yield largely subsurface information on the prehistory and fossil history
of the County based on prehistoric environmental patterns within the County,
as determined in consultation with the Florida Museum of Natural History.
Paleontological Zones will tend to conform to certain geological features and
deposits and shall be recorded on a Map of Broward County Paleontological
Zones to be maintained and amended as necessary by the HPO.



      PARAPET.  A vertical false front or wall extension above the
Roof line.



      PARCEL OF LAND.  Any quantity of land capable of being described
with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established,
which is designated by its Owner or developer as land to be used or developed
as a unit or that has been used or developed as a unit.



      PARK (Motor Vehicles).  The complete Stopping of a Motor Vehicle
under circumstances in which its operator does not remain inside of the
vehicle.



      PARKING AISLE.  The area immediately adjacent to the Motor
VehicleParking Stalls that permits maneuvering of the Motor Vehicles entering
and leaving a Parking Stall, and that connects the Parking Stalls to the
driveway.



      PARKING STALL.  The space that is designated to Park a Motor
Vehicle, excluding Parking Aisles and driveways.



      PARTS (Motor Vehicles and Vessels).  All component Parts of a
vehicle or Vessel that are in a state of disassembly, or are assembled with
other vehicle or Vessel component Parts, but which, in their state of
assembly, do not constitute a complete vehicle or Vessel.



      PASS THROUGH (Solid Waste).  A discharge that exits the POTW
into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the operations permit, including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



      PASS-THROUGH PROVIDER (Telecommunications).  Any Person who
places or maintains a Communications Facility in the City’s Public
Rights-Of-Way and who does not remit taxes imposed by the City pursuant to
F.S. Chapter 202, as may be amended from time to time.



      PAY TELEPHONE.  Any self-service telephone operated by coin,
credit card or prepaid phone card, available for use by the public. This term
includes enclosures, structural support and mounting equipment.



      PAYOFF (Simulated Gambling Device). Cash, monetary value or other
credit, billets, tickets, tokens, or electronic credits to be exchanged for
cash, merchandise or anything of value whatsoever.



      PERFORMANCE BOND.   A bond posted to ensure complete
satisfaction of a Person’s obligations to the City.



      PERIMETER BUFFER.  A continuous area of land along the perimeter
of a Parcel of Land, including Landscaping, berms, walls, fences, and
BuildingSetbacks, that is used to provide a transition between one type of
land use and another.



      PERIOD OF SIGNIFICANCE (Historic Preservation).  The period of
time from which a Historic Resource’s importance is derived.



      PERSON.  Any natural person or entity including, but not limited
to, a corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, an estate, a trust,
a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a
successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.



      PERSONAL INVESTMENTS (Business Tax).  Investments that exist
solely for the benefit of the person or relative(s) of the person managing
them, and may not benefit any unrelated third party. If the person or
relative of the person managing Personal Investments regularly and
substantially participates in the operation of a Business funded by such
investments, then such investments shall not be a personal investment, and
shall be considered a Business.



      PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES (Telecommunications).  Commercial
Mobile Radio Services, unlicensed wireless Services, and common Carrier
wireless exchange access services, as defined under federal Law, 47 U.S.C. §
332(c)(7)(C), and includes but is not limited to, cellular, personal
communication services, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile
radio, and paging service. Personal Wireless Services shall not be considered
as Essential Services, Public Safety Communications, public Utilities or
private Utilities.



      PERVIOUS AREA.  Area maintained in its natural condition or
covered by a material that permits infiltration or percolation of water
directly into the ground.



      PHARMACY.  Any business that is required to maintain an active
and valid State license or permit from the State of Florida Board of Pharmacy.



      PHASED DEVELOPMENT.  A Development that is designed, permitted
or Platted in distinct, sequential stages to be developed over a specified
period of time.



      PHYSICAL BARRIER (Prohibited Acts). An uncovered opening; a
screened or otherwise partially covered opening; or an open or closed window,
jalousie, or door.



      PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.  Any area where people assemble,
whether publicly or privately owned and maintained. Includes, but is not
limited to, public assembly Buildings such as auditoriums, assembly halls,
private clubs and fraternal lodges, Community Centers, clubhouses, theaters,
and places of worship or other facilities that are used for prayer and
assembly by persons of similar beliefs.



      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.  An area of land developed as a
single entity or in phases for a variety of residential types and
nonresidential uses which do not correspond in lot size or type of Dwelling,
density, lot coverage, and required open space to the regulations established
in any of the zoning districts created from time to time under the provisions
of the zoning ordinance enacted by the City Commission. The planned
Development shall be in conformity with the Master Development Plan of a PDD.



      PLANT UNIT.  A numeric measurement to establish planting
requirements that can be expressed in various plant types.



      PLAT.  A map or delineated representation of a subdivision of
land(s), being a complete, exact representation of the subdivision and other
information in compliance with F.S. Chapter 177, and any applicable local
government regulations.



      PLUMBING.  All or any part of the materials, appurtenances or
devices attached to and forming a water, Sewer, gas or waste distribution
system, including fixtures and devices used for cooking, washing, drinking,
cleaning, fire fighting and mechanical purposes.



      POLE.  Any Utility, electricity, telephone, power or light Pole,
other than any pole owned by the City.



      PORTABLE TOILET FACILITIES.  A room or booth that can be carried
or moved to multiple sites and is only intended for temporary use containing
a fixture to receive the elimination of human waste. Portable Toilet
Facilities include, but are not limited to, holding tanks, privies, or any
other toilet facility that is intended for use on a nonpermanent basis.



      POTABLE WATER.  Water that is satisfactory for drinking,
culinary, and domestic purposes and which meets the quality standards of the
Florida Department of Environmental Regulation, Chapter 17-22, Florida
Administrative Code.



      POTENTIALLY TOXIC MATERIALS.  Those materials potentially toxic
to human life such as, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Herbicides.



      (2)   Pesticides.



      (3)   Chlorine.



      (4)   Insecticides.



      (5)   Any material for which an Manufacturer’s Safety Data
Sheet (MSDS) has been issued.



      PRE-EXISTING TOWER (Telecommunications).  A Telecommunications
Tower for which a Building permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of Ordinance 2009-03, including permitted Telecommunications
Towers that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current
and not expired.



      PREFERRED ZONING DISTRICTS (Telecommunications).  The zoning
districts within Ordinance 2009-03 in which the City provides a preference
for the installation of Wireless Communications Facilities.



      PREMISES.  A distinct and definite locality or place with metes
and bounds or lot and block, as land or land with Buildings thereon; lands
and tenements; an estate; the area of land surrounding a Building, and any
improvements to the land.



      PRETREATMENT (Utilities).  Any chemical, biological, or physical
treatment (other than use of a Grease Trap) applied to Sewage by a Customer
in order to reduce any actual or potential adverse impact upon the Sewer
System or public health and safety.



      PRINCIPAL BUILDING or STRUCTURE.  A Building or Structure that
is occupied by, or devoted to, a Principal Use or an addition to an existing
principal Building or Structure that is larger than the original existing
Building or Structure.



      PRINCIPAL STOCKHOLDER (Adult Business).  A Person who owns or
controls, legally or beneficially, 5% or more of a corporation’s capital
stock, and includes the officers and directors. If no stockholder of a
corporation owns or controls, legally or beneficially, at least 5% of the
capital stock, all stockholders shall be considered Principal Stockholders.
And, if a corporation is registered with the Security and Exchange
Commission, or pursuant to F.S. Chapter 517, and its stock is for sale to the
general public, it shall not be considered to have Principal Stockholders.



      PRINCIPAL USE.  The primary purpose for which the land or
Building is used.



      PRIVATE PERFORMANCE (Adult Business).  The display or exposure
of a Specified Anatomical Area by an Employee at an Adult Entertainment
Establishment to a Person other than another employee while the Person is in
an area within the Establishment not accessible during such display to all
other persons in the Establishment, or while the person is in an area in
which the Person is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such
display from the view of all Persons within the Establishment.



      PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any Dwelling, house, Building, or other
Structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such Dwelling, house,
Building, or other Structure.



      PRIVATE PROPERTY.  All privately owned property that is not
classified within the definition of Public Property.



      PRIVATE RECEPTACLE.  A Litter storage and collection receptacle
established for private use and operated in conformity with the Code.



      PROPERTY APPRAISER.  The Broward County Property Appraiser.



      PRUNE (Tree Preservation).  The removal or trimming of dead,
dying, diseased, weak, or objectionable branches in a manner consistent with
the standard established in the definition of Tree Abuse and Chapter 122.



      PUBLIC PARK (Public Parks, Recreation and Special Events).  Any
Public Park, recreation, or playground area or any Building or facility
thereon within the City which is owned, leased, managed, or maintained as a
Public Park, regardless of whether the area has been formally dedicated to
the City for such purpose.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any and all Property, Building, Rights-Of-Way or
portions thereof, owned by the City.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any property owned by a governmental entity.



      PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS (Telecommunications).  Any and all
wireless communications to and from police, fire, and other Emergency
services operating within the City.



      PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL.  Includes members of a Police
Department, Fire Rescue Services, and other City personnel with
responsibility for life or health related emergencies.



      PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT (Acquisition of Goods and Services and
Disposal of City Property).  A Building, road, Street, Sewer, Storm Drain,
water system, site development, Irrigation system, reclamation project, gas,
or electrical distribution system, gas or electrical substation, or other
facility, project or portion thereof, including repair, renovation or
remodeling, owned in whole or in part by the City.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).  A “treatment works”
as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) that is owned by the City of
Weston or City of Sunrise, Florida. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, Recycling, and
reclamation of Sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey Wastewater to a Treatment Plant.



      RECONNAISSANCE LEVEL ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY.  A cursory
archaeological survey generally conducted to identify and map sites and to
obtain data on site types and distribution. Field methodology in this type of
survey involves surface collection, as well as limited subsurface testing.



      RECREATIONAL FACILITY.  A Building or complex of Buildings where
activities relating to organized sports, cultural or other similar activities
are conducted or held.



      RECURRING LOCAL SERVICE REVENUES (Telecommunications).  The
revenue derived by a provider from local service, as defined by Florida
Statutes and provided within the corporate limits of the City.



      RECYCLABLE MATERIAL (Solid Waste).  The term has the meaning
given in F.S. Chapter 403.



      RECYCLING (Solid Waste).  The term has the meaning given in F.S.
Chapter 403.



      RECYCLING CART (Solid Waste).  A receptacle authorized and
approved by the City Manager for the Collection of Recyclable Material from
residential service units.



      REFUELING FROM TANK VEHICLE.  The dispensing of Class I, Class
II or Class III liquids in the open to a Motor Vehicle located at commercial,
industrial, manufacturing establishments, Construction sites or other
locations intended for fueling vehicles used in connection with their
businesses.



      REFUSE (Solid Waste).  All putrescible and nonputrescible Solid
Wastes (except body wastes), including Garbage, Rubbish, ashes, Street
cleanings, dead Animals, Abandoned automobiles, and solid market and
industrial wastes.



      REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION NETWORK or REGIONAL ROAD NETWORK.  Those
Roadways shown on the Broward County Trafficways Plan promulgated by the
Broward County Planning Council pursuant to Chapter 59-1154, Laws of Florida,
and the Broward County Charter, or on the Broward County Long Range
Transportation Plan, promulgated by the Broward County Metropolitan Planning
Organization, or for which Right-Of-Way has been delineated by the Board of
County Commissioners pursuant to Chapter 71-561, Laws of Florida, and the
Broward County Charter.



      REGISTRANT or FACILITY OWNER (Telecommunications).  A
Communications Services Provider, Cable or Video Service Provider or other
Person that has registered with the City in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter.



      RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS.  Churches and ecclesiastical or
denominational organizations or established physical places for worship in
this State at which nonprofit religious services and activities are regularly
conducted and carried on, and also means church cemeteries.



      RELOCATION  (Historic Preservation).  The movement of a
Historic Resource, including movement on its own site. Relocation shall also
include the introduction of a Historic Resource or previously nondesignated
resource onto the site of a Historic Resource.



      REPEAT VIOLATION.  A violation of a provision of a code or
ordinance by a Person who has been previously found through a code
enforcement board or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process to have
violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five Years
prior to the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different
locations.



      RESERVE STRIP.  A piece of land or line on one side of a Street
in the control of the Owner of the land on the opposite side of the Street
that prevents access to the Street by Development immediately beyond the
piece of land or line.



      RESERVOIR AREA.  An area not on the Public Right-Of-Way that is
provided for the temporary use of vehicles waiting to enter or leave a
vehicle oriented service, or an off-Street Parking facility.



      RESIDE OR RESIDENCE (Sexual Violator).  To have a place where a
person abides, lodges, or lives for three or more consecutive days, or for a
period of three or more days in the aggregate during any 12 month period.



      RESIDENTIAL AREA (Motor Vehicles and Vessels).  Any areas zoned
primarily or exclusively for Single-Family or multi-family residential use.



      RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  A Parcel of Land whose land use or zoning
permits Single-Family, Duplex, townhomes and/or multi-family Dwelling Units.
Hotels, Motels, Timeshares and Common Areas or community property within a
residential community are not included in the definition of Residential
Property.



      RESIDENTIAL TRASH (Solid Waste).  Every waste accumulation of
paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other material of any kind
that is usually attendant to housekeeping.



      RESOURCE RECOVERY SYSTEM (Solid Waste).  The resource recovery
facilities that are constructed, operated, and maintained, or caused to be
constructed, operated, and maintained, pursuant to the Interlocal Agreement.



      RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  One or more Persons or any combination
thereof who cause or allow the Discharge of Hazardous Substances that
requires action by the Fire Department of the City or its authorized agents
in order to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.



      RESTAURANT.  Any establishment that has more than six indoor
seats and serves food for consumption on the Premises.



      RESTORATION (Telecommunications).  The process by which
Rights-Of-Way are returned to a condition as good or better than existed
before the Construction.



      RETAIL TOBACCO SHOP (Prohibited Acts). Any Enclosed Indoor
Workplace dedicated to or predominantly for the retail sale of tobacco,
tobacco products, and accessories for such products, in which the sale of
other products or services is merely incidental. Any Enclosed Indoor
Workplace of a business that manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco
products or of a tobacco leaf dealer is a business dedicated to or
predominantly for the retail sale of tobacco and tobacco products when, as a
necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing,
importing, or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual retail sale of
such tobacco or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked or a
lighted tobacco product is tested.



      RETAIL VAPORIZER SHOP (Prohibited Acts). Any Enclosed Indoor
Workplace dedicated to or predominantly for the retail sale of Nicotine
Vaporizers, Liquid Nicotine products, and accessories for such products, in
which the sale of other products or services is merely incidental. Any
Enclosed Indoor Workplace of a business that manufactures, imports, or
distributes Nicotine Vaporizers or Liquid Nicotine products is a business
dedicated to or predominantly for the retail sale of Nicotine Vaporizers and
Liquid Nicotine products when, as a necessary and integral part of the
process of making, manufacturing, importing, or distributing a Nicotine
Vaporizer or Liquid Nicotine product for the eventual retail sale of such
product. Liquid Nicotine or other nicotine products are heated to provide a
vapor or a Nicotine Vaporizer or Liquid Nicotine product is tested.



      RETENTION AREA.  An area designated to prevent Stormwater runoff
from direct discharge into receiving waters.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY.



         IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY or IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
(Telecommunications).  In, on, over, under or across the Public
Rights-Of-Way.



         RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE.  That area privately owned but
dedicated and/or used for Street purposes, including but not limited to
Roadways, Swales, bike paths, and Sidewalks, by the residents of the
community. This definition excludes parking lots and their access roads.



         RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC.  All that area dedicated to public
use or otherwise owned by a public agency for public Street purposes and
shall include, but not be limited to, any public Streets, Roadways, Swales,
bike paths, and Sidewalks.



         RIGHT-OF-WAY, ULTIMATE.  The area created for public
Roadway purposes including all required and necessary dedications,
reservations and easements have been made or easements have been granted.



         RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE.  The line where the property meets the
Public Right-Of-Way at a public Street or public waterway, provided that this
definition shall not include alleys, easements, or other similar dedicated
uses.



         RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, ULTIMATE.  That line that separates the
Ultimate Right-Of-Way from the remaining Private Property.



         RIGHT-OF-WAY VENDOR OR SOLICITOR.  Any Person who
personally hands to or seeks to transmit by hand or receive by hand any thing
of any kind, whether or not payment in exchange is required or requested, to
any Person who operates or occupies a Motor Vehicle of any kind, which
vehicle is engaged in travel on or within any portion of any of the roads
designated in § 71.10, whether or not such vehicle is temporarily Stopped in
the travel lanes of the road. The term shall not apply to any Person who does
not enter into any portion of the Roadway or its Median.



         RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  The surface and space above and below any
real property in which an entity has an interest in Law or equity, whether
held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee, including, but not
limited to any Street, boulevard, road, Highway, freeway, lane, alley, court,
Sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, Public Park, Swale,
neutral ground, Median or any other place, area, or real property owned or
controlled by the entity.



         RIGHTS-OF-WAY, PUBLIC.  A public Utility Easement,
Highway, Street, Sidewalk, alley, bridge, tunnel, pier, waterway, dock,
wharf, court, lane, or path, or any other property for which the City is the
authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to
such property pursuant to applicable Law, and includes the surface, the air
space over the surface and the area below the surface to the extent the City
holds a property interest therein. Public Rights-Of-Way shall not include
Private Property. Public Rights-Of-Way shall not include any real or personal
City property except as described above and shall not include CityBuildings,
fixtures, Poles, conduits, drainage, facilities or other Structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the Public
Rights-Of-Way.



      ROADWAY.  The portion of a paved Right-Of-Way for vehicular use,
and bicycle use within a bicycle lane.



      ROOF.  The exterior upper covering of a Building.



      ROPE RESCUE.  Any rescue attempt requiring rope and related
equipment to safely gain access to, and remove victims from, a hazardous
exterior Environment.



      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE (Telecommunications).  Maintenance or repair
of a Registrant’s facilities that does not entail or include any digging,
Excavation or Construction in or Restoration of the non-Pervious Areas of
City ’s Rights-Of-Way and that will be completed within one work day.
Routine Maintenance shall not include removal of mature plant material. No
permit shall be required for Routine Maintenance. However, Persons performing
Routine Maintenance shall give prior notice to the City of expected work days
and locations.



      RUBBISH (Solid Waste).  Nonputrescible Solid Waste consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, and similar materials.



      SANITARY SEWAGE (Utilities).  That type of Sewage normally
originating from Dwelling Units, that is, Sewage generated by bathrooms,
preparation and serving of food for family consumption, and laundry in
family-size loads. Sewage introduced into the CitySewer System by a
Commercial or Industrial Customer shall be considered to be Sanitary Sewage
only if its potential as a hazard to public health and safety or as an
adverse impact upon the Sewer System and/or the Sewer treatment processes is
similar to or less severe than caused by Sewage normally originating from
Dwelling Units. The following are some, but not necessarily all, of the
criteria that shall be used in identifying Sanitary Sewage. If any one of
these criteria is exceeded, then the Sewage in question automatically shall
be considered as not being Sanitary Sewage. The potential as a hazard or
adverse impact of any characteristic not listed herein shall be determined by
the City on a case-by-case basis.



 


Characteristics

 

Maximum (or Minimum) for Sanitary Sewage (ppm)





BOD
 

300



Suspended Solids
 

300



Grease, Fat, or Oil
 

100 - Instantaneous; 20 - Daily Average



Chlorine Demand
 

15



Surfactants (MBAS)
 

2



Nitrogen, Total
 

35



Phosphorus, Total
 

10



Sulfides
 

0.2



Dissolved Oxygen
 

Minimum 1 ppm



pH
 

9.5 Maximum; 5.5 Minimum



Temperature
 

150°F



Heavy Metals, Phenols, and Other Toxic or Poisonous Substances
 

Zero





 



      SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES (Engineering Standards).  Structures
or piping systems designed for the collection, transmission, treatment, or
disposal of Sewage and includes gravity Sewers, manholes, Lift Stations,
Force Mains, interceptors, Treatment Plants and disposal systems.



      SCALE TOLERANCE (Commercial Vehicles).  The allowable deviation
from legal weights established in § 73.05 of the Code.



      SCHEDULE OF FEES. A schedule adopted by resolution from time to
time setting forth all charges, fees and deposits required by the City .



      SCHOOL.



         SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR SECONDARY.  An institution of
learning, whether public or private, that conducts regular classes and
courses of study required for accreditation as an elementary or Secondary
School approved by the Florida Department of Education.



         SCHOOL, PRIVATE.  An institution and attendant Building(s)
used for educational or training purposes that is not operated by the School
Board of Broward County and whose major source of funding is not from any
governmental agency, including elementary, middle, high, vocational and
technical schools.



         SCHOOL, PUBLIC.  An institution and attendant Building(s)
used for educational or training purposes that is operated by the School
Board of Broward County or whose major source of funding is from any
governmental agency, including elementary, middle, high, charter, vocational
and technical schools.



      SEARCH AREA (Telecommunications).  The geographic area, in which
a Wireless Communications Facility must be located in order to provide FCC
required coverage, as certified through an affidavit by a radio frequency
Engineer as to radio frequency waves or other such appropriate technical
expert.



      SEASONAL DELIVERY PERSONNEL.  Any employees of a licensed
commercial delivery service that has at least 10,000 Persons employed in this
State.



      SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS (Historic Preservation). 
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and
Reconstructing Historic Buildings, and Archaeological Documentation, codified
at 36 C.F.R. Part 68, and the Archaeological Program, codified at 36 C.F.R.
Part 79, published by the United States Department of the Interior, and those
guidelines developed by the Secretary of the Interior to guide work
undertaken on Historic and Archaeological Resources.



      SECURE.  In reference to items, includes fastening down or
removing all potentially hazardous objects such as Construction shacks,
temporary toilets, Roofing tile, Building materials, Trash, forms, insecure
Structures, temporary electric service Poles, furniture, potted plants,
ornaments and similar items.



      SELF-SUPPORT TOWER (Telecommunications).  A tapered Structure
broad at the base and more narrow at the top consisting of cross-members and
diagonal bracing and without guyed support, also known as Lattice Towers.



      SELF-STORAGE FACILITY.  A Structure containing separate,
individual and private storage space of various sizes, rented to individual
Tenants.



      SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



         SERVICE CONNECTION (Utilities).  A Water Service
Connection and/or Sewer Service Connection.



         SERVICE CONNECTION, SEWER (Utilities).  The fitting to
which the property Owner’s Plumbing is connected, the clean-out and
temporary plug, and any markings or devices installed as an aid to locating
the Service Connection.



         SERVICE CONNECTION, WATER (Utilities).  The Utility owned
meter box or vault, together with all of its contents, and any valve and
valve box installed immediately adjacent to the public side of the meter box
or vault.



      SERVICE INTERRUPTION (Telecommunications).  The loss of picture
or sound on one or more cable or Video Service ProviderChannels.



      SERVICE LATERAL (Utilities).  A pipe which connects a Service
Connection to a water distribution main or Sewer main.



      SERVICE TIER (Telecommunications).  A category of Cable Service
provided by a franchisee and for which a separate charge is made by the
franchisee.



      SERVICES/SYSTEM (Telecommunications).  Open Video Service or
Telecommunications Services or both.



      SETBACKS.



         SETBACK, FRONT.  The minimum space required between the
front of any Structure and its corresponding property line.



         SETBACK, REAR.  The minimum space required between the
rear of any Structure and its corresponding property line.



         SETBACK, SIDE.  The minimum space required between the
side of any Structure and its corresponding property line.



      SEVERE WEATHER.  The weather conditions expected or occurring
when the appropriate governmental entity gives the following weather notices:
tropical storm watch, tropical storm warning, Hurricane Watch or hurricane
warning.



      SEWAGE (Utilities).  Liquid wastes and waterborne Solid Wastes
originating from residential, commercial, or industrial establishments,
together with such ground water, surface water, or Storm Drainage as may
unintentionally enter into the Sewer System.



      SEWER or SEWER SYSTEM (Utilities).  A network of gravity mains,
pump stations, and Force Mains used to transport Sewage from points of origin
to a treatment/disposal plant.



      SEXUAL VIOLATOR.  Any person who has been convicted of or who
has had adjudication withheld for any felony sexual offense in any state in
the United States at any time in which the victim of the offense was less
than 16 years of age, as that term was applied and used by the state in which
the person was convicted.



      SHRUB (Landscaping).  A bushy, woody plant usually with several
permanent stems, and usually not less than 24 inches upon installation and
not over ten feet high at maturity.



      SIDEWALK.  A concrete or asphalt surface designed primarily for
pedestrians.



      SIGNS.



         SIGN.  Any device or representation for visual
communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to
the attention of others, or identifying an establishment, product or service,
that is projected onto any surface or into the sky, and that is affixed or
attached to Premises, real property, fixtures on real property, or a
vehicle.  A sign that is not visible from any nearby Public Property or
Public Place, including without limitation a Public Right-Of-Way and a
Private Right-of-Way that is accessible to the public, is not a Sign subject
to regulation under Chapter 126.



         SIGN, ABANDONED.  A Sign communicating a subject on behalf
of a Tenant or property owner that is no longer associated with the Sign
location, or identifying an establishment, product or service that is no
longer present at the Sign location or no longer exists.  Noncommercial
signs that do not relate to an event or timeframe shall not be considered
abandoned unless the current Tenant or property owner affirms that such signs
are no longer communicating a message on their behalf.



         SIGN, ANIMATED.  A Sign depicting action, motion, light or
color changes through electrical or mechanical means, or that make noise,
sound, or music.



         SIGN, AWNING.  A Sign that is mounted on or attached to
any awning or canopy.



         SIGN, BANNER.  A Sign that is not permanently affixed to
any Structure, having the characters, letters, illustrations, or
ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind with only such
material for a backing. Banner Signs shall include any animated, rotating, or
fluttering devices designated to attract attention.



         SIGN, BUILDING ENTRANCE.  An additional Wall Sign for a
main entrance to a Building.



         SIGN, CANOPY.  A Sign that is suspended from, attached to,
supported from, or forming a part of a canopy.



         SIGN, DIRECTIONAL.



         (1)   A Sign permanently erected or permitted directing
an individual to a location of ingress or egress to or from the property.



         (2)   A Sign permanently erected or permitted
identifying a Building or Buildings .



         Color and lettering of Directional Signs shall be uniform
throughout a premises or master planned development.



         SIGN, DIRECTORY.  A Sign identifying the names, uses, or
locations of more than one Business, activity, or Professional Office
conducted within a Building, group of Buildings, or commercial center or
office park.



         SIGN, FIXED PROJECTING.  A Sign affixed to the exterior
wall of a Building or Structure with the Sign Face(s) not parallel to the
plane of such wall.



         SIGN, FLAT.  A Sign erected parallel to and extending not
more than 12 inches from the Façade of any Building to which it is attached
and supported throughout its entire length by the Façade and not extending
above the Façade.



         SIGN, FREESTANDING.  A Sign supported by a Sign Structure
secured in the ground that is wholly independent of any Building, fence,
vehicle, or object other than the Sign Structure for support.



         SIGN, HANGING.  A Sign that hangs down and is supported by
or attached to the underside of a canopy, awning, marquee, or extension of a
Structure.



         SIGN, MONUMENT.  Any Freestanding Sign supported by a
solid Structure containing a Sign Face that is supported solely by its own
ground-mounted base and that is not attached or affixed in any way to a
Building or other Structure.



         SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL.  A Sign that does not contain copy
that advertises the availability of any commercial merchandise, service,
institution, Residential use available for sale or lease, entertainment, or
activity.



         SIGN, OFF-PREMISES.  A Sign identifying, advertising, or
directing the public to a Commercial Establishment , merchandise, service,
institution, entertainment, or activity which is located, sold, rented,
based, produced, manufactured, or taking place at a location other than on
the Premises on which the Sign is located. For the purposes of zoning review,
an Off-Premises Sign shall constitute a Principal Use of the property on
which it is located.



         SIGN, PAINTED.  A Sign painted directly on any exterior
Building wall or door surface, exclusive of window and door glass areas.



         SIGN, POLE.  A Sign that has a visible pole Structure.



         SIGN, PROJECTED.  Any image projected onto any surface or
into the sky for the purpose of drawing the attention of the public or
identifying an establishment, product or service.



         SIGN, PROJECTING.  A Sign projecting from the outside wall
or walls of any Building that is supported by only one rigid support.



         SIGN, REAL ESTATE LEASING.  A Sign erected by the Owner or
his or her agent advertising the Premises or real property upon which the
Sign is located for rent or lease.



         SIGN, REAL ESTATE SALE.  A Sign erected by the Owner or
his or her agent advertising the real property upon which the Sign is located
for sale.



         SIGN, ROOF.  A Sign erected over or on, and wholly or
partially dependent upon, the Roof of any Building for support, or attached
to the Roof in any way.



         SIGN, SNIPE.  A Sign that is fastened or attached to
another Sign.



         SIGN, TEMPORARY.  Any Sign to be displayed for a limited
period of time, as specified in Chapter 126.



         SIGN, VEHICLE.  Any Sign attached, either permanently or
temporarily, to any type of vehicle.



         SIGN, WALL.  Any Sign attached to any exterior Building
wall or door surface, exclusive of window and door glass areas, that is
parallel to the plane of the wall.



         SIGN, WARNING.  Any Sign indicating danger or warning of a
hazardous physical condition to pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists.



         SIGN, WINDOW.  Any Sign that is painted on, applied to,
attached to or projected upon or within the exterior or interior of a
Building glass area, including doors, or located within 15 feet of the
interior of a Building glass area, including doors, or any interior
illuminated Signs whose identification, message, symbol, insignia, visual
representation, Logo-type or any other form that communicates information can
be read from Off-Premises contiguous property or Public Rights-Of-Way.



      SIGN AREA.  Sign Area shall be computed by means of the smallest
square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination of shapes that will
encompass the outer limits of the writing, representation, emblem, Logo or
other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part
of the background of the display or area used to differentiate the Sign from
the backdrop against which it is placed. Sign Area shall not include any
supporting framework, bracing, or wall when such Structure otherwise meets
the regulations of this Code and is incidental to the display itself. Signs
comprised of individual elements attached to a Building wall shall be
measured as one unit, when the distance between the Sign elements is less
than two times the dimension of each element. When the faces of a
double-faced Sign are parallel, only one side shall be counted in computing
Sign Area. If the two faces of such double-faced Sign are of unequal area,
the larger Sign Face shall be considered the area of the Sign. Where the Code
establishes a Maximum Combined Sign Area requirement for a sign type, it
shall mean the sum of the Sign Areas of all of the Signs of that type on a
parcel.



      SIGN FACE.  The part of the Sign that is or can be used to
identify, advertise, or communicate information or for visual representation
that attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. Sign Face includes
any background material, panel, trim, color, and direct or self-illumination
used that differentiates the sign from the Building, Structure, backdrop
surface, or object upon which or against which it is placed. The Sign
Structure shall not be included as a portion of the Sign Face provided that
no message, symbol, or any of the aforementioned Sign Face criteria are
displayed on or designed as part of the Sign Structure.



      SIGN STRUCTURE.  A supporting Structure erected or intended for
the purpose of identification, with or without a Sign thereon, situated upon
or attached to the Premises, upon which any Sign may be fastened, affixed,
displayed, or applied; however, this definition shall not include a Building
or fence.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (Utilities).



      (1)   A user subject to categorical Pretreatment standards; or



      (2)   A user that:



      (2)(a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process Wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown Wastewater );



      (2)(b)   Contributes a process wastestream that makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTWTreatment Plant ; or



      (2)(c)   Is designated as such by the City on the basis that
is has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW ’s operation
or for violating any Pretreatment standard or requirement.



      SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICE. Any Device that is available to play
or operate a Computer Simulation of any Game through the use of skill, the
application of the element of chance, or both, and which may deliver or
entitle the Person or Persons playing or operating the Device to a Payoff, or
may notify or announce said Payoff to the Person or Persons playing.



      SINGLE-FAMILY.  One Dwelling Unit, other than a Mobile Home,
sharing no walls with another Dwelling Unit.



      SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE.  A detached Single-Family home.



      SITE ASSESSMENT SURVEY.  A systematic archaeological survey
utilizing field methodology based on the types of sites known or expected to
be present in the survey area. Field methodology in this type of survey
involves subsurface testing at depths and intervals sufficient to leave
little doubt that all or nearly all sites in the survey were:



      (1)   Identified;



      (2)   Bounded horizontally and vertically;



      (3)   Presented in the resulting report at a level sufficient
to permit:



      (3)(a)   An assessment of National Register eligibility, and



      (3)(b)   Recommendations of appropriate site treatments; and



      (4)   Recorded and submitted to the Florida Site File in an
accepted form (i.e., on standard Florida Site File forms with photographic
and map attachments).



      SLOT MACHINE (Simulated Gambling Device). Any Device as specified
in F.S. § 849.16.



      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY (Telecommunications).  A wireless
facility that meets the following qualifications:



      (1)   Each Antenna associated with the facility is located
inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of
Antennas that have exposed elements, each Antenna and all of its exposed
elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in
volume; and



      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.  The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services, and Utility Poles or other
support structures.



      SOLID WASTE.  All waste accumulations consisting of Garbage,
residential/household Trash, commercial/business Trash, and Construction and
Demolition Debris.



      SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES ASSESSED COST.  The amount
determined by the City Commission to be assessed in any Fiscal Year to fund
all or any portion of the cost of the provision of curb-side residential
Solid Waste and Recyclable materials collection, disposal and Recycling
services, facilities, or programs.



      SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES ASSESSMENT.  A Special
Assessment lawfully imposed by the City against Assessed Property to fund all
or any portion of the cost of the provision of curb-side residential Solid
Waste and Recyclable Materials collection, disposal and Recycling services,
facilities, or programs providing a special benefit to property as a
consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or
characteristics of the Assessed Property.



      SOURCE SEPARATED (Solid Waste).  The Recovered Materials that
are separated from Solid Waste where the Recovered Materials and Solid Waste
are generated. The term does not require that various types of Recovered
Materials be separated from each other and recognizes de minimis Solid Waste,
in accordance with industry standards and practices, may be included with the
Recovered Materials . Garbage may not be commingled with Recyclable Material.
“De minimis” shall be construed to be less than 5% by volume. Any
container that has more than 5% Garbage mixed with Recyclable Material shall
be deemed to be Garbage and disposed of accordingly.



      SPECIAL MAGISTRATE.  Any Person or Persons appointed by the City
Manager to hear code enforcement violation cases.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS (Adult Business).



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:



      (1)(a)   Human genitals, pubic region.



      (1)(b)   Full anal cleft or cleavage.



      (1)(c)   That portion of the human female breast encompassed
within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to
intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola, including the
areola; this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, but shall not include a portion of the cleavage of the human
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or
other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



      SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT (Adult Business).



      (1)   A violation of Code §§ 86.01 et seq.;



      (2)   A felony;



      (3)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 794, (Sexual Battery);



      (4)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 796, (Prostitution);



      (5)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 800, (Lewdness; Indecent
Exposure);



      (6)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 826, (Bigamy; Incest);



      (7)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 847, (Obscene Literature;
Profanity);



      (8)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 831, (Forgery;
Counterfeiting);



      (9)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 837, (Perjury);



      (10)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 843, (Obstructing
Justice);



      (11)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 849, (Gambling);



      (12)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 893, (Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control);



      (13)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 895, (Racketeering;
Illegal Debts);



      (14)   An offense under F.S. Chapter 896, (Offenses Related to
Financial Transactions); or



      (15)   An offense under an analogous statute of a state other
than Florida, or under an analogous ordinance of another county or city.



      SPECIFIED CRIMINAL OFFENSE.



      (1)   A conviction under F.S. § 60.05, (Nuisance Abatement);



      (2)   A conviction under F.S. §§ 480.043, 480.046, 480.047,
480.048, or 480.049, or subsequent regulation;



      (3)   A conviction under F.S. Chapter 561 (Beverage Law ;
Administration) or Chapter 562 (Beverage Law ; Enforcement); or



      (4)   A judgment against or conviction under F.S. Chapter 823
(Public Nuisances).



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES (Adult Business).



      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal, or tumescence; or



      (2)   Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery,
cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, masochism,
masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism
sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or



      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, or female breast; or



      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with the
activities set forth in subsections (1)—(3) above.



      SPORTS  LEAGUE OFFICIAL.  Any Person who is authorized by a
sports league to work as a coach, assistant coach, trainer, team manager,
referee or any other position for 20 or more hours within a Year, who has
direct contact with one or more minors at City facilities, courts or playing
fields, whether for compensation or as a volunteer.



      STABLE.  A facility where horses are boarded and/or offered for
rental.



      STAND or STANDING (Motor Vehicles and Vessels).  The halting of
a vehicle, for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or
discharging passengers or goods.



      STAND-ALONE BAR (Prohibited Acts). Any licensed premises devoted
during any time of operation predominantly or totally to serving alcoholic
beverages, intoxicating beverages, or intoxicating liquors, or any
combination thereof, for consumption on the licensed premises; in which the
serving of food, if any, is merely incidental to the consumption of any such
beverage; and the licensed premises is not located within, and does not share
any common entryway or common indoor area with, any other Enclosed Indoor
Workplace, including any business for which the sale of food or any other
product or service is more than an incidental source of gross revenue. A
place of business constitutes a Stand-Alone Bar in which the service of food
is merely incidental if the licensed premises derives no more than 10 percent
of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the licensed premises.



      STATE.  The State of Florida and its various departments,
agencies, and boards.



      STATE OF THE ART (Telecommunications).  Existing technology
where the level of facilities, technical performance, capacity, equipment,
components and personal wireless service is equal to that developed and
demonstrated to be as technologically advanced and generally available for
comparable service areas in South Florida.



      STEALTH or STEALTH FACILITY OR TOWER (Telecommunications).  Any
wireless Telecommunications Facility that is designed to blend into the
surrounding Environment. Examples of such facilities include, but are not
limited to, architecturally screened Roof mounted Antenna, Building-mounted
Antenna, Antenna painted to match the Existing Structure, Antenna integrated
into architectural elements, alternative Tower Structures or other similar
Structures.



      STOP or STOPPING (Motor Vehicles and Vessels).  Any halting,
even momentarily, of a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other Traffic or to comply with the direction of a LawEnforcement Officer or
Traffic control Sign or signal.



      STOP THE BLEED KIT (SBK).  A collection of equipment housed in a
container that displays the universal medical symbol that is used to attempt
to control bleeding from a patient who has suffered a traumatic injury,
capable of stopping severe bleeding through clotting, pressure, tourniquets,
and other proven effective means of stopping blood loss.



      STORM DRAIN or STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM (Utilities).  A system of
conduits, open channels, and/or sloped ground intended to restrict and/or
direct the flow of run-off resulting from rainfall. All run-off from any
source, including BuildingRoofs and surfaces, shall be directed to a Storm
Drain. There shall be no intentional connections between any Storm Drain and
any Sewer, and both type systems shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained in such a manner as to minimize the likelihood of any
unintentional introduction of run-off or ground water into a Sewer, and vice
versa.



      STORMWATER (Utilities).  The flow of water that results from,
and which occurs during and immediately following a rainfall event.



      STORY.  The portion of a Building that is between one finished
floor level and the next higher finished floor level or the Roof.



      STREET or HIGHWAY.  A Right-Of-Way for purposes of travel by
vehicular means, including the entire area within the Right-Of-Way.



      STREET FRONTAGE.  The portion of property that is adjacent and
parallel to a Public or Private Right-Of-Way used as a thoroughfare by Motor
Vehicles.



      STRUCTURAL COLLAPSE RESCUE.  Those rescues from exterior or
interior Environments involving abrupt failure or partial failure of a
Structure resulting in the creation of Debris and voids.



      STRUCTURAL DEBRIS (Emergency Management).  Debris resulting from
damage to structural improvements to land, including but not limited to
screen enclosures, Roof tiles or shingles, gutters, windows, aluminum siding,
bricks, stucco, wood trim, drywall and carpet. This definition excludes floor
tiles, appliances, fixtures, furniture and clothing.



      STRUCTURALLY SIMILAR (Synthetic Cannabinoid). Chemical
substitutions off a common chemical backbone associated with synthetic
cannabinoids or synthetic cannabinoid-mimicking compounds listed in the
controlled substance schedules in F.S. Chapter 893, or otherwise prohibited
by federal or state law.



      STRUCTURALLY SIMILAR (Synthetic Stimulants). Chemical
substitutions off a common chemical backbone associated with cathinone,
methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine,
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), 3,4-methylenedioxymethcathinone,
3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), methylmethcathinone,
methoxymethcathinone, methylethcathinone, fluoromethcathinone, BZP
(benzylpiperazine), fluorophenylpiperazine, methylphenylpiperazine,
chlorophenylpiperazine, methoxyphenylpiperazine, DBZP
(1,4-dibenzylpiperazine), TFMPP (3-Trifluoromethylphenylpiperazine), MBDB
(Methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), 5-Hydroxy-alpha-methyltryptamine,
5-Hydroxy-N-methyltryptamine, 5-Methoxy-N-methyl-N-isopropyltryptamine,
5-Methoxy-alpha-methyltryptamine, methyltryptamine,
5-Methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine, 5-Methyl-N,N-dimethyltryptamine, Tyramine
(4-Hydroxyphenethylamine), 5-Methoxy-N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine, DiPT
(N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine), DPT (N,N-Dipropyltryptamine),
4-Hydroxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine, N,N-Diallyl-5-Methoxytryptamine, DOI
(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine), DOC (4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine),
2C-E (4-Ethyl-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine), 2C-T-4
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-isopropylthiophenethylamine), 2C-C
(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine), 2C-T
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylthiophenethylamine), 2C-T-2
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylthiophenethylamine), 2C-T-7
(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylthiophenethylamine), 2C-I
(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine), Butylone
(beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylpropylamine), Ethcathinone, Ethylone
(3,4-methylenedioxy-N-ethylcathinone), Naphyrone (naphthylpyrovalerone),
N-N-Dimethyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone,
N-N-Diethyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone, 3,4-methylenedioxy-propiophenone,
2-Bromo-3,4-Methylenedioxypropiophenone,
3,4-methylenedioxy-propiophenone-2-oxime,
N-Acetyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone,
N-Acetyl-N-Methyl-3,4-Methylenedioxycathinone,
N-Acetyl-N-Ethyl-3,4-Methylenedioxycathinone, Bromomethcathinone, Buphedrone
(alpha-methylamino-butyrophenone), Eutylone
(beta-Keto-Ethylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), Dimethylcathinone,
Dimethylmethcathinone, Pentylone (beta-Keto-Methylbenzodioxolylpentanamine),
(MDPPP) 3,4-Methylenedioxy-alpha pyrrolidinopropiophenone, (MDPBP)
3,4-Methylenedioxy-alpha pyrrolidinobutiophenone,
Methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MOPPP),
Methyl-alpha-pyrrolidinohexiophenone (MPHP), Benocyclidine (BCP),
benzothiophenylcyclohexylpiperidine (BTCP), Fluoromethylaminobutyrophenone
(F-MABP), Methoxypyrrolidinobutyrophenone (MeO-PBP),
Ethyl-pyrrolidinobutyrophenone (Et-PBP), 3-Methyl-4-Methoxymethcathinone
(3-Me-4-MeO-MCAT), Methylethylaminobutyrophenone (Me-EABP),
Methylamino-butyrophenone (MABP), Pyrrolidinopropiophenone (PPP),
Pyrrolidinobutiophenone (PBP), Pyrrolidinovalerophenone (PVP),
Methyl-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MPPP) or related salts, isomers, and
salts of isomers, listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S.
Chapter 893, as amended, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law.



      STRUCTURALLY SOUND.  The absence of imperfections, wear and
damage that could adversely impact the intended use of the Structure.



      STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed, assembled, or erected,
installed or portable, the use of which requires a location on a Parcel of
Land. It includes a movable Structure while it is located on land and which
can be used for housing, Business, commercial, industrial, recreational or
office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. Structure also includes
fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, transmission lines,
tracks, and advertising Signs and tennis courts.



      STRUCTURE, ANTENNA SUPPORT (Telecommunications).  Any Building
or other Structure other than a Tower that can be used for the location of
Telecommunications Facilities.



      SUBSCRIBER (Telecommunications).  Any Person, as defined herein,
who lawfully receives Cable or Video Services delivered over the Cable or
video System. However, notwithstanding anything to the contrary, Subscriber
shall not mean any Homeowner or Condominium Association or other bulk
purchaser unless mandated by FCC rules.



      SUPERMARKET (Business Tax).  A self-service retail Business
selling primarily food, and may also include accessory Businesses such as a
pharmacy, bank or photography lab that are owned by the same taxed Business
entity.



      SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (Utilities).  The collection of
devices, improvements, or natural systems whereby surface waters are
controlled, impounded, or obstructed. The term includes dams, impoundments,
reservoirs, and appurtenant works as defined in F.S. § 373.403(1-4), as well
as all artificial Structures including, but not limited to, ditches, canals,
conduits, channels, culverts, pipes, and other Construction that conveys,
impounds, or controls surface water.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SS (Utilities).  Solid particles floating or
suspended in a liquid that are removable by laboratory filtration.



      SWALE.  The area within a Right-Of-Way that lies between the
Right-Of-Way Line and the edge of the travel lane of the Roadway.



      SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID HERBAL INCENSE.  Aromatic or nonaromatic
plant material containing a Synthetic Drug, or to which a Synthetic Drug has
been sprayed, applied or otherwise added, that is distributed in a loose,
leafy, powder or granular form or in a compressed block or blocks that can be
crushed to result in a powder or granular form, and can be placed into a
pipe, cigarette paper or drug paraphernalia for purposes of ingestion by
smoking, inhaling or other method.



      SYNTHETIC DRUG.  Any chemical or mixture of chemicals, however
packaged, that is Structurally Similar to synthetic cannabinoids or synthetic
cannabinoid-mimicking compounds listed in the controlled substance schedules
in F.S. Chapter 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law. 
Synthetic Drug also shall include any chemical or mixture of chemicals,
however packaged, that mimics the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol (also known
as THC), the main active ingredient found in marijuana. Packaging that
indicates or implies that a product mimics the effects of marijuana, such as
“fake weed” or “fake pot”, shall create a presumption that the
product mimics the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol. Synthetic Drug shall not
include any substance currently listed in the controlled substance schedules
in F.S. Chapter 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law.



      SYNTHETIC STIMULANT.  Any chemical or mixture of chemicals,
however packaged, that has a stimulant effect on the central nervous system
and is Structurally Similar to cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine,
methamphetamine, cocaine, MDMA or any other substance listed in the
definition of Structurally Similar (Synthetic Stimulants), or related salts,
isomers, and salts of isomers, as listed in the controlled substance
schedules in F.S. Chapter 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state
law. Synthetic Stimulant shall also include any chemical or mixture of
chemicals, however packaged, that mimics the pharmacological effects of
cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, MDMA or any
other substance listed in , or related salts, isomers, and salts of isomers.
Packaging  that indicates, suggests or implies that a product mimics the
pharmacological effects of  cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine,
methamphetamine, cocaine, ecstasy or any other substance listed in the
definition of Structurally Similar (Synthetic Stimulants), shall create a
presumption that the product  mimics the effects of the substance. Synthetic
Stimulant shall not include any substance currently listed in the controlled
substance schedules in F.S. Chapter 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal
or state law.



      SYNTHETIC STIMULANT BATH SALTS. Any substance, whether in powder,
crystal, liquid, tablet or capsule form, containing a Synthetic Stimulant or
to which a Synthetic Stimulant has been added or applied, that can be
ingested by smoking, inhaling or other method, regardless of whether the
substance is marketed as not for the purpose of human consumption, and
regardless of how the substance is labeled, including but not limited to bath
salts, insect repellant, plant food, herbs, incense, iPod cleaner, nutrient,
dietary supplement or spice.



      SYSTEM MALFUNCTION (Telecommunications).  Any Cable System
equipment, facility, or signal failure or malfunction that results in the
loss of satisfactory service on one or more Channels to one or more
Subscribers. A malfunction is major if it affects 50 or more Subscribers.



      TABLE, BISTRO.  A round table having a diameter not greater than
31 inches, or a square or rectangular table not having a side greater than 27
inches in length.



      TABLE, DINING.  A round table having a diameter greater than 31
inches, or a square or rectangular table having a side greater than 27 inches
in length.



      TANK VEHICLE.  Any commercial Motor Vehicle that is designed to
transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks having an
individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated
capacity of 1,000 gallons or more that is either permanently or temporarily
attached to the vehicle or the chassis.  A commercial Motor Vehicle
transporting an empty storage container tank, not designed for
transportation, with a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more that is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer is not considered a Tank Vehicle.



      TAX COLLECTOR.  The Broward County Tax Collector.



      TAX ROLL.  The real property ad valorem tax Assessment Roll
maintained by the Property Appraiser for the purpose of the levy and
collection of ad valorem taxes.



      TECHNICAL RESCUE.  Those rescues from exterior Environments
located in greater than a 40 degree inclination, or on such rough terrain
that the operation requires specific Technical Rescue training.



      TECHNICAL RESCUE COSTS (Cost Recovery).  Those necessary and
reasonable costs, over and above those services normally provided, incurred
by the City in connection with responding to, investigating, mitigating,
abating, securing, and decontaminating due to a Technical Rescue incident.
Such costs include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Disposable materials and supplies acquired, consumed,
and expended as a result of the incident.



      (2)   Full cost recovery for compensation of City employees
and/or contractors for the time devoted specifically to the incident.



      (3)   Rental or leasing of equipment used specifically for the
incident.



      (4)   Replacement costs for equipment that is contaminated
beyond reuse or repair as a result of the incident.



      (5)   Decontamination and/or proper disposal of equipment
and/or supplies contaminated during the incident.



      (6)   Special technical services specifically required as a
result of the incident.



      (7)   Other special services specifically required as a result
of the incident (e.g., utilities, etc.).



      (8)   Laboratory costs for purposes of analyzing samples taken
during the incident.



      (9)   Costs associated with the services, supplies, and
equipment procured for a specific extrication.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS.  The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without
change in the form or content of the information sent and received.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.  Any cables, wires, lines, wave
guides, Antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the
direct transmission, retransmission, or reception of Telecommunications which
a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near an Antenna Support
Structure which does not use or cross over, under, or through a Public
Right-Of-Way.



      TENANT.  The term has the meaning given in F.S. § 83.43(4).



      TIMESHARE.  A form of ownership or right to the use of a
property in which multiple parties hold rights to use the property, with each
Owner allotted a specified period of time each Year in which they may use the
property.



      TOWER or TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER.  Any Structure, and support
thereto, designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one
or more Antennas intended for transmitting or receiving Personal Wireless
Services, telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including
alternative Tower Structure, Lattice, Stealth, Monopole, and Guyed Towers.
The term includes radio and television transmission Telecommunications
Towers, microwave Telecommunications Towers, common-Carrier
Telecommunications Towers, and cellular telephone Telecommunications Towers,
among others. Poles are only a support Structure and are not a
Telecommunications Tower.



      TOWNHOUSE.  Two or more Dwelling Units attached by a common wall
with each unit having two or more Stories.



      TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, bicycles and Motor Vehicles, either
singularly or together while using any Street or Roadway.



      TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.  Any Sign, signal, marking or other
device consistent with the Uniform Manual for Traffic Control Devices and
other national standards that is used to regulate, warn or guide Traffic
placed on, over, or adjacent to a Street, Highway, pedestrian facility or
shared use path by authority of the City or other public body having
jurisdiction.



      TRAFFIC LANE.  The portion of the Roadway used for the movement
of vehicles but not including the shoulders, bicycle lanes or parking lot
drive aisles.



      TRAFFICWAY.  Any one of the expressways, principal arterials,
minor arterials, or collector roads shown on the Broward County Trafficways
Plan, promulgated by the Broward County Planning Council, or any delineated
Trafficway shown on the Broward County Delineated Trafficways Plan.



      TRAFFICWAY CORRIDOR.  The land area comprised of a Trafficway
and its intersections, and that part of any intersecting nontrafficway Street
and its intersections that is within either:



      (1)   Any intersecting nontrafficway collector road that is
within 300 feet of the Trafficway as measured along the centerline of the
nontrafficway collector from a point opposite the chord; or



      (2)   Any intersecting Local Street that is within 100 feet of
the Trafficway as measured along the centerline of the Local Street from a
point opposite the chord.



      TRAILER.  Any vehicle that carries Persons or property and is
pulled, or is designed to be pulled, by a Motor Vehicle.



      TRANSACTING COMMERCE (Business Tax).  The buying, selling or
exchange of merchandise, commodities or services.



      TRANSFER OF A FRANCHISE (Telecommunications).



      (1)   Any transaction in which:



      (1)(a)   An ownership or other interest in a franchisee or its
Cable System is transferred from one Person or group of persons to another
Person or group of Persons so that control of a franchisee is transferred; or



      (1)(b)   The rights and/or obligations held by a franchisee
under a Franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another Person,
group of Persons, or business entity.



      (2)   A transfer shall be considered “pro forma” when it
involves a transfer to a Person, group of persons, or business entity wholly
owned by the franchisee and will not result in a change in the control or
ownership of the franchisee.



      TRANSIENT OCCUPANT.  Any Person , or guest or invitee of such
Person who occupies or is in actual or apparent control or possession of
residential property registered or used as a Vacation Rental. It shall be a
rebuttable presumption that any Person who holds themselves out as being an
occupant or guest of an occupant of a Vacation Rental, or a property used as
a Vacation Rental, is a Transient Occupant.



      TRASH.



      (1)   Other vegetable waste not included in the term Garbage
and wastepaper, straw, excelsior, or other Rubbish and waste not connected
with the preparation, distribution, or other Lawn or garden waste.



      (2)   Debris generated in the normal maintenance of
Landscaping (excluding large branches, trunks or stumps of Trees ), bottles,
cans, boxes, small household appliances and other miscellaneous household
Debris .



      TREE, SPECIMEN. Any Tree which has a DBH of eighteen (18) inches
or greater with a condition rating of sixty percent (60%) or greater in
accordance with the condition rating guidelines as specified in the Guide for
Plant Appraisal, 9th edition, as amended; with the exception of the following:



      (1)   Non-native fruit Trees that are cultivated or grown for
the specific purpose of producing edible fruit, including but not limited to:
mangos, avocados, or citrus.



      (2)   Species of the genus Ficus except F. aurea (strangler
fig), F. laevigata (short leaf fig), F. rubiginosa (rusty fig or rusty leaf
fig), F. jacquinifolia.



      (3)   All multi-trunk palms.



      (4)   Trees that are in poor condition or form as determined
by the City.



      TREES.



         TREE.  Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant
which at maturity attains a trunk diameter at least one and one-half inches
or more when measured at a point four and one-half feet above ground level
and which normally attains an overall height of at least 15 feet, usually
with one main stem or trunk and many branches.



         TREE, CONIFER.  Pine Tree, Cypress Tree, or other
cone-bearing seed plant.



         TREE, DICOTYLEDONOUS (DICOT).  A Tree having a woody stem
and branches and leaves with net venation and having a separate, distinct
outer bark which can be peeled from the Tree.



         TREE, MONOCOTYLEDONOUS (MONOCOT).  A palm Tree or a Tree
having fronds with parallel venation and no true woody bark with a minimum
overall natural height of ten feet at maturity.



         TREE, NATIVE.  A Tree of a species identified as native to
this area by the Association of Florida Native Nurseries incorporated herein
by reference. These varieties are recommended for utilization for mitigation
of the relocated or removal Tree replacement described in Chapter 122 herein.



         TREE, SWALE.  Tree planted along improved Rights-Of-Way
typically located between the Sidewalk and edge of Roadway.



      TREE ABUSE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Hatracking a Tree .



      (2)   Pruning that reduces the height or spread of a Tree that
has not attained a height or spread of 30 feet.



      (3)   Cutting upon a Tree which destroys its natural habit of
growth.



      (4)   Pruning that leaves stubs or results in a flush cut; or
splitting of limb ends.



      (5)   Peeling or stripping of bark; or the removal of bark to
the extent that if a line is drawn at any height around the circumference of
the Tree , over one-third of the length of the line falls on portions of the
Tree where bark no longer remains.



      (6)   The use of climbing spikes, nails, or hooks, except for
purposes of total Tree Removal or as specifically permitted by standards set
by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI A300).



      (7)   Pruning that does not conform to standards or
recommendations set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI A300),
with the exception of palm pruning, which shall allow no pruning of fronds
above the horizontal plan.



      (8)   Hammering nails or other piercing devices into a Tree.



      (9)   Girdling of Trees by guying, staking, support, string
trimmers, or non-removal of planting materials from root balls.



      (10)   Lawn mower or mower deck damage inflicted on any
portion of a Tree or palm.



      (11)   Vehicular damage inflicted causing bark removal, Tree
leaning, and/or destruction.



      (12)   Structures being placed or constructed within or on a
Tree.



      (13)   Utilizing any portion of a Tree as a fence post or
similar structural support.



      (14)   Overlifting a Tree.



      (15)   Shaping a Tree.



      TREE BOND.  A certified check or cashier’s check made payable
to the City in an amount equal to no less than 100% of the estimated cost of
installing, maintaining, and warranting the Trees to be removed, relocated,
and/or preserved, and providing a guarantee of replacement by the Applicant,
to be utilized as part of the site plan approval process for existing Trees
on a site plan with relocated Trees denoted for relocation and/or
preservation. This shall include Trees whose Dripline may be encroached upon
during the Construction of the project or any site where specimen Trees
exist. The guarantee of replacement shall extend for a period of one Year
from the approved relocation date. The value shall be submitted by the
registered Landscape Architect who prepared the planting plans or a Certified
Arborist and approved by the City. The value of the bond shall be based upon
a published trade wholesale price list for the DBH replacement value with the
appropriate multiplier, representing maintenance (watering contract for three
months), installation, warranty, and other planting costs factored in. An
initial deposit shall be required, in an amount to be set by resolution, to
cover the fee charged for staff review to determine that successful Tree
relocation, replacement, and protection has been accomplished. Additional
deposits may be required from time to time whenever the account balance
approaches zero.



      TREE CANOPY.  The upper portion of a Tree, consisting of limbs,
branches and leaves.



      TREE PERMIT.  Consists of the application and all necessary
information and fees relating to impact to any existing Trees on site.



      TREE REMOVAL.  To permanently remove the trunk or the trunk and
root system of a Tree.



      TREE SERVICE PROVIDER or ARBORIST.  Any Person who regularly,
for compensation or fee, transplants, maintains, removes, Prunes, trims,
repairs, injects, or performs surgery on a Tree.



      TREE SURVEY.  A depiction of a property showing the location,
size, botanical name and common name of all Trees thereon.



      TRENCHLESS TECHNOLOGY (Telecommunications).  The use of
directional boring, horizontal drilling and micro-tunneling and other similar
techniques in the Construction of underground portions of facilities.



      TWO-WAY CAPABILITY (Telecommunications).  The incorporation into
a Cable System of all appropriate design and engineering characteristics and
features so that two-way transmission, including but not limited to
addressability, over the System can be implemented and activated.



      UNDERGROUND FACILITIES (Telecommunications).  All lines, cables,
conduits, posts, tanks and any other facilities owned or operated by Persons
other than the City which are located wholly or primarily underneath or below
the surface of Rights-Of-Way.  However, City facilities shall be included to
the extent required by F.S. § 166.047.



      UNDERSTORY (Landscaping).  The plant life existing under a Tree
Canopy including ferns, bushes, and Groundcovers.



      UNDEVELOPED LAND.  Land upon which there is no Development.



      UNDEVELOPED PARCEL.  A Parcel of Land upon which there is no
Development.



      UNIFORM ASSESSMENT COLLECTION ACT.  F.S. §§ 197.3632 and
197.3635 or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad
valorem Assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable
regulations promulgated thereunder.



      UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLE.  A type of aircraft that operates
without a human pilot onboard, including but not limited to drones (as
defined in F.S. § 934.50), model airplanes and rockets.



      USABLE LAND.  Land that has adequate public access and which has
been cleared, demucked, and is free from deleterious materials, filled with
good granular material (soil/sand) free from deleterious material, and graded
to a level six inches above the highest existing or proposed adjacent
finished crown of road elevation.



      USE.  Any purpose or activity for which a Structure or a Parcel
of Land is intended, designed, arranged, maintained, or occupied.



      USE FEE (Telecommunications).  The fee paid by a provider to the
City for constructing and maintaining facilities in the Rights-Of-Way.



      USE, COMMERCIAL.  An enterprise that provides goods and/or
services directly to the consumer, where such services are available on
Premises and goods are available for immediate purchase and removal from the
Premises by the purchaser.



      USE, INSTITUTIONAL.  A public or private use that provides a
service, whether educational, health, religious, charitable or governmental
in character, and is operated by a government, utility, college, tax-exempt
or private organization, and/or a Place of Public Assembly. Examples include,
but are not limited to: public agency, library, public safety and Emergency
services, charitable, essential and Utility services, cultural, service and
religious facilities, public/private health facilities or other similar uses.



      UTILITY.  Any public or private facility used for the provision
of services, including, but not limited to, Storm Drainage, sanitary Sewers,
electric power, Potable Water, gas service, cable television, fiber optics
communication, or telephone line, whether underground or overhead.



      UTILITY POLE (Telecommunications).  A pole or similar structure
that is used in whole or in part to provide Communications Services or for
electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar
function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights
but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other
traffic control devices are attached and does not include a pole or similar
structure 15 feet in height or less unless the City grants a waiver for such
pole.



      VACATION RENTAL.  Any Dwelling Unit or group of Dwelling Units
in a condominium or cooperative or any individually or collectively owned
single-family, two-family, three-family, or four-family house or Dwelling
Unit that is rented, in whole or in part, to guests more than three times in
a calendar year for periods of less than 30 days or one calendar month,
whichever is less, or which is advertised or held out to the public as a
place regularly rented to guests, but that is not a timeshare project.



      VACATION RENTAL AGENT.  The Owner or the Person designated by
the Owner of the property to be called upon to answer for the maintenance of
the property and for the conduct and acts of occupants of Vacation Rental
properties.



      VEGETATION, NATIVE (Landscaping).  Any plant species that is
indigenous to all or a part of the State of Florida. Plant species which have
been introduced by humans are not classified as native species.



      VEGETATIVE DEBRIS (Emergency Management).  Debris resulting from
damage to Lawns, plants and Trees, including but not limited to Tree branches
and limbs severed, broken or otherwise hanging from the Tree without being on
the ground, but excluding Tree stumps or limbs with a diameter of at least 24
inches at the widest part.



      VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL.



      (1)   Any:



      (1)(a)   Vehicle that permanently or temporarily displays or
has affixed to it any marking, Sign , lettering, Logo , picture, symbol,
number, or the like, whether alone, or in combination, which identifies or
advertises a business or similar commercial venture or use;



      (1)(b)   Vehicle designed or used for the commercial
transportation of persons, goods, or things when such design or use is
apparent from a visual inspection of the vehicle (e.g., a vehicle which has
seating for more than nine passengers or has attached to it racks, carriers,
or holders for the transport of glass, mirrors, pipes, ladders, equipment, or
other similar item or materials);



      (1)(c)   “Bus,” “farm tractor,” “house Trailer ,”
“maxi-cube vehicle,” “pole Trailer ,” “road tractor,”
“semi-trailer,” “special mobile equipment,” “tandem Trailer
truck,” “ Trailer ,” or “truck tractor” as defined by F.S. §
316.003;



      (1)(d)   Vehicle commonly known as a “step van,”
“wrecker,” “tow-truck,” “hearse,” “ambulance”, “taxicab,”
“well-driller,” and any other similar vehicle so constructed, designed,
or used;



      (1)(e)   Vehicle that exceeds eight feet in height from
pavement to the highest point on the vehicle (including any appurtenances
except Antennas ) and 23 feet in length from outside of the front bumper to
the outside of the rear bumper; or



      (1)(f)   Vehicle that, upon visual inspection, bears the
effect or remnants of regular commercial use, e.g., spilled paint or concrete
overpour in the truckbed or elsewhere on the vehicle, or commercial supplies
or equipment left in the vehicle overnight.



      (2)   This definition does not include passenger or sports
utility vehicles owned by government entities and used as police or fire
vehicles.



      VEHICLE, INOPERATIVE MOTOR.  Any Motor Vehicle that cannot move
under its own power due to defective or missing Parts, provided, however,
that this term does not include vehicles that meet the statutory definition
of street rod, ancient, antique, or collectible that are dormant in one
location no longer than two months.



      VEHICLE, MOTOR.  As defined in F.S. § 320.01.



      VEHICULAR USE AREA.  An area used for the loading, circulation,
access, storage, or Parking of Motor Vehicles.



      VERY LOW INCOME PERSON.  One or more natural Persons or a
family, not including students, that has a total annual anticipated income
for the household that does not exceed 50% of the median annual income, as
published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted
for family size for households within the county. While occupying a rental
unit, a very Low Income Person’s annual anticipated gross income may
increase to an amount not to exceed 140% of 50% of the applicable median
income adjusted for family size.



      VESSEL.  Any watercraft as defined in F.S. § 327.02.



      VIDEO CHANNEL or CHANNEL (Telecommunications).  A portion of the
electromagnetic frequency spectrum that is used in a Cable System and which
is capable of delivering a television Channel, including the associated audio
signal, as television Channel is defined by the FCC by regulation or
otherwise.



      VIDEO PROGRAMMING (Telecommunications).  Programming provided
by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a
television station as set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522(20).



      VIDEO SERVICE (Telecommunications).  Video Programming Services,
including Cable Services, provided through wireline facilities located at
least in part in the Public Rights-Of-Way without regard to delivery
technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not
include any Video Programming provided by a commercial mobile service
provided as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d), Video Programming provided as
part of, and via a service that enables end users to access content,
information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public
internet.



      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER (Telecommunications).  An entity
providing Video Service.



      VILLA.  Two or more Dwelling Units attached by a common wall in
a Building not exceeding one Story.



      VINE (Landscaping).  Any plant with a long, slender stem(s) that
trails or creeps on the ground or climbs by winding itself on a support.



      VIOLATOR.  The Person responsible for the Code violation which,
in the appropriate circumstances, shall be the perpetrator of the violation,
the Owner of the real property or personal property, or the Person legally
responsible for the property upon which the violation occurred.



      WAREHOUSE.  A Structure or location used primarily for the
storage, transfer or distribution of merchandise or commodities.



      WASTEWATER (Utilities).  The combination of liquid and
water-carried pollutants from residences, commercial Buildings, industrial
plants and institutions together with any groundwater, surface runoff or
leachate that may be present.



      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT (Utilities).  That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
Sewage and industrial waste.



      WATER RESOURCE (Utilities).  Any and all water on or beneath the
surface of the ground, including natural or artificial water courses, lakes,
ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing or flowing
beneath the surface of the ground.



      WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION (Utilities).  When sufficient water is
not available to meet present or anticipated needs of Persons using the Water
Resource, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in
total water usage within a particular area to protect the Water Resource from
serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought.



      WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY (Utilities).  That situation when the
powers which can be exercised under Part II of Chapter 40E-21, Florida
Administrative Code, are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety
or welfare, or the health of Animals, fish or aquatic life, or a public water
supply, or commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other
reasonable uses.



      WETLANDS.  As defined in F.A.C. 40E-4.201(44).



      WHIP ANTENNA (Telecommunications).  A cylindrical Antenna that
transmits signals in 360 degrees.



      WILD ANIMAL.  Any nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox,
poisonous snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other Animal so
classified by the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission.



      WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (Telecommunications).  Any
equipment or facility used to provide Personal Wireless Service and may
include, but is not limited to, Antennas, Towers, Equipment Facilities,
cabling, Antenna brackets, and other such equipment. Placing a Wireless
Communications Facility on an existing Structure does not cause the existing
Structure to become a Wireless Communications Facility. It also means
Personal Wireless Services facilities, as defined under federal Law, 47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C), and includes, but is not limited to, Antennas and
radio-transmitting Telecommunications Towers, and associated facilities used
to transmit Telecommunications Signals. Poles are only a support Structure
and are not a Wireless Communications Facility. An open video System is not a
Wireless Communications Facility to the extent that it provides Video
Services; a Cable System is not a Wireless Communications Facility to the
extent that it provides Cable Service.



      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE (Telecommunications).  A freestanding
structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another
existing or proposed Structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities.  The term does not include a Utility Pole .



      WORK (Prohibited Acts). Any person’s providing any employment
or employment-type service for or at the request of another individual or
individuals or any public or private entity, whether for compensation or not,
whether full or part time, whether legally or not. “Work” includes,
without limitation, any such service performed by an employee, independent
contractor, agent, partner, proprietor, manager, officer, director,
apprentice, trainee, associate, servant, volunteer, and the like. The term
does not include noncommercial activities performed by members of a
Membership Association.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011; Am. Ord.
2011-06, passed 6-20-2011; Am. Ord. 2011-11, passed 9-12-2011; Am. Ord.
2011-16, passed 12-5-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-19-2012; Am. Ord.
2012-07, passed 4-2-2012; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 4-16-2012; Am. Ord.
2012-13, passed 8-20-2012; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 9-12-2012; Am. Ord.
2012-18, passed 9-24-2012; Am. Ord. 2012-19, passed 9-24-2012; Am. Ord.
2013-02, passed 5-6-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-04, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord.
2013-05, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 9-23-2013; Am. Ord.
2013-13, passed 11-18-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-3-2014; Am. Ord.
2014-02, passed 2-3-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-21, passed 10-20-2014; Am. Ord.
2014-24, passed 12-1-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-13, passed 6-1-2015; Am. Ord.
2015-17, passed 9-11-2015; Am. Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015; Am. Ord.
2015-21, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-4-2016; Am. Ord.
2016-09, passed 5-2-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-2-2016; Am. Ord.
2016-12, passed 6-20-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-16, passed 9-12-2016; Am. Ord.
2016-18, passed 9-26-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-21, passed 11-21-2016; Am. Ord.
2017-02, passed 2-6-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-07, passed 8-21-2017; Am. Ord.
2017-11, passed 9-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-14, passed 11-6-2017; Am. Ord.
2017-17, passed 11-20-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord.
2018-16, passed 11-19-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-3-2018; Am. Ord.
2018-18, passed 12-3-2018; Am. Ord. 2019-03, passed 4-15-2019; Am. Ord.
2019-06, passed 6-3-2019; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



 


Notes

Animal 
ANIMAL.  Every living nonhuman creature.



CHAPTER 2:  RULES FOR INTERPRETATION AND CONSTRUCTION



Section



   2.01   Title of code



   2.02   Interpretation



   2.03   Application of code to City



   2.04   Application to future ordinances



   2.05   Amendments to cited law, contracts and other publications



   2.06   Special zoning district regulations



   2.07   Severability



   2.08   References to offices



   2.09   Reference to City Manager



   2.10   Errors and omissions



   2.11   Time computation



   2.12   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   2.13   Section histories; statutory references



   2.14   Bonds



   2.15   Permit, license and approval limitations



   2.16   Legal actions



   2.17   Procedures for relief from specified laws



   2.18   Schedule of fees



 



   2.99   General penalty



§ 2.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Weston shall be
designated as the City of Weston Code (“the Code ”) and may be so cited.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by Law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.03  APPLICATION OF CODE TO CITY.



   Unless the Code expressly provides otherwise, the provisions of this
Code shall not apply to the City, property owned by the City or to City
employees, contractors and/or authorized agents in their official capacity
while conducting official City business.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.04  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.05  AMENDMENTS TO CITED LAW, CONTRACTS AND OTHER PUBLICATIONS.



   Code references to outdated and/or amended applicable Federal, State
and local Laws, contracts, City policies and procedures, and other cited
publications shall be interpreted and applied to include the current Federal,
State and local Law , contract, policy, procedure or publication, as may be
amended or renumbered from time to time.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.06  SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



   For the U.S. Nature and Culture Center, Weston Town Center, Estates of
Swan Lake, Isles at Weston and Weston Commons special zoning districts,
additional property standards are set forth in the Zoning Chapter for special
zoning districts. If regulations set forth in the Zoning Chapter for the U.S.
Nature and Culture Center, Weston Town Center, Estates of Swan Lake, Isles at
Weston and Weston Commons special zoning districts are inconsistent with
regulations in other Chapters of the Code , the special zoning district
regulations in the Zoning Chapter shall govern to the extent of such conflict.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.07  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or other part
of this Code be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of this Code as a whole or any
portion thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.08  REFERENCES TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.09  REFERENCE TO CITY MANAGER.



   When the Code requires an act to be performed by the City Manager that,
by Law , may be performed by an agent or designee of the City, the
requirement may be satisfied by the performance of such act by an agent or
designee if authorized by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If an error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words;
the improper capitalization of defined terms; the omission of any word or
words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use
of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word
or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such
intent, then the City Manager and City Attorney jointly may correct such
error, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.11  TIME COMPUTATION.



   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. All time
periods shall be based upon calendar days unless otherwise specified. If the
last day of a time period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday,
the time period shall be extended to the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.12  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   2.12(A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
effective date of the ordinance repealing or modifying it, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



   2.12(B)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause,
or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.13  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   2.13(A)   As histories for the Code sections, the specific number
and passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if
any, are listed following the text of the Code section.



         Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed
1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   2.13(B)(1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the Section reads substantially the same as the
statute and should be deemed to include any amendments thereto.



         Example:  (F.S. § 943.14(4)) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980;
Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)



   2.13(B)(2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the Section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.



      Example:



      Statutory reference:



         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records,
see F.S. §§ 119.01 et seq.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.14  BONDS.



   2.14(A)   Bond Form.  All bonds provided to the City shall be in a
type and form acceptable to the City Manager and City Attorney, except as
otherwise provided herein.  The City shall pay no interest, earned or
otherwise, on cash bonds during the time that the City holds them.



   2.14(B)   Letter of Credit.  Anytime a cash bond is required, an
entity that is exempt under the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC Sec. 501(c)(3)
may petition the City Manager to utilize a letter of credit in lieu of a cash
bond.  The bank issuing the letter of credit shall meet the following
criteria:



   2.14(B)(1)   Be a Federal or Florida chartered bank with a principal
branch office located within the legal boundaries of the City.



   2.14(B)(2)   Be a member of the Federal Reserve System.



   2.14(B)(3)   Be insured by the FDIC.



   2.14(B)(4)   Be a “Qualified Public Depository” in conformance
with the Florida Security for Public Deposits Act (Chapter 280 F.S.).



   2.14(B)(5)   Have total assets exceeding $50 billion.



   2.14(C)   Governmental Exemption.  Governmental entities shall be
exempt from all bond requirements.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-09, passed 3-17-2014)



§ 2.15  PERMIT, LICENSE AND APPROVAL LIMITATIONS.



   2.15(A)   Limitations.  The issuance or granting of a permit,
license or approval shall not be deemed or construed as an approval of a
violation of any of the provisions of the City Code. No permit, license or
approval presuming to give the authority to violate or cancel the provisions
of these regulations shall be valid unless supported by a variance. Nor shall
such permit, license or approval prevent the enforcing Officer from
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and
specifications or from preventing Building operations being carried on
thereunder when in violation of these regulations.



   2.15(B)   Suspension and revocation.  The City Manager may suspend
or revoke, in writing, a permit, license or approval issued under provisions
of this Code, whenever the permit, license or approval is issued on the basis
of a misstatement of fact or fraud. The written suspension or revocation
shall describe the appeal process. The notice of the suspension or revocation
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any Person having
an interest in the permit, license or approval may appeal the suspension or
revocation to the City Commission, by filing a written notice of appeal with
the City Clerk within 15 days after receipt of the written notice of
suspension or revocation.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.16  LEGAL ACTIONS.



   2.16(A)   Quasi-judicial decisions of the City Commission.  Any
Person claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the City
Commission acting in its quasi-judicial capacity may present to the Circuit
Court of the county a petition for writ of certiorari to review such final
action as provided by Law. Such petition shall be presented to such court
within 30 days after the date of such final action by the City. No act, other
than the issuance of, or refusal to issue, a Development Order by the City
Commission, is intended to be a final City action under this Chapter for the
purpose of judicial review of quasi-judicial decisions.



   2.16(B)   Legislative decisions of the City Commission.  Any Person
claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any final action of the City
Commission acting in its legislative capacity may seek review of such final
action as provided by law.



   2.16(C)   Decisions of the City Manager. Except for decisions of the
City Manager under § 3.03(a) of the City Charter, no decision of the City
Manager shall constitute final action of the City. Unless otherwise provided
for in this Code, any Person claiming to be injured or aggrieved by any such
decision of the City Manager shall first appeal such decision to the City
Commission. Written notice of such appeal must be filed with the City Manager
within ten days of the date of the decision to be appealed. The standard of
review for such appeals to the City Commission shall be de novo.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.17  PROCEDURES FOR RELIEF FROM SPECIFIED LAWS.



   2.17(A)   Application.  A request for relief under this Section
shall be required prior to any Person filing a lawsuit based upon federal
Law; F.S. Chapter 761 (“Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1998"); F.S.
Chapter 760 (“Florida Civil Rights Act of 1992”); or the Florida
Constitution. The request for relief shall be filed with the City Manager on
a form provided by the City. The form shall contain such questions and
requests for information as are necessary for evaluating the relief requested.



   2.17(B)   Application and hearing.  The City Commission shall hold
a public hearing within 75 days of the City determining that the application
is complete, unless such timeframe is extended by the Person requesting
relief. The City Commission , after a public hearing, may: (a) grant the
relief requested; (b) grant a portion of the request and deny a portion of
the request, or impose conditions upon the grant of the request; or (c) deny
the request.



   2.17(C)   Notice.  At least 20 days before a public hearing on an
application for relief under this Section, the City shall display a notice on
the City ’s public notice bulletin board, which shall describe the request
for relief and state the location, date and time of the applicable public
hearing.  If the request for relief relates to the use of a specific parcel
of privately owned real property, the notice shall include the address of the
subject real property, and, in addition to the posting of the notice on the
City ’s public notice bulletin board, the City , at its expense, shall
deliver a copy of the notice, by first class mail postmarked at least ten
days prior to the date of the hearing, to all property owners within 500 feet
of the property, exclusive of road Rights-Of-Way and water bodies.  If the
real property is located within a Homeowners’ Association and that
Homeowners’ Association is registered with the City , then the City , shall
deliver a copy of the notice, by first class mail postmarked at least ten
days prior to the date of the hearing, to the Homeowners’ Association.



   2.17(D)   Criteria.  In determining whether the relief request
shall be granted or denied, the Applicant shall have the burden to establish:



   2.17(D)(1)   The Applicant is a potential claimant under federal Law
; F.S. Chapter 761, (“Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1998”); F.S.
Chapter 760 (“Florida Civil Rights Act of 1992”); or the Florida
Constitution; and



   2.17(D)(2)   The Applicant believes in good faith, as stated in his
or her request, that the City through implementation of its Code has
intentionally or unintentionally violated a federal Law ; F.S. Chapter 761
(“Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1998”); F.S. Chapter 760
(“Florida Civil Rights Act of 1992”); or the Florida Constitution; and



   2.17(D)(3)   The Applicant satisfies the required legal standard for
bringing such a lawsuit as set forth in the applicable Law , or legal
precedent interpreting the applicable Law .



   2.17(E)   Exhaustion required.  Completion of the relief procedures
shall be a supplement to and not a substitute for any other pre-litigation
dispute resolution processes available by Law to the City or the Person.
Completion of the relief procedures shall constitute the exhaustion of all
administrative remedies available from the City.



   2.17(F)      Effect while pending.  While an application for
relief or appeal of a determination of same is pending before the City, the
City will not enforce the subject Code, rules, policies, and procedures,
except the City may seek injunctive relief if an imminent threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the public is present.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-07, passed 4-18-2016)



§ 2.18  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   The City Commission is authorized to establish and revise, by
Resolution, a Schedule of Fees that includes all charges, fees and deposits
required by the City.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 2.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   2.99(A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful
for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code,
and where no specific penalty is provided in this Code, the violation of any
provision of this Code shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00
per day per violation for a first violation, $5,000.00 per day per violation
for a Repeat Violation, and up to $15,000.00 per violation if the violation
is deemed to be irreparable or irreversible in nature; or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment, provided,
however, that no penalty shall be imposed that is greater than the penalty
imposed by State statutes regulating similar conduct.



   2.99(B)   The trial court, in its discretion, may in any case
(including cases when adjudication is withheld) also assess the court costs,
place a defendant on probation in accordance with F.S. Chapter 948, order a
defendant to pay restitution in accordance with F.S. § 775.089, or order the
defendant to complete community service hours in an amount not to exceed 250
hours per violation, or both, or impose any other lawful condition, term, or
order. In lieu of such participation, the court may permit a defendant to pay
$20.00 to the City for each hour of community service work otherwise required.



   2.99(C)   Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.



   2.99(D)   The City may take any other action permitted by Law to
enforce this Code.



(Ord. 2010-08, passed 10-4-2010)



TITLE II:  LEGISLATIVE



   Chapter



      20.   CITY COMMISSION



      21.   ELECTIONS



      22.   BUSINESS RELATIONSHIPS




      23.   NAMING OF PUBLIC PLACES AND RECOGNITION OF COMMUNITY
CONTRIBUTIONS




      24.   SPECIAL DISTRICTS



      25.   LOBBYIST REGULATION



      26.   PROHIBITION FROM PARTICIPATION IN DISCUSSION



CHAPTER 20:  CITY COMMISSION



Section



   20.01   City Commission; reimbursement of travel expenses



   20.02 through 20.09  Reserved



   20.10   Local planning agency



§ 20.01  CITY COMMISSION; REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   20.01(A)   Reimbursements.  The Mayor and City Commissioners shall
be reimbursed for their own reasonable travel expenses incurred in connection
with City business related travel outside of the City. The Mayor and City
Commissioners shall not be reimbursed for travel within the City.



   20.01(A)(1)   Meals.  The City shall reimburse the Mayor and City
Commissioners for actual expenses of meals incurred in connection with
overnight travel.



   20.01(A)(2)   Lodging.  The City shall reimburse the Mayor and City
Commissioner for actual expenses relating to lodging.



   20.01(A)(3)   Ground transportation and airfare.  The City shall
reimburse the Mayor and City Commissioners for actual expenses relating to
ground transportation, including but not limited to train, bus, taxi fares
and airfare.



   20.01(A)(4)   Incidental travel related expenses.  The City shall
reimburse the Mayor and City Commissioners for incidental travel related
expenses, including but not limited to valet services, parking, roadway tolls
and gratuities.



   20.01(A)(5)   Private vehicle.  Mileage for use of the Mayor and
City Commissioners’ own vehicle will be paid at the maximum non-taxable
rate allowed by the Internal Revenue Service. If two or more members of the
City Commission travel in one private vehicle, the Person supplying the
vehicle shall receive the transportation reimbursement.



   20.01(B)   Filing of expense form; proof of expenditures.  Within
60 days after incurring expenditure, the Mayor or City Commissioner shall
file with the City Manager a signed travel expense form setting forth the
reasonable expenses incurred for which City payment is sought. The form shall
contain a statement that the expenses were actually incurred by the Mayor or
City Commissioner as necessary travel expenses in the performance of official
duties and shall be verified by a written declaration that it is true and
correct as to every material matter. Whoever receives an allowance or
reimbursement by means of a false claim shall be liable in the amount of the
overpayment for the reimbursement of the fund from which the claim was paid.
Original receipts documenting each expense must accompany the form, except
for reasonable and customary out-of-pocket expenses, such as tolls, valet
services, gratuities and mileage. If a travel expense form has not been filed
within 60 days after incurring an expenditure, the City shall not reimburse
such expenses.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010)



§§ 20.02 THROUGH 20.09  RESERVED.



§ 20.10  LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY.



   20.10(A)   The City Commission of the City of Weston is designated
the Local Planning Agency (LPA) for the City.



   20.10(B)   The LPA shall have all powers authorized under F.S. §
163.3174.



   20.10(C)   The City Commission, in their position as members of the
LPA, shall receive no additional compensation.



   20.10(D)   A representative of the School Board of Broward County
shall be entitled to sit as a non-voting member of the LPA. Such School Board
representative shall not be counted when determining the presence of a
quorum, nor shall the School Board representative be entitled to any
compensation for service on the LPA.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 21:  ELECTIONS



Section



   21.01   Qualification of candidates



   21.02   Candidate campaign financial disclosure forms



§ 21.01  QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES.



   The time and manner for qualification of candidates for election to the
office of Commissioner or Mayor shall be as follows:



   21.01(A)   Time for qualification.  Candidates shall qualify to
file to run for the office of Commissioner or Mayor as follows:



   21.01(A)(1)   Regular election.  For all regular elections: the
qualifying period for candidates to file shall begin at noon on the day that
is 71 days before the State primary election date (as determined by F.S. §
100.61), and shall end at noon on the day that is 67 days before the State
primary election date.



   21.01(A)(2)   Special elections.  In circumstances in which a
vacancy on the City Commission in the office of Mayor or City Commissioner is
filled by special election, the qualifying period for candidates to file
shall begin at noon on the first Monday after the adoption of a City
Commission resolution calling the special election, or if it shall be a legal
holiday, on the first regular business day thereafter, and shall end at noon
on the fifth regular business day thereafter.



   21.01(B)   Manner of qualification.



   21.01(B)(1)   For regular and special elections, as provided by
subsections 21.01(A)(1) and 21.01A)(2) above, it shall be the duty of any
Person desiring to become a candidate for election to the office of Mayor or
Commissioner to (a) file a written notice of candidacy in the form set forth
in subsection 21.01(C) below, (b) present their voter registration card
indicating an address of the candidate’s place of abode for inspection by
the City Clerk or designated City official, (c) present their Florida
driver’s license (or, if the Person does not possess a driver’s license,
an official Florida state identification) that reflects the address of such
place of abode, as required by § 2.07 of the City Charter, for inspection by
the City Clerk or designated City official, (d) pay the qualification fee
required by § 2.04 of the City Charter, and (e) pay the additional election
assessment imposed by State statute.



(F.S. § 99.093)



   21.01(B)(2)   Candidates must meet the applicable residency
qualifications provided by §§ 2.03(b), 2.04, 2.05(c)(2) and 2.07 of the
City Charter.



   21.01(B)(3)   The place of qualification shall be the office of the
City Clerk and the hours and dates of qualifying shall be the applicable time
period set forth in subsection 21.01(A)(1) or 21.01(A)(2) above.



   21.01(C)   Notice of candidacy.  The form of notice of candidacy
shall be as follows:



I,_______________________, currently reside in the City and the Residential
Area for which election is being sought. At all times during the prior twelve
months, I have resided, and have had the intent to permanently reside, in the
City and the Residential Area for which election is being sought. I am a
registered voter in the City of Weston. My residence address is
______________________________, Weston, Florida,______. I hereby announce my
candidacy for the office of (Commissioner, Seat No.     ) (Mayor)
[cross-out inapplicable provision] to be voted for at the election to be held
on the______day of________________, ______. I hereby agree to obey all the
laws relating to my candidacy and to serve if elected.



   ____________________________________



   Signature of Candidate



Sworn to and subscribed before me this_____day of________________, ______, at
Broward County, Florida.



   ____________________________________



   Notary Public or City Clerk



   DATE AND HOUR OF FILING:



   ____________________________________



   RECEIVED BY:



   /s/



   CITY CLERK/ELECTION OFFICIAL



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-11, passed 5-21-2012)



§ 21.02  CANDIDATE CAMPAIGN FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE FORMS.



   Requirement to file copy of state required campaign financial
disclosure forms.  Every candidate for Mayor or City Commissioner shall file
with the City Clerk, for placement on the City's website, copies of all
candidate campaign financial disclosure forms that are submitted to the
Supervisor of Elections or any other election official, before 12:00 p.m. on
the date by which the candidate campaign financial disclosure form is
required to be mailed, in accordance with F.S. Chapter 106.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-06, passed 4-2-2012)



CHAPTER 22:  BUSINESS RELATIONSHIPS



Section



   22.01   Disclosure of business relationships



§ 22.01  DISCLOSURE OF BUSINESS RELATIONSHIPS.



   22.01(A)   Time of disclosure.  Except as prohibited by law or
regulatory standards, each member of the City Commission or any City Advisory
Board shall disclose the existence of any Business Relationship of which he
or she is aware that he or she has, or has had within the prior 24-month
period, with any Applicant or Interested Person, at the time that the
Applicant or interested Person appears before the City Commission or City
Advisory Board.



   22.01(B)   Disclosure subsequent to action taken.  Except as
prohibited by law or regulatory standards, if a member of the City Commission
or any City Advisory Board learns, within 30 days after an action is taken by
the City Commission or the City Advisory Board, that he or she had a Business
Relationship with any Applicant or interested Person who appeared before the
City Commission or the City Advisory Board, he or she shall disclose any such
Business Relationship in writing to the City Clerk that was not disclosed at
the initial meeting.



   22.01(C)   Establishment of Business Relationship after
appearance.  Except as prohibited by law or regulatory standards, if a
member of the City Commission or any City Advisory Board establishes a
Business Relationship with any Applicant or interested Person within 12
months after the Applicant or interested Person appears before the City
Commission or the City Advisory Board, the member of the City Commission or
the City Advisory Board shall disclose any such Business Relationship in
writing to the City Clerk.



   22.01(D)   Abstention.  F.S. § 286.012 prohibits a member of the
City Commission or any City Advisory Board from abstaining from voting unless
there is, or appears to be, a possible conflict of interest under Florida
Statutes. In any situation where a member of the City Commission or a City
Advisory Board discloses a Business Relationship under this Section, the
member may abstain because of the appearance of a possible conflict of
interest.



   22.01(E)   Failure to disclose.  If any member of the City
Commission or City Advisory Board believes that another member has willfully
failed to make a disclosure required under this Section, he or she may submit
evidence supporting the alleged failure to disclose to the City Manager who
shall place the item on the next available City Commission Agenda. The
allegation and supporting evidence shall be presented by the member of the
City Commission or City Advisory Board who raised the issue for consideration
by the City Commission . The member of the City Commission or City Advisory
Board against whom the allegation is made may present evidence refuting the
allegations. If three or more members of the City Commission determine that
an accused City Commissioner willfully failed to make a required disclosure,
the accused City Commissioner shall be deemed to be censured. If three or
more members of the City Commission determine that an accused member of a
City Advisory Board has willfully failed to make a required disclosure, the
accused board member shall be removed from the Advisory Board.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-04, passed 2-21-2012; Am. Ord.
2015-22, passed 10-5-2015)



CHAPTER 23:  NAMING OF PUBLIC PLACES AND RECOGNITION OF COMMUNITY
CONTRIBUTIONS



Section



   23.01   Naming of public places



   23.02   Procedures for solicitation of funds for municipal purposes



§ 23.01  NAMING OF PUBLIC PLACES.



   The City Commission shall not name Public Places after people or
entities, but may establish a commemorative program and/or public memorial.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 23.02  PROCEDURES FOR SOLICITATION OF FUNDS FOR MUNICIPAL PURPOSES.



   No individuals, organizations or entities shall solicit funds or in
kind goods or services for City purposes, or use the City’s name for any
solicitation, unless prior City Commission approval is obtained. The City
Commission may condition such approval as it deems appropriate. In order to
obtain City Commission approval, application shall be made to the City
Manager on a form provided by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 24:  SPECIAL DISTRICTS



Section



   24.01   Indian Trace Development District



   24.02   Bonaventure Development District



§ 24.01  INDIAN TRACE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   24.01(A)(1)   Creation of District.  Pursuant to F.S. § 189.4041,
the Indian Trace Development District is hereby created as a dependent
special district of the City, which shall have all the rights, powers, and
authority of F.S. Chapter 190.



   24.01(A)(2)   Boundaries.  The Indian Trace Development District is
comprised of and includes those lands described as follows:



Portions of Sections 34, 35, and 36 in Township 49 South, Range 39 East,
together with a portion of Section 31, Township 49 South, Range 40 East
together with portions of Sections 3, 10, 15, 22, 25, 26 and 27 and all of
Sections 1, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14, 23 and 24 in Township 50 South, Range 39 East,
together with portions of Sections 6, 7, 8, 29 and 30 and all of Sections 17,
18, 19 and 20 in Township 50 South, Range 40 East, all in Broward County,
Florida, and being more particularly described as follows:



BEGINNING at the intersection of the East line of said Section 29, Township
50 South, Range 40 East, with the North Right-Of-Way line of South Florida
Water Management District Canal C-11, also known as the South New River Canal;



THENCE Westerly, along said North Right-Of-Way Line of Canal C-11, to the
intersection with the Easterly Right-Of-Way line of State Road 25, also known
as U.S. 27 and shown on Florida Department of Transportation Right-Of-Way
Maps for Section 86060-2515;



THENCE Northerly, along said Easterly Right-Of-Way line of State Road 25
(U.S. 27), to the intersection with the Southerly Right-Of-Way line of State
Road 93 (Interstate 75) as shown on Florida Department of Transportation
Right-Of-Way Map for Section 86075-2409;



THENCE Southeasterly, along said Southerly Right-Of-Way line of State Road
93, to the intersection with the West line of BONAVENTURE, according to the
Plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book 82, page 43 of the Public Records of
Broward County, Florida;



THENCE Southerly, along said West line of BONAVENTURE, to the North
one-quarter (N ¼) corner of said Section 7, Township 50 South, Range 40 East;



THENCE continue Southerly, along said West line of BONAVENTURE according to
the Plat and the East line of that certain Boundary Line Agreement recorded
in Official Records Book 10343, Page 593 of the Public Records of Broward
County, Florida, to the Northeast corner of a parcel of land described in
Quit-Claim deed recorded in Official Records Book 10343, Page 602 of the
Public Records of Broward County, Florida;



THENCE Westerly, along the North line of said parcel of land, to the
Northwest corner of said parcel of land;



THENCE Southerly, along the West line of said parcel of land, to the
Southwest corner of said parcel of land;



THENCE Easterly, along the South line of said parcel of land, to the
Southeast corner of said parcel of land, said corner being located on said
West line of BONAVENTURE according to the Plat and the East line of that
certain Boundary Line Agreement recorded in Official Records Book 10343, Page
593 of the Public Records of Broward County, Florida;



THENCE Southerly, along said West line of BONAVENTURE and said East line of
said Boundary Line Agreement, to the Southwest corner of said BONAVENTURE;



THENCE Easterly, along the South line of said BONAVENTURE and the North line
of said Boundary Line Agreement, to the Southeast corner of said BONAVENTURE;



THENCE continue Easterly, along the Easterly extension of said South line of
BONAVENTURE, to the East one-quarter (E ¼) corner of said Section 8,
Township 50 South, Range 40 East;



THENCE Southerly along the East line of said Section 8, to the Southeast
corner of said Section 8 and the Northeast corner of said Section 17,
Township 50 South, Range 40 East;



THENCE continue Southerly, along the East line of said Section 17, to the
Southeast corner of said Section 17 and the Northeast corner of said Section
20, Township 50 South, Range 40 East;



THENCE continue Southerly, along the East line of said Section 20, to the
Southeast corner of said Section 20 and the Northeast corner of said Section
29, Township 50 South, Range 40 East;



THENCE continue Southerly, along the East line of said Section 29, to the
POINT OF BEGINNING;



      LESS THEREFROM:



All of that portion of Tract 38, FLORIDA FRUIT LANDS COMPANY’S SUBDIVISION
NO. 1, in Section 3, Township 50 South, Range 39 East, according to the Plat
thereof as recorded in Plat Book 2, Page 17 of the Public Records of Dade
County, Florida, lying East of the Easterly Right-Of-Way line of State Road
25 (also known as U.S. 27) as shown on Florida Department of Transportation
Right-Of-Way Map for Section 86060-2515;



Said lands lying in Broward County, Florida.



   24.01(A)(3)   Purpose, Powers, Functions and Duties.  Pursuant to
F.S. Chapters 189 and 190, the Indian Trace Development District is formed
for the purpose of exercising those rights, powers and authority contained in
F.S. Chapter 190 and as provided herein in the above described lands and to
that end shall possess all the powers to do all things reasonably necessary
to provide such services. In addition to all powers specified herein, the
Board shall have all powers necessary or incidental to exercising the
purposes of the District, including those powers granted to the governing
board of a community development district pursuant to F.S. Chapter 190 (the
“Act”). Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, such powers
shall include those specified in F.S. §§ 190.011 and 190.012 (other than
F.S. § 190.012(2)(b), (c) and (f)) of the Act, which sections are hereby
incorporated and shall be applicable to the District as if set forth herein
at length. For all purposes hereof, the provisions of F.S. §§ 190.014,
190.015, 190.016, 190.017, 190.021, 190.022, 190.023, 190.024, 190.025,
190.026, 190.031, 190.035, 190.036, and 190.041 of the Act are hereby
incorporated herein and shall be applicable to the District as if set forth
herein at length; provided, however that:  (i) all references in said
sections of the Act to the “Act” or applicable sections thereof shall be
deemed to refer to this Section and the applicable sections hereof which
incorporate such provisions of the Act; (ii) all references in said sections
to the “board” shall mean the Board of the District; (iii) all references
in said sections to “district” shall mean the District; and (iv) the
provisions of F.S. §§ 190.013 and 190.015(12) of the Act shall be
discretionary rather than mandatory. To the extent necessary, useful or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions hereof, the definitions set forth in
F.S. § 190.003 of the Act are incorporated herein and made applicable to the
District and its activities. All provisions of the Act referred to herein are
available for inspection at the City Clerk’s Office.



   24.01(A)(4)   Governing Body.  The Indian Trace Development
District is formed as a dependent special district pursuant to F.S. §
189.403(2)(a) and the governing body of the Indian Trace Development District
shall be ex-officio the City Commission of the City of Weston, Broward
County, Florida. Commission members shall receive no additional compensation
for service as members of the governing body. The Mayor shall serve as chair
of the governing body.



   24.01(A)(5)   Management.  Management of the Indian Trace
Development District shall be by the City Manager. Management’s duties
shall be to administer the activities of the District in accordance with
established policies of the City Commission.



   24.01(A)(6)   Clerk.  The functions of clerk for the Indian Trace
Development District shall be carried out by the City Clerk.



   24.01(A)(7)   Attorney.  The functions of attorney for the Indian
Trace Development District shall be carried out by the City Attorney.



   24.01(A)(8)   Explanation of why a dependent special district is the
best alternative.  Pursuant to F.S. § 189.4041(4)(d), the Indian Trace
Development District is formed as a dependent special district because the
City desires to have the City Commission serve as the governing body of the
Indian Trace Development District, in order to enhance coordination and
consistency of policy between the City and the District.



   24.01(A)(9)   Financial disclosure, noticing and reporting
requirements.  The financial disclosure, noticing and reporting requirements
applicable to the governing body and management of the District shall be the
same as those required by the position of Commissioner and staff Person of
the City, respectively.



   24.01(A)(10)   Methods of finance.  The District shall be financed
in accordance with F.S. Chapters 189 and 190 and by any other methods of
finance the District is empowered to use.



   24.01(A)(11)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.  The
creation of the District is hereby found and declared to be consistent with
the approved Comprehensive Plan of the City.



   24.01(B)(1)   Declaration of authority.  The City Commission finds
that the City, through its dependent special district, the Indian Trace
Development District, can provide services to the residents of Indian Trace
as efficiently as the Indian Trace Community Development District, at a level
of quality equal to that delivered by the Indian Trace Community Development
District’s Board of Supervisors, and at a cost equal to the actual cost for
which the Indian Trace Community Development District’s Board of
Supervisors will have to charge Indian Trace Community Development District
users for the provisions of similar services.



   24.01(B)(2)   Adoption of plan of transfer.  The City approved and
adopted the plan of transfer of the Indian Trace Community Development
District.



   24.01(B)(3)   Transfer.  F.S. Chapter 190 having been fully
satisfied and addressed, the City declared, in its sole discretion and
pursuant to F.S. § 190.046(4) and applicable legal authority, its election
to transfer to the Indian Trace Development District, a dependent special
district of the City, all powers, rights, duties, functions, and obligations
of the District, in accordance with the plan of transfer.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 24.02  BONAVENTURE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   24.02(A)   Creation of district.  Pursuant to F.S. § 189.4041, the
Bonaventure Development District is hereby created as a dependent special
district of the City.



   24.02(B)   Boundaries. The Bonaventure Development District is
comprised of and includes those lands described as follows, said lands lying
in Broward County, Florida:



A portion of Section 31, Township 49 South, Range 40 East together with
portions of Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8, in Township 50 South, Range 40 East, all
in Broward County, Florida and being more particularly described as follows:



COMMENCE at the Northwest corner of Parcel “A” of NEW RIVER ESTATES
SECTION SIX, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book 116, Page
37 of the Public Records of Broward County, Florida, said point also being
the Point of Beginning of a parcel of land described in City of Weston
Ordinance No. 98-27 also known as the “de-annexation parcel,” said point
being located on the arc of a curve concave to the Southwest, a radial line
through said point bears North 23°50'32" East from the radius point of the
next described curve;



THENCE Northwesterly on the South Right-Of-Way line of Interstate 75 as shown
on Florida Department of Transportation Right-Of-Way Maps for Section
86075-2409, the North line of said parcel described in City of Weston
Ordinance No. 98-27 and the arc of said curve having a radius of 7565.44
feet, a central angle of 00°24'49" for an arc distance of 54.60 feet to the
intersection with a line 50.00 feet west of and parallel with the East line
of said Section 5, said point being the POINT OF BEGINNING of this
description;



THENCE Southerly on the West line of said parcel of land described in City of
Weston Ordinance No. 98-27 the following five (5) courses and distances;



   24.02(B)(1)   South 00°03'06" East on the last described parallel
line, a distance of 2059.78 feet;



   24.02(B)(2)   South 49°18'10" West, a distance of 1.63 feet;



   24.02(B)(3)   South 89°56'54" West, on the Easterly extension of
the North Right-Of-Way line of Blatt Boulevard, as shown on the plat of
BONAVENTURE, according to the plat thereof as recorded in Plat Book 82, Page
43 of the Public Records of Broward County, Florida, a distance of 48.76 feet
to the intersection with a line located 100.00 feet West of and parallel with
said East line of Section 5;



   24.02(B)(4)   South 00°03'06" East on the last described parallel
line 1020.13 feet to the intersection with a line located 100.00 feet West of
and parallel with the East line of said Section 8;



   24.02(B)(5)   South 00°07'42" East on the last described parallel
line, to the Southeast corner of said plat of BONAVENTURE;



THENCE Westerly, along the South line of said BONAVENTURE and the North line
of that certain Boundary Line Agreement recorded in Official Book 10343, Page
593 of the Public Records of Broward County, Florida, to the Southwest corner
of said BONAVENTURE;



THENCE Northerly, along the West line of said BONAVENTURE and the East line
of said Boundary Line Agreement, to the Southeast corner of that certain
parcel of land described in Quit-Claim Deed recorded in Official Records Book
10343, Page 602 of the Public Records of Broward County, Florida;



THENCE Westerly, along the South line of said parcel, to the Southwest corner
of said parcel;



THENCE Northerly, along the West line of said parcel, to the Northwest corner
of said parcel;



THENCE Easterly, along the North line of said parcel, to the Northeast corner
of said parcel, said corner being located on the said West line of
BONAVENTURE and the East line of said Boundary Line Agreement recorded in
Official Records Book 10343, Page 593 of the Public Records of Broward
County, Florida;



THENCE Northerly, along said West line of BONAVENTURE and the East line of
said Boundary Line Agreement, to the North one-quarter (N ¼) corner of said
Section 7, Township 50 South, Range 40 East;



THENCE continue Northerly along said West line of BONAVENTURE to the
intersection with said South Right-Of-Way line of State Road 93 (interstate
75) as shown on Florida Department of Transportation Right-Of-Way Maps for
Section 86075-2409;



THENCE Southeasterly, along said South Right-Of-Way Line , to the POINT OF
BEGINNING.



   24.02(C)   Purpose; powers; functions and duties.  Pursuant to F.S.
Chapters 189 and 190, the Bonaventure Development District is formed for the
purpose of exercising all those rights, powers, and authority provided herein
in the above-described lands and to that end shall possess all the powers to
do all things reasonably necessary to provide such services. In addition to
all powers specified herein, the Board shall have all powers necessary or
incidental to exercising the purposes of the District, including those powers
granted to the governing board of a community development district pursuant
to F.S. Chapter 190 (the “Act”). Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, such powers shall include those specified in F.S. §§ 190.011 and
190.012 (other than F.S. §§ 190.012(2)(b), (c) and (f)) of the Act, which
sections are hereby incorporated and shall be applicable to the District as
if set forth herein at length. For all purposes hereof, the provisions of
F.S. §§ 190.014, 190.015, 190.016, 190.017, 190.021, 190.022, 190.023,
190.024, 190.025, 190.026, 190.031, 190.035, 190.036, and 190.041 of the Act
are hereby incorporated herein and shall be applicable to the District as if
set forth herein at length; provided, however that: (i) all references in
said sections of the Act to the “Act” or applicable sections thereof
shall be deemed to refer to this Section and the applicable sections hereof
which incorporate such provisions of the Act; (ii) all references in said
sections to the “board” shall mean the Board of the District; (iii) all
references in said sections to “district” shall mean the District; and
(iv) the provisions of F.S. §§ 190.013 and 190.016(12) of the Act shall be
discretionary rather than mandatory. To the extent necessary, useful or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions hereof, the definitions set forth in
F.S. § 190.003 of the Act are incorporated herein and made applicable to the
District and its activities. All provisions of the Act referred to herein are
available for inspection at the City Clerk’s Office.



   24.02(D)   Governing body.  The Bonaventure Development District is
formed as a dependent special district pursuant to F.S. § 189.403(2)(a) and
the governing body of the Bonaventure Development District shall be
ex-officio the City Commission of the City of Weston. Commission members
shall receive no additional compensation for service as members of the
governing body. The Mayor shall serve as chair of the governing body.



   24.02(E)   Management.  Management of the Bonaventure Development
District shall be by the City Manager. Management’s duties shall be to
administer the activities of the District in accordance with established
policies of the City Commission.



   24.02(F)   Clerk.  The functions of clerk for the Bonaventure
Development District shall be carried out by the City Clerk.



   24.02(G)   Attorney.  The functions of attorney for the Bonaventure
Development District shall be carried out by the City Attorney.



   24.02(H)   Explanation of why a dependent special district is the
best alternative.  Pursuant to F.S. § 189.4041(4)(d), the Bonaventure
Development District is formed as a dependent special district because the
City desires to have the City Commission serve as the governing body of the
Bonaventure Development District, in order to enhance coordination and
consistency of policy between the City and the District.



   24.02(I)   Financial disclosure, noticing and reporting
requirements.  The financial disclosure, noticing and reporting requirements
applicable to the governing body and management of the District shall be the
same as those required by the position of Commissioner and staff Person of
the City, respectively.



   24.02(J)   Methods of finance.  The District shall be financed in
accordance with F.S. Chapters 189 and 190 and by any other methods of finance
the District is empowered to use.



   24.02(K)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan.  The creation
of the District is hereby found and declared to be consistent with the
approved Comprehensive Plan of the City.



(Ord. 2010-09, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 25:  LOBBYIST REGULATION



Section



   25.01   Lobbyist registration



   25.02   Penalties



§ 25.01  LOBBYIST REGISTRATION.



   25.01(A)   Registration Statement.  Prior to engaging in any
Lobbying activities, whether or not compensation is paid or received in
connection with those activities, each Lobbyist shall:



   25.01(A)(1)   File with the City Clerk, on a form prescribed by the
City, an annual registration statement under oath containing the following
information:



   25.01(A)(1)(a)   The Lobbyist's full name, residence address,
business name, business address, email address, and nature of business.



   25.01(A)(1)(b)   The full name and address of all Persons on whose
behalf the Lobbyist will be Lobbying.  If, after filing the registration
statement, the Lobbyist intends to Lobby on behalf of any Person(s) not
listed on the registration statement, the Lobbyist shall, prior to engaging
in any Lobbying activities on behalf of such unlisted Person(s), file an
amendment to the registration statement in form prescribed by the City Clerk,
containing all the information required in the annual registration statement.



   25.01(A)(1)(c)   The general and specific subject matters which the
Lobbyist seeks to influence.



   25.01(A)(1)(d)   The extent of any direct business association by
the Lobbyist with any current elected or appointed official or employee of
City.  For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "direct business
association" shall mean any mutual endeavor undertaken for profit or
compensation.



   25.01(A)(1)(e)   A Lobbyist representing a group, association, or
organization shall, prior to engaging in Lobbying, receive appropriate
authorization from said group, association, or organization to Lobby on its
behalf upon a particular subject matter. A copy of the applicable minutes,
motion, or other documentation of the action providing such authorization
shall be attached to the registration statements.



   25.01(A)(2)   Pay to the City an annual registration fee, to be set
by resolution of the City Commission, for each employer or principal,
identified on an annual or amended registration statement, on whose behalf he
or she intends to Lobby, whether he or she was retained directly by the
employer or principal or by another Lobbyist retained by the employer or
principal.  A Lobbyist, who is Lobbying without any compensation, on behalf
of a nonprofit entity, is not required to pay a registration fee in
connection with those uncompensated Lobbying activities.



   25.01(B)   Amendment.  A Lobbyist is required to promptly amend any
filed registration statement if any information in the statement changes.



   25.01(C)   Effective Period.  Registration statements are effective
from January 1 of a given year through December 31.  Registration fees paid
under (A)(2) above cover Lobbying activities during the effective period of
the registration statement.  A new registration statement shall be filed,
and all required fees shall be paid, prior to engaging in any Lobbying
activities after expiration of a previously-filed registration statement.



   25.01(D)   Disclosure Statement Required.  On or before January 15
of each year, each Lobbyist shall submit to the City Clerk's Office, on a
form prescribed by the City, a signed statement under oath, disclosing all
Lobbying expenditures, contingency fees, and the sources from which funds for
making such expenditures and paying such contingency fees have come. The
statement shall provide such information with respect to all Lobbying
activities undertaken from January 1 of the prior year through December 31 of
the year in which such disclosure statement is required to be filed. Lobbying
expenditures shall not include personal expenses for lodging, meals, and
travel. A statement shall be filed even if there have been no expenditures
during a reported period. A public official acting in his or her official
capacity shall not be required to file the statement required by this
subsection.



   25.01(E)   List of Current Lobbyists.  The City Clerk's Office
shall keep a current list of registered Lobbyists and their respective
statements required under this Chapter, all of which shall be open for public
inspection.



   25.01(F)   Partial Year Filing Required.  Discontinuance of
Lobbying activities during a year shall not relieve the Lobbyist of the
requirement to file the statement required by subsection (D) above for that
portion of the year during which the Lobbyist was engaged in Lobbying
activities.



   25.01(G)   Withdrawal of Registration.  A Lobbyist may withdraw his
or her registration by providing to the City Clerk a written notice of
withdrawal and simultaneously providing the City Clerk with the Lobbyist's
disclosure statement under subsection (D) above that would otherwise be due
by January 15 of the subsequent year. In the event of such withdrawal, the
Lobbyist shall not be refunded the annual registration fee or any portion
thereof. Subsequent to withdrawal, during the same annual effective period,
should the Lobbyist choose to engage in Lobbying activities in the City, the
Lobbyist is required to file a new annual registration statement required by
subsection 25.01(A) and submit the annual registration fee paid under
subsection 25.01(A)(2).



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 12-5-2011; Am. Ord. 2015-24, passed 11-16-2015)



§ 25.02  PENALTIES.



   25.02(A)   Enforcement.  Code enforcement shall be informed of any
Person engaged in Lobbying activities who has failed to comply with the
provisions of § 25.01, and, in each such instance, shall conduct such
investigation as deemed necessary under the circumstances. 



   25.02(B)   Sanctions.  The City's Special Magistrate, pursuant to
Chapter 31, shall have jurisdiction to hear and rule upon violations of this
Chapter. The Special Magistrate shall issue enforcement orders and impose
fines pursuant to § 31.22 of the Code as well as have the power to
reprimand, suspend, or prohibit the violator from appearing on behalf of any
person before the City Commission or any decision-making body under the
jurisdiction of the City Commission or from otherwise Lobbying the City  for
any Person in any fashion for a period of time; provided, however, that any
suspension or prohibition may not exceed a period of two years, and any of
said sanctions shall not be imposed unless the Lobbyist (or the employer or
principal of the Lobbyist, as applicable) allegedly in violation has been
afforded reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, in accordance with
Chapter 31 of the Code.  Further, the intentional failure or refusal of any
Lobbyist to comply with any order of the Special Magistrate suspending or
prohibiting the Lobbyist from Lobbying shall be punishable as provided by law
and shall otherwise be subject to such civil remedies as the City may pursue,
including injunctive relief.



   25.02(C)   Validity.  The validity of any action taken by the City
Commission, City employees, or any decision-making body under the
jurisdiction of the City Commission, shall not be affected by the failure of
any person to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.



   25.02(D)   City's Right to Terminate Contract.  In addition to all
other penalties in this Section, an employer or principal who has retained a
Lobbyist(s) to Lobby in connection with a competitive solicitation shall be
deemed non-responsive unless the employer or principal, in responding to the
competitive solicitation, certifies that each Lobbyist retained has timely
filed the registration or amended registration required under § 25.01.  If,
after awarding a contract in connection with the solicitation, the City
learns that the certification was erroneous, and upon investigation
determines that the error was willful or intentional on the part of the
employer or principal, the City may, on that basis, exercise any contractual
right to terminate the contract for convenience.



   25.02(E)   Failure to Comply with Disclosure Statement
Requirement.  In addition to all other penalties in this Section, the City
Clerk shall not accept any lobbyist registration statements from any Person
who fails to comply with the disclosure statement requirement as set forth in
§ 25.01(D) of this Code until the required disclosure statement has been
filed.



(Ord. 2011-16, passed 12-5-2011; Am. Ord. 2013-01, passed 3-18-2013)



CHAPTER 26: PROHIBITION FROM PARTICIPATION IN DISCUSSION



Section



   26.01   Prohibition of a member of the City Commission or any City
Advisory Board from participation in discussion



§ 26.01  PROHIBITION OF A MEMBER OF THE CITY COMMISSION OR ANY CITY
ADVISORY BOARD FROM PARTICIPATION IN DISCUSSION.



   In instances where a member of the City Commission or any City Advisory
Board will be abstaining from voting on a matter for any reason permitted
under Florida law, that Person shall not participate in any discussion
regarding that matter and shall leave the dais.



(Ord. 2015-22, passed 10-5-2015)



TITLE III:  EXECUTIVE



   Chapter



      30.   CITY MANAGEMENT



      31.   CODE ENFORCEMENT



      32.   ACQUISITION OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND DISPOSAL OF CITY
PROPERTY



      33.   INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS



CHAPTER 30:  CITY MANAGEMENT



Section



   30.01   Administrative policies



   30.02   Official seal



   30.03   Alteration of City documents prohibited



   30.04   Public records



   30.05   Claims against or on behalf of the City; authority of the
City Manager and City Attorney



§ 30.01  ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES.



   The City Manager is authorized to establish, promulgate and enforce
administrative policies.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 30.02  OFFICIAL SEAL.



   The official seal of the City, is as follows:









 



   Any use of the City seal by unauthorized Persons shall constitute a
second degree misdemeanor pursuant to F.S. § 165.043.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 30.03  ALTERATION OF CITY DOCUMENTS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful to alter any original City document, including but not
limited to licenses, permits, receipts and certificates, after it is issued
by the City. In the event a City document is altered, the original City
document shall be rendered null and void and a new application and payment of
the applicable fee shall be required to obtain a replacement.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 30.04  PUBLIC RECORDS.



   Pursuant to and subject to the limitations and exemptions set forth in
F.S. Chapter 119, the City shall make available public records to any Person
for inspection or copying. In the event that the City determines that a
public records request will require extensive use of information technology
resources, will require extensive clerical or supervisory assistance, or
copies of records, the City shall require an advanced deposit equal to the
City’s good faith estimate of actual costs and payment of all outstanding
fees and charges related to previous public records requests made by the same
Person, prior to commencing research, compilation and/or copying of public
records. If the actual cost incurred exceeds the deposit, the City shall not
charge the difference between the actual costs and the deposit. If the actual
cost incurred is less than the deposit, the City shall refund the difference
between the deposit and the actual costs. Additional public records requests
shall be subject to additional deposits. Federal, State and local
governmental entities shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in this
Section.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 30.05  CLAIMS AGAINST OR ON BEHALF OF THE CITY; AUTHORITY OF THE CITY
MANAGER AND CITY ATTORNEY.



   30.05(A)   For claims against the City, the City Manager, with the
concurrence of the City Attorney, is authorized to:



   30.05(A)(1)   Approve a settlement where the cost of the settlement
to the City will be less than $100,000, upon determining that it is in the
best interest of the City;



   30.05(A)(2)   Reject any settlement offer, upon determining that
acceptance of a settlement proposal would not be in the best interest of the
City.



   30.05(B)   For claims brought by the City, the City Manager, with
the concurrence of the City Attorney, is authorized to:



   30.05(B)(1)   Approve a settlement where the difference between the
total amount of the City’s claim and the amount that the City will receive
pursuant to the settlement is less than $100,000, upon determining that it is
in the best interest of the City;



   30.05(B)(2)   Reject any settlement offer, upon determining that
acceptance of a settlement proposal would not be in the best interest of the
City.



(Ord. 2019-05, passed 5-20-2019)



CHAPTER 31:  CODE ENFORCEMENT



Section



   31.01   Establishment of code enforcement system



   31.02   Purpose and intent



   31.03   Jurisdiction



   31.04   Special Magistrate



   31.05   Special Magistrate Clerk



   31.06   Code Prosecutor



   31.07   Code Enforcement Officers



   31.08   Required method of notice



   31.09   Code enforcement inspections



   31.10   Minimum housing/unsafe structures



   31.11   Property Owner responsibility for occupant's compliance




Enforcement by Notice of Violation Method




   31.20   Notice of violation procedures



   31.21   Special Magistrate procedures



   31.22   Enforcement orders; fines and other remedies; right of appeal



   31.23   Settlement; disposition of all collected fines and liens




Enforcement by Supplemental Method




   31.35   Citation procedures



   31.36   Supplemental provisions



   31.37   Correction of condition by City



§ 31.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM.



   31.01(A)   Alternative code enforcement system. The City, by this
Chapter, hereby adopts an alternate code enforcement system, which shall
provide for:



   31.01(A)(1)   A Special Magistrate with the authority to hold
hearings and assess fines against Violators of the City Code ; or



   31.01(A)(2)   The supplemental code enforcement procedures
authorized by F.S. §§ 162.21 et seq.



   31.01(B)   Implementation of F.S. Chapter 162.  The City, by this
Chapter, hereby implements the procedures set forth in F.S. Chapter 162 in
its entirety.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the intent of this Chapter to promote, protect, and improve the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City by authorizing the
creation of the position of Special Magistrate for code enforcement
proceedings with the authority to impose administrative fines and other
non-criminal penalties in addition to the implementation of supplemental code
enforcement procedures provided for in F.S. § 162.21 in order to provide an
equitable, expeditious, effective, and inexpensive method of enforcing any
codes and ordinances in force in the City where a pending or repeat violation
exists.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.03  JURISDICTION.



   The Special Magistrate shall have jurisdiction to:



   31.03(A)   Hear and rule upon those matters that may be prosecuted
by municipalities pursuant to F.S. Chapter 162;



   31.03(B)   Hear and rule upon violations of the City Code that
authorize violations to be heard by the Special Magistrate.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.04  SPECIAL MAGISTRATE.



   31.04(A)   Qualifications and appointment.  The qualifications and
appointment of the Special Magistrate shall be as follows:



   31.04(A)(1)   The Special Magistrate shall be appointed by the City
Manager and shall serve with compensation as established by the City
Commission upon appointment.



   31.04(A)(2)   The Special Magistrate must be either a Florida
registered architect, a Florida registered Engineer , or an attorney who is a
member in good standing of the Florida Bar.



   31.04(A)(3)   The Special Magistrate shall be bound by the Code of
Judicial Conduct.



   31.04(B)   Rules and regulations.  The rules and regulations as
found in F.S. Chapter 162 shall be adopted by the Special Magistrate. The
Special Magistrate may adopt additional rules and regulations as are
consistent with the provisions of F.S. Chapter 162, which the Magistrate
finds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, subject to the
approval of the City Commission.



   31.04(C)   Term. The Special Magistrate ’s term shall run from
April 1 through March 31.



   31.04(D)   Termination. The Special Magistrate may be terminated for
cause by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-17, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 31.05  SPECIAL MAGISTRATE CLERK.



   The City Manager may appoint an individual to be the Special Magistrate
Clerk, who shall perform the functions assigned to the Special Magistrate
Clerk as set forth in this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.06  CODE PROSECUTOR.



   31.06(A)   City Attorney representation.  The City Attorney may
represent the interests of the City and act as Code Prosecutor.



   31.06(B)   Prosecutorial discretion.  The Code Prosecutor shall
have prosecutorial discretion, including but not limited to, the right to
negotiate a plea with the violator and present that plea to the Special
Magistrate for approval, to recommend the disposition of a case to the
Special Magistrate, and to decline to prosecute a case, similar to the
discretion exercised by the State Attorney in criminal cases.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.07  CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.



   31.07(A)   Municipal Code.  Code Enforcement Officers shall have
the authority to enforce the City Code commensurate with the Special
Magistrate’s jurisdiction set forth in § 31.03, and may initiate
enforcement proceedings before the Special Magistrate. The Special Magistrate
shall not have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings.



   31.07(B)   Building Code, Minimum Housing and Unsafe Structures. 
The Building Official, or qualified designee, shall have all the powers and
duties set forth in § 31.07(A), and shall have the exclusive authority to
enforce the City’s Minimum Housing and Unsafe Structures Chapters. The
Building Official shall advise the City of violations of the Unsafe
Structures Chapter that present serious and immediate threats to the life,
health or safety of occupants of Structures or Premises or the public, and
shall recommend, upon the identification of violations that present serious
and immediate threats, actions that the City may take to mitigate or
eliminate these violations and/or threats. The Building Official may act as
the City’s agent for any purpose set forth in these Chapters.



   31.07(C)   Fire Codes. The Fire Marshal and certified fire safety
inspectors shall have all the powers and duties set forth in § 31.07(A), and
shall have authority to enforce the Fire Codes, as set forth in Chapter 50 of
this Code.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 9-12-2012)



§ 31.08  REQUIRED METHOD OF NOTICE.



   31.08(A)   F.S. § 162.12.  Notice shall be provided as set forth
in F.S. § 162.12.



   31.08(B)   Minimum Housing and/or Unsafe Structures Chapters.  When
notice is required to enforce the Minimum Housing and/or Unsafe Structures
Chapters, such notice shall be:



   31.08(B)(1)   Sent by certified mail to the record Owner (s) listed
in the records of the Broward County Property Appraiser ;



   31.08(B)(2)   Addressed to “Occupant” and sent by U.S. Mail to
the address of the Structure or Premises ; and



   31.08(B)(3)   Posted in a conspicuous place on the Structure or
Premises .



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.09  CODE ENFORCEMENT INSPECTIONS.



   31.09(A)   Authorization to inspect.  When a Code Enforcement
Officer has reasonable suspicion that a Structure or Premises is in violation
of the City Code, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized and empowered to
inspect, enter, examine and survey the Structure or Premises for the purpose
of enforcing the City Code. Inspection, entrance, examination and survey of
Structures or Premises shall be conducted during reasonable hours.



   31.09(B)   Identification procedures.  Code Enforcement Officers
shall carry credentials sufficient to identify the Officer as a Code
Enforcement Officer of the City. Upon initial and all subsequent visits to
Structures or Premises, the Code Enforcement Officer shall present and allow
examination of these credentials upon initial contact with persons at the
property and on demand during the visit to the Structure or Premises.



   31.09(C)   Inspection protocol.  Code Enforcement Officers shall
comply with the following procedures when seeking authority to inspect
portions of Structures or Premises not visible from Public Property or from
Private Rights-Of-Way.



   31.09(C)(1)   Code Enforcement Officers shall seek consent to
inspect the Structure or Premises from a Person over the age of 18 who has
common authority over the Structure , Premises or property on their initial
and all subsequent visits.



   31.09(C)(2)   In the event a Person over the age of 18 who has
common authority over a Structure or Premises shall not consent to immediate
inspection of the Structure or Premises , that Person shall be given the
opportunity to reschedule such inspection for a date and time certain within
ten days of the Officer’s initial visit.



   31.09(C)(3)   The City may seek a search warrant for the Structure
or Premises , as provided in subsection 31.09(D) of this Section, if:



   31.09(C)(3)(a)   The Person who scheduled the inspection in
accordance with subsection 31.09(C)(2) of this Section refuses to consent to
inspection of the Structure or Premises at the scheduled time;



   31.09(C)(3)(b)   The Person who scheduled the inspection in
accordance with subsection 31.09(C)(2) of this Section is not at the
Structure or Premises at the scheduled time; or



   31.09(C)(3)(c)   The Code Enforcement Officer has gotten no response
to repeated attempts to contact the property Owner and/or the Persons in
possession of the Structure or Premises .



   31.09(C)(4)   In the event a Structure or Premises appears to be
unoccupied or vacant and the Owner cannot be contacted in order to obtain
consent to inspect the Structure or Premises , the Officer then may enter any
open portion of the Structure or Premises in order to conduct an inspection.



   31.09(D)   Obtaining a search warrant.  The City shall seek a
search warrant as follows.



   31.09(D)(1)   When a Code Enforcement Officer believes, based upon
reliable evidence, that it is more likely than not that a specific Structure
or Premises is in violation of the City Code , that Code Enforcement Officer
shall:



   31.09(D)(1)(a)   Swear out an affidavit stating with particularity
the basis of the Officer’s belief, including:



   31.09(D)(1)(a)1.   The nature and extent of the suspected violation;



   31.09(D)(1)(a)2.   The source(s) of the information on which the
Officer is basing his or her belief; and



   31.09(D)(1)(a)3.   The circumstances under which the source(s) of
the information obtained the information;



   31.09(D)(1)(b)   Collect all documentary evidence of the suspected
violation and attach that documentary evidence to the Code Enforcement
Officer ’s affidavit as incorporated exhibits.



   31.09(D)(2)   When a Code Enforcement Officer believes based upon
reliable evidence that it is more likely than not that some Structures and/or
Premises within a group of Structures and/or Premises are in violation of the
City Code that Code Enforcement Officer shall:



   31.09(D)(2)(a)   Swear out an affidavit stating with particularity
the basis of the Officer’s belief about the group of Structures and/or
Premises , including:



   31.09(D)(2)(a)1.   The nature and extent of the suspected violation;



   31.09(D)(2)(a)2.   The source(s) of the information on which the
Officer is basing his or her belief; and



   31.09(D)(2)(a)3.   The circumstances under which the source(s) of
the information obtained the information.



   31.09(D)(2)(b)   Collect all documentary evidence of the suspected
violation and attach that documentary evidence to the Code Enforcement
Officer ’s affidavit as incorporated exhibits.



   31.09(D)(2)(c)   The Code Enforcement Officer ’s affidavit,
together with the documentary evidence attached thereto, must establish a
nexus between each Structure and/or Premises in the group of suspected
Structures and/or Premises and the testimony and/or documentary evidence upon
which the Code Enforcement Officer ’s belief is based.



   31.09(D)(3)   On behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall seek a
search warrant based upon the Code Enforcement Officer ’s affidavit and as
required by law.



   31.09(E)   Execution of the search warrant.  Once the Code
Enforcement Officer has received the search warrant, he or she shall execute
the search warrant as soon as possible, provided that the time of execution
is reasonable. When executing a search warrant Code Enforcement Officers
shall be accompanied by an Officer of the Broward County Sheriff’s Office



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.10  MINIMUM HOUSING/UNSAFE STRUCTURES.



   The Building Official shall bring Minimum Housing/Unsafe Structures
cases to a Minimum Housing/Unsafe Structures Board in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the Florida Building Code, including Broward County
Amendments.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.11  PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY FOR OCCUPANT'S COMPLIANCE.



   31.11(A)   Responsibility.  The Owner of any real property in the
City shall be responsible for any Person or Business occupying the Premises
of the Owner's property, which shall be done in compliance with the City
Code. 



   31.11(B)   Violation.  A property Owner violates this Section of
the Code if a Person or Business commits a violation of any section of the
City Code at or on the Owner's property.



   31.11(C)   Occupant’s Business Tax Compliance.  The Owner of any
real property in the City that receives a notice of violation indicating that
a Person or Business occupying the Premises of the Owner’s property has
failed to obtain a Business Tax Receipt is not responsible for such
non-compliance if the Owner files a sworn statement with the City Manager,
under penalty of perjury and on a form provided by the City, that the Owner
(i) has no lease or other agreement with such Person  or Business for use of
the Owner’s property, (ii) has no knowledge of such Person or Business’s
presence at the Owner’s property, (iii) has not authorized a sublease or
other agreement between an authorized Tenant at the property and such Person
or Business for use of the Property; and (iv) has not received any
compensation, in any form, from such Person or Business for use of the
Owner’s property.



   31.11(D)   Penalty.  Any Person who violates this Section of the
Code shall be subject to a code enforcement citation under this Section and
the City's code enforcement violation procedures and fines as set forth in
this Chapter of the Code.



(Ord. 2012-10, passed 4-16-2012; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-17-2015)



ENFORCEMENT BY NOTICE OF VIOLATION METHOD



§ 31.20  NOTICE OF VIOLATION PROCEDURES.



   31.20(A)   Written Notice.  If a violation of the City Code is
alleged to exist, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, except as provided in
subsections 31.20(B) and 31.20(C) below, provide written notice to the
alleged Violator of the violation and afford that Person a reasonable time,
in light of the nature of the violation, to correct it. Should the violation
continue beyond the time specified for correction, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the Special Magistrate Clerk, who shall schedule a
hearing before a Special Magistrate. The Enforcement Officer, Special
Magistrate Clerk, or other Person designated by the City Manager shall
provide written notice of the hearing, by hand delivery or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the alleged Violator. At the option of the
Special Magistrate, notice may additionally be served by publication or
posting.



   31.20(B)   Serious threat to public.  If the Code Enforcement
Officer has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the
public health, safety or welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may proceed
directly to a hearing, upon approval of the City Manager without notifying
the alleged Violator. However, where possible, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall use his or her best efforts to ensure that reasonable notice shall be
given to the alleged Violator.



   31.20(C)   Repeat violation.  If a Code Enforcement Officer finds a
repeat violation, the Officer shall notify the alleged Violator, but is not
required to give the alleged Violator a reasonable time to correct the repeat
violation. Upon notifying the alleged Violator, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall notify the Special Magistrate Clerk, who shall schedule a hearing
before a Special Magistratee and provide notice to the alleged Violator. The
case may be presented to the Special Magistrate, even if the repeat violation
has been corrected prior to the Special Magistrate hearing, and the notice
shall so state.



   31.20(D)   Transfer of ownership.  If the  Owner of property that
is subject to an enforcement proceeding pursuant to this Chapter transfers
ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served
and the time of the hearing, such Owner shall:



   31.20(D)(1)   Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of
the proceeding to the prospective transferee;



   31.20(D)(2)   Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the
pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement
proceeding received by the transferor;



   31.20(D)(3)   Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee
that the new Owner will be responsible for compliance with the City Code and
with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding; and



   31.20(D)(4)   File a notice with the Special Magistrate Clerk of the
transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new Owner and
copies of the disclosures made to the new Owner , within five days after the
date of the transfer.



   31.20(E)   Rebuttable presumption.  A failure to make the
disclosures described in subsection 31.20(D)(1), 31.20(D)(2), and 31.20(D)(3)
before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the
property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be
dismissed, but the new Owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to
correct the violation before the hearing is held.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.21  SPECIAL MAGISTRATE PROCEDURES.



   31.21(A)   Pre-hearing procedures.



   31.21(A)(1)   A time and date for the Special Magistrate hearing
shall be set, and notice to the alleged Violator and the Code Enforcement
Officer of the same shall be provided. The Violator may file a written reply
to the charges contained in the notice of violation, which shall be known as
the response. The response must contain the address of the violation, and the
alleged Violator ’s relationship to the property (for example, owner,
tenant, and the like).



   31.21(A)(2)   If the violation is not corrected by the time
specified for correction by the Code Enforcement Officer , the case may be
presented to the Special Magistrate, even if the violation has been corrected
prior to the Special Magistrate hearing, and the notice shall so state.



   31.21(B)   Hearing procedures.



   31.21(B)(1)   At the time and place set for the hearing, the Special
Magistrate shall hear and consider all testimony offered, and shall examine
and consider all the evidence presented. After determining that there is a
legally sufficient case to be presented, the City Attorney shall present each
case before the Special Magistrate. After the conclusion of the hearing, the
Special Magistrate shall issue findings of fact and conclusions of law, in a
written order, affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted
herein. Such order may command a Violator to take whatever steps are
necessary to bring a violation into compliance by the time announced at the
hearing and subsequently placed in the order. The findings, conclusions and
order of the Special Magistrate shall be announced orally at the Special
Magistrate hearing, and shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the
Violator .



   31.21(B)(2)   No Special Magistrate shall act in any case in which
that Special Magistrate has a conflict of interest. If the Special Magistrate
has a conflict of interest with any case, he or she shall orally announce
such at the scheduled hearing. However if the Special Magistrate is aware of
such conflict prior to the hearing, he or she shall notify the Special
Magistrate Clerk, and that case shall be rescheduled for a hearing before
another Special Magistrate.



   31.21(B)(3)   All hearings of the Special Magistrate shall be open
to the public, and any Person whose interests may be affected by the matter
before the Special Magistrate shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The
record of all hearings, agendas, findings, determinations and final orders
shall be maintained by the Special Magistrate Clerk.



   31.21(B)(4)   Hearings shall be informal and need not be conducted
according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Fundamental
due process shall be observed and shall govern all hearings.



   31.21(B)(5)   All relevant evidence shall be admitted if, in the
opinion of the Special Magistrate, it is the type of evidence upon which
reasonable and responsible Persons would normally rely in the conduct of
business affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory
rule which might make such evidence inadmissible over objections in a civil
action. The Special Magistrate may exclude irrelevant or unduly repetitious
evidence.



   31.21(B)(6)   Hearsay evidence may be accepted for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but such hearsay evidence
shall not in and of itself be considered sufficient to support a finding or
decision, unless the evidence would be admissible over objections in a civil
action.



   31.21(B)(7)   Each party to the hearing shall have the right to call
and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing witnesses,
impeach witnesses and rebut evidence.



   31.21(B)(8)   The alleged Violator has the right, at his or her own
expense, to be represented by an attorney at any Special Magistrate hearing.



   31.21(B)(9)   All testimony before the Special Magistrate shall be
under oath and shall be recorded. The alleged Violator or the City may cause
the proceedings to be recorded by a certified court reporter or by a
certified recording instrument.



   31.21(B)(10)   The burden of proof shall be with the Code
Enforcement Officer to show, by the greater weight of evidence, that a code
violation exists and that the alleged Violator committed, or was responsible
for maintaining, the violation.



   31.21(B)(11)   If written notice of the hearing has been provided to
an alleged Violator , a hearing may be conducted and an order rendered in the
absence of the Violator .



   31.21(B)(12)   The Special Magistrate may, for good cause shown,
postpone or continue a hearing.



   31.21(B)(13)   Reports of decisions. Subsequent to a public hearing,
the Special Magistrate shall make a written report, a final order of his or
her decision, in accord with the rules and procedures set forth herein, and
shall provide a copy of the final order to all parties of record and
appropriate City staff.



   31.21(B)(14)   Records. The City shall record all proceedings. At a
minimum, a summary of the testimony taken at such proceeding shall be
provided in the final order, or as an appendix thereto.



   31.21(C)   Subpoena powers.  The Code Enforcement Officer, the
Special Magistrate, the Code Prosecutor and the alleged Violator may request
that witnesses and records, including surveys, plats and other materials, be
subpoenaed to any formal hearings. Subpoenas may be served by Officers of the
Police Department of the City, police aides or other such persons authorized
to deliver subpoenas. The Special Magistrate shall provide the Special
Magistrate Clerk with sufficient signed and blank witness and document
subpoenas to be provided to alleged Violators and the Code Enforcement
Officer for the purpose of having witnesses and records subpoenaed. For each
subpoena served, the Violator shall pay to the City a fee that shall be set
by resolution of the City Commission.



   31.21(D)   Calling of emergency Special Magistrate hearings.  The
Special Magistrate may call an emergency Special Magistrate hearing. Written
notice of any emergency hearing shall be given to an alleged Violator, if
circumstances permit, at least one day in advance of such hearing. The
Special Magistrate may, at any hearing, set a future hearing date.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.22  ENFORCEMENT ORDERS; FINES AND OTHER REMEDIES; RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   31.22(A)   Remedies.



   31.22(A)(1)   The order of the Special Magistrate may require the
Violator to pay a fine, not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, for each day that
the violation continues past the date set in the order for compliance. In the
case of a repeat violation, the Special Magistrate may order the repeat
Violator to pay a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 per day, for each day the
repeat violation continues past the date of notice to the Violator of the
repeat violation. Upon a finding that the violation is irreparable or
irreversible in nature, the Special Magistrate may order the violator to pay
a fine not to exceed $15,000.00 per violation. In addition to such fines, the
Special Magistrate may impose additional fines to cover all costs incurred by
the City in enforcing the Code and all costs of repairs. The Special
Magistrate may take any other action permitted by law.



   31.22(A)(2)   If a finding of violation or repeat violation has been
made, then a hearing shall not be necessary for the issuance of an order
imposing a fine.



   31.22(A)(3)   A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be
recorded in the Public Records of Broward County, Florida. Once recorded, it
shall constitute a lien against the property upon which the violation was
found to exist, and upon any other real or personal property owned by the
Violator . Upon petition to the Circuit Court, it may be enforced in the same
manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this State, including levy
against the Violator ’s personal property, but shall not be deemed
otherwise to be a judgment of the court except for enforcement purposes.
Interest shall begin to accrue ten days after verification that the
underlying violation has been corrected.



   31.22(A)(4)   A fine imposed pursuant to this Section shall continue
to accrue, until the Violator comes into compliance or until judgment is
rendered in a suit to foreclose the lien, whichever occurs first. It shall be
the responsibility of the Violator to notify the City if and when the
Violator believes that the violation has been remedied.



   31.22(A)(5)   After three months from the filing of any such unpaid
lien, the City Attorney may foreclose upon the lien. The duration and effect
of such lien shall be consistent with State law, which is a period of 20
years.



   31.22(B)   Determination of fine amount.  In determining the amount
of the fine, if any, the Special Magistrate shall consider the following
factors:



   31.22(B)(1)   The gravity of the violation;



   31.22(B)(2)   Any actions taken by the Violator to correct the
violation; and



   31.22(B)(3)   Any previous violations committed by the Violator ,
whether on the same or any other property.



   31.22(C)   Injunctive Relief.  In the event the Special Magistrate
believes that a violation presents a serious threat to the public health,
safety or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in
nature, the Special Magistrate may request the City Attorney to seek
appropriate injunctive relief in the name of the City in the appropriate
court.



   31.22(D)   Enforcement Order.



   31.22(D)(1)   Every enforcement order of the Special Magistrate
shall be final, subject to the right of any aggrieved party, including the
City or the Violator , to appeal a final administrative order of the Special
Magistrate to the Circuit Court of the Seventeenth Judicial Circuit in and
for Broward County, Florida. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the
rendition of the order to be appealed.



   31.22(D)(2)   Every enforcement order of the Special Magistrate
shall have the force of law, shall be in writing, and shall include findings
of fact and conclusions of law.



   31.22(D)(3)   Every enforcement order of the Special Magistrate
shall be signed by the Special Magistrate. All orders shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk. A copy of the signed order shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or where certified mailing would
not be effective, by regular mail or by hand delivery by the Code Enforcement
Officer to the Violator .



   31.22(D)(4)   The Special Magistrate shall, in every proceeding,
make a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.



   31.22(E)   Effect on Applications to City.  Once the period for
appeal has run with no appeal filed, the existence of an Order of the Special
Magistrate finding a violation of City Code that has not been remedied, shall
be considered in the processing of any application requiring City approval.
When it is found that the nature of the violation is such that it bears on
the Applicant’s requested approval, it may provide justification for the
City to withhold such approval until such time as the violation is abated and
any unpaid fine has been satisfied.



   31.22(F)   Additional Remedies.  The provisions and procedures
contained in this Chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to any other
remedies now existing or subsequently provided for by law, regarding City
Code violations.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-01, passed 1-18-2011)



§ 31.23  SETTLEMENT; DISPOSITION OF ALL COLLECTED FINES AND LIENS.



   The City Manager is authorized to negotiate and settle all fines and
liens imposed by the Special Magistrate relating to City Code violations that
have been complied with by the Violator . However, the Special Magistrate
shall ratify all decisions of the City Manager with respect to the settlement
of any such fines and liens.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



ENFORCEMENT BY SUPPLEMENTAL METHOD



§ 31.35  CITATION PROCEDURES.



   31.35(A)   Citation.  As an alternative to the notice of violation
procedures set forth in §§ 31.20 and 31.21 hereof, a Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a citation to a Person, when the Code Enforcement Officer,
upon personal investigation, has a reasonable cause to believe that the
Person has committed a violation of a City ordinance.



   31.35(B)   Notice prior to issuance of citation.  Prior to issuing
a citation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide notice to the Person
that the Person has committed a violation of a City ordinance, and shall
establish a reasonable time period, not to exceed 30 days, within which the
Person must correct the violation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Code
Enforcement Officer does not have to provide a Person a reasonable time
period to correct a violation prior to issuing a citation, if the Code
Enforcement Officer has reason to believe the violation presents a serious
threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the City, or if
the violation is irreparable or irreversible.



   31.35(C)   Format.  The form of citation shall be as provided by
State law.



   31.35(D)   Fine Schedule.  A Person who receives a citation from a
Code Enforcement Officer for the violation of a City ordinance has committed
a civil infraction, and shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the
following schedule:



 


Violation Category

 

First Offense

 

Second Offense

 

Third Offense

 

Fourth Offense**





Animal Nuisance
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Building Maintenance
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Eyesore
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Health Hazard
 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$300.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Landscaping
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Licensing
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Litter/Debris
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Nuisance
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Recycling
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Safety Hazard
 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$300.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Signs/Advertising
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Vehicle
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Other
 

$50.00

 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$250.00—1,000.00



Development Permit/order
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Reroofing a Building without a permit (FBC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Alteration of a residential Building without a permit

(FBC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Alteration of a commercial Building without a permit

(FBC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Construction of a Building addition or accessory Building without a permit
(FBC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Maintaining unsanitary conditions

(FBC)
 

$100.00

 

$200.00

 

$300.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Discharging deleterious wastes to a drainage system

(FBC)
 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Hazardous electrical conditions

(FBC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Unauthorized electrical installations (FBC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Unauthorized electrical service connections (bypassed meter, taps on overhead
FP & L conductors)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Expiration of a Building Permit

(FBC)
 

$100.00

 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Failure to meet jobsite personnel requirements

(FBC)
 

$200.00

 

$400.00

 

$400.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Means of egress (exit, exit access, exit discharge);locked, blocked,
obstructed or impeded, obstruction to secondary means of egress windows (i.e.
bars, security grills, etc.) and fire escapes, improper locking, latching or
releasing devices

(FBC, FFPC)
 

$500.00

 

$750.00

 

$1000.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Means of egress marking: (exit signs) not provided, obstructed or blocked,
improper illumination, not functioning (FBC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Means of egress illumination: not provided, improper illumination, not
properly maintained or functioning (FBC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Means of egress emergency lighting: not provided, not properly maintained or
functioning, blocked or obstructed, inadequate

(FBC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fire extinguishing and suppression systems: not provided, not functioning,
not properly installed, maintained, tested or tagged, obstructed or blocked,
not accessible, tampered with (FAC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fire alarm and detection systems: not provided, not functioning, not properly
installed, maintained, tested or tagged, obstructed or blocked, not
accessible, tampered with

(FAC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fire protection water supply devices (fire hydrants, fire wells, etc.): not
provided, not functioning, not properly installed, tested or maintained,
blocked or obstructed, not accessible, tampered with

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Smoke detectors (commercial and residential) (system and single-station type
devices): not provided, not functioning, not properly installed, tested or
maintained, blocked or obstructed, not accessible, tampered with

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Portable fire extinguishers: not provided, not properly tested, serviced,
maintained or tagged, not properly mounted or installed, not readily visible
or accessible, blocked or obstructed, tampered with

(FAC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Maximum occupant load: overcrowding, no Sign posted

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Improper use and maintenance of electrical equipment, appliances, wiring,
cords and related devices

(FFPC)
 

$175.00

 

$350.00

 

$350.00

 

$350.00—1,000.00



Tampering with Fire Department official barricades, locks, signs, seals,
tags, etc., interfering with Fire Department operations

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Emergency property and vehicle access for Fire Department equipment and
operations (fire lanes, laddering areas, fire access roads): not provided,
not properly maintained, marked or designated, blocked or obstructed, impeded
by parking

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Unlawful or unauthorized burning (open burning, campfires, bonfires,
ceremonial burns, etc.): no permit or expired permit, unattended burning,
burning of Rubbish or Trash

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Barbecue grills and outdoor cooking (commercial and residential): improper
and/or unsafe use of barbecue grills or similar cooking equipment

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Accumulations of waste and readily combustible materials, overgrowth of
weeds, grass, or other vegetation: improper storage and/or handling, unsafe
or hazardous accumulations, or overgrowth endangering property

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Flammable decorative materials: improper, unsafe or hazardous use of,
improper use or storage within Structures

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Torches, flames or spark producing devices: improper, unsafe or hazardous use
of, improper fire protection features and distance separations

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Vacant Buildings: unsafe, unguarded, unsecured Structures, hazardous
accumulations of flammable or combustible waste or Rubbish materials

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Buildings under Construction (emergency access, storage, open fires, water
supply devices, extinguishing systems): not provided or maintained, improper
storage or emergency access, improper or not functioning fire protection
features, unsafe or hazardous operations

(FBC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Heating and cooking equipment: improper maintenance, hazardous or unsafe use
of equipment, appliances and devices

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Accumulations of dust or waste materials in air conditioning or ventilation
systems, or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fire reporting and false alarms: false emergency calls, delay in reporting
fires, emergencies and fire alarms (FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Smoking materials: careless or improper use of materials, designated smoking
areas not provided, signs not posted or provided, receptacles (ashtrays) not
provided or improper (FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Improper storage, transporting, handling or dispensing of all classes of
flammable and combustible liquids, or otherwise hazardous substances

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Spraying of flammable or combustible materials without an approved spray
booth, spray area or fire protection features

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Storage, handling and/or use of hazardous materials, explosives, flammable or
combustible liquids/ solids, LP gas and other compressed gases, or cellulose
nitrate plastics: without an approved permit, fire protection features
improper or not provided, unsafe or hazardous storage, handling or use

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Visible hazard identification signs (FFPC): not provided, improperly
displayed, not readable, not plainly visible, obstructed or blocked

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Welding and cutting operations: operating without an approved permit, fire
protection features not provided, inadequate or improper, improper clearances

(FBC, FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Storage, handling, use or sales of fireworks or sparklers: without approved
permit, improper or unsafe storage, handling, use or sales, fire protection
features not provided or improper, fire separation improper or not provided

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Trash chutes (commercial and residential): chute openings not properly
protected, not self-closing, trash chute fusible links not provided or
properly maintained

(FBC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Storage within Structures and open storage: not orderly, improper clearances,
impeding or obstructing exitways, aisles or fire protection systems and
equipment, improper height and stacking practices, improper or unsafe storage
creating a fire hazard (FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Display of Building address: not provided, improperly installed, not plainly
visible or contrasting, improper size address numbers/ letters, blocked or
obstructed, not properly illuminated (FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fire drills, evacuation plans, resident training, employee training, fire
extinguisher training: not provided or performed, inadequate training,
improper documentation, not properly posted

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Places of assembly: operating without an approved permit or inspection, crowd
control and fire control inadequate, improper or not provided, improper or
unauthorized use of candles, open flames, dry ice or smoke-making machines,
seating plans not provided or improper

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Parking of vehicles inside Structures (commercial and residential): improper,
unauthorized or unsafe parking of vehicles inside Structures or Buildings
(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Carnivals, circuses, special events, tents and air-supported Structures:
operation or use without approved inspection or permit, fire protection
features inadequate, improper or not provided, means of egress improper,
inadequate, not provided, obstructed or blocked, flame retardant materials
not provided, unsafe or unauthorized cooking operation, unlawful smoking
(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueling equipment (i.e. piping, pumps, flanges connections, hoses):
malfunctioning, leaking, defective, not properly installed, tested or
maintained (FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueling hose and couplings: defective, leaking, not properly tested or
maintained, improper coupling arrangement, hydrostatic testing not performed,
hydrostatic test records and/or inspection records not suitably maintained
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fuel operation control devices: defective, inoperable, locks open, improper
use, use defeated, improper operation of automatic braking system (FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueler vehicle and equipment (i.e. brakes, parking brakes, tires): needs
repair or replacement, remove accumulations of grease, oil or combustibles,
replace or repair tires, remove Debris

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Emergency fuel shutoffs and placarding: not provided, not accessible,
defective, improper number of shutoffs, emergency instructions not posted at
controls, improper placarding, placards not legible or visible, improper size
lettering

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueler fire extinguishers: not provided, insufficient quantity, improper type
or rating not accessible, not properly installed, serviced, tested or
maintained, location signage not provided or posted

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Electrostatic hazards and bonding: bonding not provided, improper bonding,
defective or insufficient bonding, bonding defeated

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueler engine exhaust system: improperly installed, located, discharged or
shielded, components unsecured or in disrepair

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueler vehicle lighting and electrical equipment: inadequate wiring and
lighting equipment, improper wiring installation, inoperable lamps,
unenclosed lamps and switching devices, non-weatherproof or non- gasketed
switching devices and lamps (FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueler vehicle spark plugs and/or terminal connections: not insulated,
improperly insulated, not properly maintained

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Smoking equipment, restrictions, and signage: non-compliant smoking materials
and equipment, “No Smoking” signs not provided or posted, not legible or
visible, insufficient number of signs, signs not properly located

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Full openings and top flashings (i.e. dome covers, gasket seals,
self-latching catches): door cover improperly hinged, repair or replace dome
cover, replace or repair seals/gaskets or self-latching catches, improper
installation, testing or maintenance of seals, gaskets, latching equipment

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fuel product identification sign/placards: install or replace product
identification signs/placards, improper location of signs/placards. In
vehicle, insufficient size lettering on signs/ placards, not legible or
visible

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Vehicle clearance and spacing: improper clearance between vehicles, improper
clearance between vehicles and aircraft, improper clearance between vehicles
and Structures/ Buildings, improper clearance during aircraft fueling
operation, improper clearance during dispensing/ transferring of fuel,
improper clearance to aircraft during tank to tank fuel transfer

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



Fueling operations: fueling equipment operator not properly trained, improper
transferring of fuel, fueling equipment not being properly maintained,
fueling equipment/vehicle left unattended during fueling operations,
spill/leak control measures not properly performed

(FFPC)
 

$250.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00

 

$500.00—1,000.00



** Mandatory court appearance for fourth offense


FAC = Florida Administrative Code

FBC = Florida Building Code

FFPC = Florida Fire Prevention Code




 



   31.35(E)   Additional means of enforcement.  Nothing contained in
this Section shall prohibit the City from enforcing the City Code by other
means.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.36  SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.



   The provisions and procedures contained in this Chapter shall be in
addition and supplemental to any other remedies now existing or subsequently
provided for by law regarding violations of municipal ordinances. Nothing
contained in this Section shall prohibit the City from enforcing the City
Code by any other means.



(Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 31.37  CORRECTION OF CONDITION BY CITY.



   31.37(A)   Owner’s Expense.  If the condition described in a
notice has not been remedied within the period of time given in the notice of
violation after the mailing or service or posting of such notice, or in the
event that there is a hearing, as provided for by §§ 31.01 et seq. of this
Code, after notice to the property Owner of the unfavorable decision of the
Special Magistrate, the condition may be remedied by the City at the expense
of the property Owner. Any such action taken by the City to repair and/or
correct the condition does not create a continuing obligation on the part of
the City to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not
create any liability against the City for any damages to the property. Such
expense shall include reasonable administrative expenses, filing costs, and
attorneys’ fees. The filing and enforcement of any lien shall be in
accordance with §§ 31.01 et seq. of this Code.



   31.37(B)   Lien on property.  Actions taken by the City to repair
or correct a violation of the City Code shall be and become a lien upon the
property or properties upon which the violation occurred. The amount of the
lien shall include all costs incurred by the City as a result of the City’s
finding of a violation and actions taken to repair or correct such violation.
The City’s entitlement to these costs is perfected upon the commitment by
the City to incur the costs. The City may record its claim of lien in the
Public Records of Broward County. All liens created as a result of actions
taken by the City to repair or correct serious threats to life, health,
safety and/or welfare shall remain liens, coequal with the liens of all
State, county, district and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other
liens, titles and claims, until paid.



((Ord. 2010-10, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-03, passed 5-16-2011)



CHAPTER 32:  ACQUISITION OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY



Section



   32.01   Applicability



   32.02   Methods of acquisition



   32.03   City Commission approval



   32.04   Protest procedures



   32.05   Form of contract



   32.06   Change orders



   32.07   Termination, extension and renewal



   32.08   Disposal of non-real property



   32.09   Real property acquisition and conveyance



   32.10   Cone of silence



   32.11   Financial statements; public records exemption



   32.12   Best interest waivers



§ 32.01  APPLICABILITY.



   This Chapter applies to the acquisitions of real and non-real property,
goods and services and disposals of real and non-real property by the City
after May 16, 2011 as provided for in this Chapter.  Any actions taken or
contracts entered into contrary to the provisions of this Chapter may, in the
City's sole discretion, be declared null and void.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011)



§ 32.02  METHODS OF ACQUISITION.



   The City shall determine, in its sole discretion, which of the
following methods of acquisition to utilize for the acquisition of non-real
property, goods and services.



   32.02(A)   Sealed Competitive Method.  Acquisitions of or contracts
for non-real property, goods or services where the expenditure by the City
(including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating
to Change Orders) is estimated to be $100,000 or greater shall be subject to
a Sealed Competitive Method, unless the City utilizes one of the direct
acquisition methods, as provided in § 32.02(C). 



   32.02(A)(1)   Competitive Bids.   Sealed Competitive Bids are
utilized where price, responsiveness and responsibility are the sole
determining factors.  Except as otherwise provided in an Invitation to Bid,
a Selection Committee, appointed by the City Manager, shall review the Sealed
Competitive Bids received by the City in response to Invitation to Bid and
shall determine whether each bidder is responsive and responsible, shall
review for mathematical accuracy and shall make a recommendation to the City
Manager. Except at otherwise provided in an Invitation to Bid, a technical
advisor, appointed by the City Manager, shall serve as the contact person and
assist the Selection Committee. The technical advisor shall not be a member
of the Selection Committee and shall not be entitled to vote. Each Selection
Committee member and the technical advisor shall complete and execute an
independence affidavit. The City Manager shall not serve on the Selection
Committee. The City Attorney or designee shall serve as counsel to the
Committee. The Selection Committee shall terminate upon the full execution of
the contract, or such other time as determined by the City Commission.



   32.02(A)(2)   Requests For Proposals, Requests for Qualifications,
Requests for Letters of Interest.   Requests for Proposals, Requests for
Qualifications and Requests for Letters of Interest are utilized where price,
responsiveness and responsibility are not the sole determining factors. 
Except as otherwise provided in Requests for Proposals, Requests for
Qualifications and Requests for Letters of interest, a Selection Committee,
appointed by the City Manager, shall review the submissions received by the
City in response to Requests for Proposals, Requests for Qualifications and
Requests for Letters of Interest and shall determine whether each proposer is
responsive and responsible, shall review for mathematical accuracy, shall
rank the proposals and shall make a recommendation to the City Manager. 
Except as otherwise provided in Requests for Proposals, Requests for
Qualifications and Requests for Letters of Interest, a technical advisor,
appointed by the City Manager, shall serve as the contact person and assist
the Selection Committee. The technical advisor shall not be a member of the
Selection Committee and shall not be entitled to vote. Each Selection
Committee member and the technical advisor shall complete and execute an
independence affidavit. The City Manager shall not serve on the Selection
Committee.  The City Attorney or designee shall serve as counsel to the
Committee.  The Selection Committee shall terminate upon the full execution
of the contract, or such other time as determined by the City Commission.



   32.02(A)(3)   Submissions.  It shall be the sole responsibility of
the bidder, proposer or responder to have the bid, proposal or response
delivered before the specified closing date and time.  Bids, proposals or
responses received after the closing date and time shall not be considered
and shall be returned unopened.  The official clock at the City Hall
reception desk shall govern.  All bids, proposals and responses submitted
pursuant to a Sealed Competitive Method shall remain sealed until they are
opened publicly on the date and time and location stated in the Notice to
Bidders, Proposers or Responders, or as may be amended by addendum. 



   32.02(A)(4)   City's reservation of rights.  The City may utilize a
Sealed Competitive Method for any acquisition that the City deems appropriate
regardless of the estimated cost of the acquisition.  Until final award of
Contract, the City reserves the right to waive any informality or
irregularity and to reject all bids, proposals and responses, with or without
cause. 



   32.02(B)   Written Quotations Method.  Acquisitions of or contracts
for non-real property, goods or services where the total expenditure by the
City (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures
relating to Change Orders) is estimated to be greater than $10,000, but less
than $100,000, may be made or entered into by the City Manager without City
Commission approval and without a Sealed Competitive Method, provided that
three written quotations are obtained from individual sources, except when
impracticable. The City may utilize the Written Quotations Method for any
acquisition of $10,000 or less that the City deems appropriate.  The written
quotations received by the City shall be retained with a copy of the purchase
order and pursuant to public records law. 



   32.02(C)   Direct Acquisition Method. 



   32.02(C)(1)   Acquisitions of $10,000 or less.  Acquisitions of or
contracts for non-real property, goods or services where the total
expenditure by the City (including expenditures during renewal periods, but
not expenditures relating to Change Orders) is estimated to be $10,000 or
less may be made or entered into by the City Manager without utilizing a
Sealed Competitive Method or the Written Quotations Method, and without City
Commission approval.



   32.02(C)(2)   Professional Services.  Except as otherwise provided
for in Florida Law, contracts for professional services may be made or
entered into by the City Manager without utilizing a Sealed Competitive
Method or the Written Quotations Method.  Acquisitions of professional
services where the expenditure by the City (including expenditures during
renewal periods, but not expenditures relating to Change Orders) is estimated
to be $100,000 or greater shall be subject to approval by the City Commission.



   32.02(C)(3)   Specialty Goods and Services.  Acquisitions of or
contracts for specialty goods and services (including but not limited to
performing artists, artwork, special events, entertainment, and food and
beverage) may be made or entered into by the City Manager without utilizing a
Sealed Competitive Method or the Written Quotations Method.  Acquisitions of
specialty goods and services where the expenditure by the City is estimated
to be $100,000 or greater shall be subject to approval by the City Commission.



   32.02(C)(4)   Emergency Acquisitions.  The City Manager may acquire
or contract for non-real property, goods or services required in
contemplation of, preparation for, or during an Emergency without utilizing a
Sealed Competitive Method or the Written Quotations Method regardless of the
amount.  Emergency acquisitions of non-real property, goods or services
where the expenditure by the City is estimated to be $100,000 or greater
shall be subject to ratification by the City Commission as soon as
practicable. 



   32.02(C)(5)   Sole Source and City Standard.



   32.02(C)(5)(a)   Sole Source.  The City may acquire or contract for
non-real property, goods or services that are available to the City from only
one source without utilizing the Sealed Competitive Method or Written
Quotations Method.  Sole Source acquisitions where the expenditure by the
City (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures
relating to Change Orders) is estimated to be $100,000 or greater shall be
subject to approval by the City Commission.



   32.02(C)(5)(b)   City Standard.  Where the City has determined that
a particular style, brand, make, or model is the only type that meets the
City's requirements for performance, consistency, compatibility or other
salient characteristics, and such determination has resulted in there being
only one source available to the City, the City may acquire or contract for
such goods without utilizing a Sealed Competitive Method or the Written
Quotations Method.  City Standard acquisitions where the expenditure by the
City (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures
relating to Change Orders) is estimated to be $100,000 or greater shall be
subject to approval by the City Commission.



   32.02(C)(6)   Utilization of other governmental entities' contracts.



   32.02(C)(6)(a)   The City may acquire or contract for non-real
property, goods or services without utilizing a Sealed Competitive Method or
the Written Quotations Method where the desired goods or services are the
subject of a contract with the State, its political subdivisions or other
local governmental entities in the State, with associations in Florida
affiliated with state and/or local governmental entities or departments (such
as the Florida Sheriffs Association and the Florida Fire Chiefs' Association)
or with the United States government, provided that the contract is based
strictly on competitive bidding and not on any preference, and provided that
the form of the contract is acceptable to the City Attorney.  Acquisitions
utilizing other governmental entities' contracts where the expenditure by the
City (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures
relating to Change Orders ) is estimated to be $100,000 or greater shall be
subject to approval by the City Commission .



   32.02(C)(6)(b)   Utilization of other government entities' contracts
shall only be permitted during the term of the other governmental entity's
contract or for one year from the date the other governmental entity awards
the bid, whichever is longer. 



   32.02(C)(6)(c)   If the City desires to utilize another governmental
entity's contract, the City shall require the vendor to certify that the
price or rate represents the lowest price or rate for the non-real property,
goods or services of any contract between the vendor and any other
governmental entity within the State. 



   32.02(C)(7)   Cooperative Acquisitions.  The City may acquire or
contract for non-real property, goods or services without utilizing a Sealed
Competitive Method or the Written Quotations Method where the City
participates in a cooperative purchasing contract with other public entities
within the United States provided that the contract for non-real property,
goods or services was competitively procured in a manner consistent with
State law, and provided that the form of the contract is acceptable to the
City Attorney. If the City desires to participate in a cooperative purchasing
contract, the City shall require the vendor to certify that the price or rate
represents the lowest price or rate for the non-real property, goods or
services of any contract between the vendor any other public entity within
the State.  Cooperative acquisitions where the expenditure by the City
(including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures relating
to Change Orders) is estimated to be $100,000 or greater shall be subject to
approval by the City Commission.



   32.02(C)(8)   Utilities.  Water, sewer, gas, electrical, and other
utility services may be acquired without utilizing a Sealed Competitive
Method or the Written Quotations Method and without City Commission approval.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011; Am. Ord. 2014-23, passed 11-17-2014; Am.
Ord. 2015-01, passed 1-20-2015; Am. Ord. 2015-20, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord.
2018-12, passed 8-20-2018)



§ 32.03  CITY COMMISSION APPROVAL.



   32.03(A)   Acquisitions of $100,000 or greater.  Acquisitions of or
contracts for non-real property, goods or services where the expenditure by
the City (including expenditures during renewal periods, but not expenditures
relating to Change Orders) is estimated to be $100,000 or greater shall be
subject to prior approval by the City Commission, except for emergency
acquisitions, which are subject to subsequent ratification by the City
Commission pursuant to § 32.02(C)(3).



   32.03(B)   Multiple acquisitions from vendor exceeding $100,000 in
any Fiscal Year. Acquisitions of or contracts for non-real property, goods or
services from the same Person exceeding the aggregate sum of $100,000 shall
not be permitted from the same Person during the course of any Fiscal Year,
unless the acquisition is first approved by the City Commission. This
subsection shall not apply to utilities, Continuing Contracts or to Ongoing
Contracts.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011)



§ 32.04  PROTEST PROCEDURES.



   32.04(A)   Standing.  Parties that are not actual bidders,
proposers or responders, including, but not limited to, subcontractors,
material and labor suppliers, manufacturers and their representatives, shall
not have standing to protest or appeal any determination made pursuant to
this Section.



   32.04(B)   Procedure. 



   32.04(B)(1)   Protest of Failure to qualify.  Upon notification by
the City that a bidder, proposer or responder is deemed non-responsive and/or
non-responsible, the bidder, proposer or responder who is deemed
non-responsive and/or non-responsible may file a protest with the City Clerk
by close of business on the third Business Day after notification (excluding
the day of notification) or any right to protest is forfeited. It shall be
the sole responsibility of such bidder, proposer or responder to verify the
operating hours of City Hall.



   32.04(B)(2)   Protest of Award of Agreement.  After a Notice of
Intent to Award an Agreement is posted, any actual bidder, proposer or
responder who is aggrieved in connection with the pending award of the
agreement or any element of the process leading to the award of the agreement
may file a protest with the City Clerk by close of business on the third
Business Day after posting (excluding the day of posting) or any right to
protest is forfeited. It shall be the sole responsibility of such bidder,
proposer or responder to verify the operating hours of City Hall, as set
forth in Chapter 2 of the Code.



   A Notice of Intent to Reject all Bids, Proposals or Responses is
subject to the protest procedure.



   32.04(B)(3)   Content and filing.  The protest shall be in writing,
shall identify the name and address of the protester, and shall include a
factual summary of, and the basis for, the protest.  Filing shall be
considered complete when the protest and the Protest Bond are received by the
City Clerk.  The official clock at the City Hall reception desk shall govern.



   32.04(C)   Protest Bond.  Any bidder, proposer or responder filing
a protest shall simultaneously provide a Protest Bond to the City in the
amount set forth in the Sealed Competitive Method documents.  If the protest
is decided in the protester's favor, the entire Protest Bond shall be
returned to the protester.  If the protest is not decided in the protester's
favor, the Protest Bond shall be forfeited to the City.  The Protest Bond
shall be in the form of a cashier's check, and shall be in the amount
specified in the Sealed Competitive Method documents. 



   32.04(D)   Protest Committee.  The Protest Committee shall review
all protests.  The City Manager shall appoint the members of the Protest
Committee.  No member of the City Commission shall serve on the Protest
Committee. Each Protest Committee member shall complete and execute an
independence affidavit. The City Attorney or designee shall serve as counsel
to the Committee.  The meeting of the Protest Committee shall be opened to
the public and all of the actual bidders, responders or proposers shall be
notified of the date, time and place of the meeting.  If the Protest
Committee determines that the protest has merit, the City Manager shall
direct that all appropriate steps be taken.  If the Protest Committee denies
the protest, the protester may appeal to the City Commission .  All of the
actual bidders, responders or proposers shall have a right to be represented
by an attorney at the Protest Committee meeting and the City Commission
meeting. All of the actual bidders, responders or proposers shall be notified
of the determination by the Protest Committee.  The Protest Committee shall
terminate upon the award of the contract, or such other time as determined by
the City Commission .



   32.04(E)   Stay of award of Agreement or Sealed Competitive
Method.  In the event of a timely protest, the City Manager shall stay the
award of the Agreement or the Sealed Competitive Method unless the City
Manager determines that the award of the Agreement without delay or the
continuation of the Sealed Competitive Method is necessary to protect any
substantial interest of the City. The continuation of the Sealed Competitive
Method or award process under these circumstances shall not preempt or
otherwise affect the protest.



   32.04(F)   Appeals to City Commission.  Any actual bidder, proposer
or responder who is aggrieved by a determination of the Protest Committee may
appeal the determination to the City Commission by filing an appeal with the
City Clerk by close of business on the third Business Day after the protester
has been notified (excluding the day of notification) of the determination by
the Protest Committee.  The appeal shall be in writing and shall include a
factual summary of, and the basis for, the appeal.  Filing of an appeal
shall be considered complete when the appeal is received by the City Clerk. 



   32.04(G)   Failure to file protest.  Any actual bidder, proposer or
responder that does not formally protest or appeal in accordance with this
Section shall not have standing to protest the City Commission's award.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011; Am. Ord. 2013-16, passed 12-2-2013; Am. Ord.
2014-23, passed 11-17-2014)



§ 32.05  FORM OF CONTRACT.



   32.05(A)   Written agreements.  Written agreements shall be
utilized for all acquisitions of non-real property, goods or services where
the total expenditure by the City (including expenditures during renewal
periods, but not expenditures relating to Change Orders) is estimated to be
$100,000 or greater. The City may utilize a written agreement for any
acquisition of less than $100,000 that the City deems appropriate.  All
written agreements must be approved as to form and legality by the City
Attorney and executed by the City Attorney.



   32.05(B)   Purchase orders.  Where no other form of contract
exists, purchase orders, in a form pre-approved by the City Attorney, shall
be utilized for acquisitions of non-real property, goods or services where
the total expenditure by the City is estimated to be greater than $10,000. 
The City may utilize a purchase order for any acquisition of $10,000 or less
that the City deems appropriate.  No change shall be made to the
pre-approved purchase order form without express approval of the City
Attorney.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011)



§ 32.06  CHANGE ORDERS.



   32.06(A)   City Commission approved contracts.



   32.06(A)(1)   Beyond the Scope of Work.  Any Change Order that
materially expands or alters the scope of the work in a City Commission
approved contract shall be subject to prior approval by the City Commission.



   32.06(A)(2)   Within the Scope of Work.  The City Manager may
approve a Change Order provided that it does not materially expand or alter
the scope of the work in a City Commission approved contract.  Any such
Change Order approved by the City Manager shall be subject to ratification by
the City Commission as soon as practicable.



   32.06(A)(3)   Extension of Completion Dates.  Any Change Order that
extends the original substantial or final completion date of a City
Commission approved contract shall be subject to prior approval by the City
Commission.



   32.06(B)   City Manager approved contracts.  The City Manager is
authorized to approve a Change Order to a contract that was not approved by
the City Commission, provided that the Change Order does not cause the total
acquisition from the vendor to exceed the aggregate sum of $100,000 during
the course of any Fiscal Year pursuant to Section 32.03(B).



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011)



§ 32.07  TERMINATION, EXTENSION AND RENEWAL.



   32.07(A)   City Commission approved contracts.



   32.07(A)(1)   Termination. Contracts approved by the City Commission
may be terminated only by the City Commission.  If the City Manager desires
to terminate a City Commission approved contract, the City Manager may
suspend the work under the contract until the City Commission makes a final
determination. 



   32.07(A)(2)   Extensions.  The City Manager may extend a City
Commission approved contract for up to 90 days.  The extension of any City
Commission approved contract for longer than 90 days shall be subject to
prior approval by the City Commission.  In the event of an Emergency, the
City Manager may extend a City Commission approved contract without City
Commission approval, subject to later ratification by the City Commission. 



   32.07(A)(3)   Renewals.  When a contract is entered into by the
City pursuant to City Commission approval and provides for one or more
renewals by affirmative action of the City, only the City Commission may
approve such renewals. 



   32.07(A)(4)   Suspensions.  The City Manager may suspend a City
Commission approved contract for up to 90 days.  Suspension of a City
Commission approved contract for longer than 90 days shall be subject to City
Commission approval.



   32.07(B)   City Manager approved contracts.



   32.07(B)(1)   Termination.  Contracts that were not approved by the
City Commission may be terminated by the City Manager. 



   32.07(B)(2)   Extensions.  The City Manager is authorized to extend
for up to 120 days any contract entered into by the City that was not
approved by the City Commission.



   32.07(B)(3)   Renewals. When a contract is entered into by the City
pursuant to City Manager approval and provides for one or more renewals by
affirmative action of the City, the City Manager is authorized to approve
such renewals without City Commission approval. 



   32.07(B)(4)   Suspensions.  Contracts that were not approved by the
City Commission may be suspended by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011)



§ 32.08  DISPOSAL OF NON-REAL PROPERTY.



   32.08(A)   Trade-in.  Where trade-in is available in conjunction
with the purchase of replacement non-real property from the same vendor, the
City may trade-in and replace its non-real property with that vendor.  The
trade-in of the City's non-real property shall be subject to approval by a
Resolution of the City Commission if the estimated market value of the
property being traded-in is greater than $10,000.



   32.08(B)   Market value of $10,000 or less. The City's non-real
property with an estimated market value of $10,000 or less may be sold or
auctioned through a competitive process as determined by the City Manager.



   32.08(C)   Market value greater than $10,000.  The City Manager may
sell or auction any of the City's non-real property with an estimated market
value of greater than $10,000 through a competitive process that is approved
by a Resolution of the City Commission.  The notice of a proposed sale of
the City's non-real property with a market value greater than $10,000 shall
be advertised on the City's website within a reasonable time subsequent to
the City Commission's approval of the Resolution providing for the sale.



   32.08(D)   Junk non-real property.  The City Manager may declare
that any non-real property that is determined by the City Manager to have
reached the end of its useful life and/or may expose the City to potential
liability from its continued use or sale and/or whose disposition cost
exceeds its value, is junk. Non-real property declared by the City Manager to
be junk shall be disposed of without receipt of consideration (or, if
necessary, at a cost to the City) and shall be rendered useless and not be
donated.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011)



§ 32.09  REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION AND CONVEYANCE.



   32.09(A)   Acquisition of rights in real property.  The acquisition
of any rights in real property shall be subject to approval by a Resolution
of the City Commission.



   32.09 (B)   Disposition of rights in real property.



   32.09(B)(1)   The transfer of any of the City's real property rights
shall be subject to approval by a Resolution of the City Commission .



   32.09(B)(2)   Prior to the sale, conveyance, assignment, lease
and/or management agreement for a term of 25 years or greater (including
options), for any Public Park(s), any Fire Station(s), Police Station, City
Hall, the Public Works Facility, the Weston Tennis Center , the Community
Center, the Administrative Services Center, any drainage pump station(s) or
any utility lift station(s), the City shall hold a minimum of two public
hearings, at least 10 days apart, in order to obtain public input into the
proposed sale, conveyance, assignment, lease and/or management agreement. 
The first public hearing shall be to determine whether to solicit offers or
proposals for the subject property.  The second public hearing shall be to
rank the offers or proposals. 



   32.09(B)(3)   The notice of a proposed sale, conveyance, lease
and/or management agreement for a term of 25 years or greater (including
options), of any of the City's facilities set forth in § 32.09 (B)(2) above,
shall be advertised on the City's website at least 10 days prior to each
public hearing. The City shall also post a sign on the real property that is
subject to the proposed sale, conveyance, lease and/or management agreement,
which includes the date, time and location of each public hearing and a
number to call for additional information.  The sign shall remain on the
subject property until after each public hearing.  The sign shall be posted
in a location that is clearly visible from the adjacent Right-Of-Way.



(Ord. 2011-04, passed 5-16-2011; Am. Ord. 2015-23, passed 10-19-2015)



§ 32.10  CONE OF SILENCE.



   32.10(A)   Prohibited Communication.  When the City utilizes a
Sealed Competitive Method, there shall be no communication related to the
Sealed Competitive Method solicitation, bids, proposals or responses
between: 



   32.10(A)(1)    Any Person (including any Lobbyist or any other
Person on that Person's behalf) that seeks a contract, contract renewal,
award, recommendation or approval, and



   32.10(A)(2)   Any member of the City Commission, Selection Committee
or Protest Committee.



   32.10(B)  Permitted Communication. 



   32.10(B)(1)   The prohibition in communication contained in § 32.10
(A) shall not apply to written or oral communications with legal counsel for
the City.



   32.10(B)(2)   The prohibition in communication contained in § 32.10
(A) shall not prohibit any Person from:



   32.10(B)(2)(a)   Making public presentations at pre-bid conferences
or to the Selection Committee or Protest Committee, or to the City
Commission, during any public meeting related to the Sealed Competitive
Method solicitation;



   32.10(B)(2)(b)   Engaging in contract negotiations at a meeting of
the Selection Committee, or with the City Commission during a public meeting;
or



   32.10(B)(2)(c)   Communicating in writing with the person designated
in the Sealed Competitive Method documents as the contact person for
clarification or information related to the competitive solicitation. The
written communication, including any response thereto, shall be provided to
any Person that has submitted a bid, proposal or response.



   32.10(C)   Effective Dates.  The prohibition in communication
contained in § 32.10(A) shall be in effect during a Sealed Competitive
Method solicitation beginning when first publicly noticed, and shall
terminate upon execution of a contract, a decision by the City Commission to
reject all bids or responses to the Sealed Competitive Method solicitation,
or the taking of other action that ends the Sealed Competitive Method
solicitation.



   32.10(D)   Notice.  When the prohibition in communication becomes
effective for a particular Sealed Competitive Method solicitation, the City
Manager shall provide notice of the prohibition to the City Commission. The
Sealed Competitive Method solicitation documents for the goods or services
shall generally disclose the requirements of this Section. 



   32.10(E)   Violations.  Any action in violation of this Section may
be cause for disqualification of the bidder, responder or proposer. The
determination of a violation and/or disqualification shall be made by the
City Commission . 



   32.10(F)   Charitable Contributions.  The prohibition in
communication contained in § 32.10(A) shall not apply to charitable
contributions pursuant to Section 7.04 of the Charter.



   32.10(G)   Exceptions.  If a prohibited communication occurs, it is
in the City Manager’s discretion to determine whether the communication is
innocuous and not intended to influence the outcome of the Sealed Competitive
Method, or whether the communication may be cause for disqualification. If
the City Manager determines the prohibited communication may be cause for
disqualification, the City Manager shall place the item on an upcoming City
Commission agenda.



(Ord. 2012-03, passed 2-6-2012; Am. Ord. 2012-15, passed 9-12-2012; Am. Ord.
2016-24, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 32.11  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS; PUBLIC RECORDS EXEMPTION.



   Financial statements submitted pursuant to Sealed Competitive Methods
for Public Works Projects shall be deemed to be exempt from public records
pursuant to F.S. § 119.071(1)(c).



(Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 32.12  BEST INTEREST WAIVERS.



   The City may waive any provision of Chapter 32, where the City
Commission declares by at least a four-fifths (4/5) affirmative vote that it
is in the best interest of the City to do so.  The City Commission shall
make specific factual findings that support its determination, and such
contracts shall be placed on the regular City Commission agenda.



(Ord. 2018-12, passed 8-20-2018)



CHAPTER 33: INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS



Section



   33.01   Suitable and authorized investments



§ 33.01  SUITABLE AND AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS.



   33.01(A)   Requirements.  The City is highly risk averse in its
investment strategy and as such will not purchase any individual security
rated lower than the third highest tier  (e.g., A-rated) by at least one
nationally recognized rating agency in the United States (e.g., Moody's, S&P,
Fitch's). U.S. Treasury obligations which carry the full faith and credit of
the United States Government, U.S. Government agency obligations, U.S.
Government instrumentality obligations, or any other debt instrument which
carries the full faith and credit of the United States Government or the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation are exempt from the previously  stated
rating requirement. In addition, the City will only purchase securities
with  book yields exceeding the maturity-equivalent Municipal AAA yield,
adjusted on a tax equivalent basis.



   33.01(B)   Investments.  Consistent with the Government Finance
Officers Association Best Practices concerning Treasury and Investment
Management, the following investments shall be permitted by this section and
are those defined by state and local law where applicable:



   33.01(B)(1)   U.S. Treasury obligations which carry the full faith
and credit of the United States Government and are considered to be the most
secure instruments available.



   33.01(B)(2)   U.S. Government agency and instrumentality obligations
that have a liquid market with a readily determinable market value.



   33.01(B)(3)   Obligations of state and local governments, including
their agencies and authorities, either directly or indirectly.



   33.01(B)(4)   Commercial paper, rated in the highest tier (e.g.,
A-1, P-1, F-1, or D-1) by a nationally recognized rating agency.



   33.01(B)(5)   Repurchase agreements collateralized by U.S. Treasury
or Government agency and instrumentality securities.



   33.01(B)(6)   Money market mutual funds regulated by the Securities
and Exchange Commission rated in the highest tier by a nationally recognized
rating agency and whose portfolios consist of only dollar denominated
securities.



   33.01(B)(7)   Demand deposit accounts, interest bearing time
deposits, money market accounts  or savings accounts in qualified  public
depositories, including negotiable certificates of deposit, as defined in
F.S. § 280.02.



   33.01(B)(8)   Obligations of any corporate institution (excluding
life and casualty insurance companies).



   33.01(B)(9)   Mortgage-backed Securities (MBS), Collateralized
Mortgage Obligations (CMO's) or Asset-backed Securities (ABS) containing
fixed or adjustable-rate mortgages or assets issued by any U.S. Government
agency or instrumentality or any corporate institution (excluding life and
casualty insurance companies).



   33.01(B)(10)   Obligations of any sovereign government issued via
the U.S. Agency for International Development and guaranteed by the full
faith and credit of the U.S. Government.



   33.01(C)   Prohibition on investments in derivative contracts. This
section does not provide authorization for investment in derivative contracts
as defined by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB), which
defers to the Federal Accounting Standards Board (FASB) on its definition of
a derivative security. The FASB definition of a derivative security, as
provided in Statement 133, Paragraph 6-7, is provided in the Appendix
preceding the Investment Policy glossary. This section also does not provide
authorization for the purchase of private placement or 144A securities as
defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 2-1-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-09, passed 6-18-2018)



TITLE IV:  TAXES, FEES AND COSTS



   Chapter



      40.   BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS



      41.   PUBLIC SERVICE TAX



      42.   HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION



      43.   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND COST RECOVERY



      44.   TECHNICAL RESCUE AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES COST RECOVERY



      45.   PAYMENTS RECEIVED BY THE CITY



      46.   LIENS



CHAPTER 40:  BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS



Section



   40.01   Payment of business tax



   40.02   Business tax receipt application and term



   40.03   Business tax exemptions and credits



   40.04   Evidence of engaging in business



   40.05   Business tax receipt transferability



   40.06   Proof of state license or registration required for state
regulated businesses



   40.07   Penalty for failure to pay business tax



   40.08   Compliance with building and zoning regulations required




Specific Business Requirements




   40.10   Assisted living facilities



   40.11   Contractors



   40.12   Health studios; consumer protection



   40.13   Mobile food vendors



   40.14   Pest control business



   40.15   Pharmacies and pharmacists



   40.16   Private detectives and criminal investigators



   40.17   Psychologists



   40.18   Sellers of travel; consumer protection



   40.19   Solicitors and canvassers



   40.20   Telemarketing businesses; consumer protection



§ 40.01  PAYMENT OF BUSINESS TAX.



   40.01(A)   Business defined.  The following definitions apply to
the Code provisions of this Chapter 40 only:



   40.01(A)(1)   Business includes the work, vocation, profession,
occupation, commercial enterprise or trade in which a person is engaged, and
all activities and matters together with all devices, machines, vehicles and
appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted, either directly or
indirectly, on or from any premises in the City.



   40.01(A)(2)   Business does not include Nonprofit Charitable
Institutions , Nonprofit Educational Institutions, or Nonprofit Religious
Institutions .



   40.01(A)(3)   Business does not include a Person that solely manages
personal investments from a residential property.



   40.01(B)   Requirement to pay Business Tax.  No Person shall engage
in any Business that is carried on within the City, and no Business Tax
Receipt shall be issued, until a Business Tax for the current year, and all
prior outstanding Business Taxes have been paid for such Business and the
proper Business Tax Receipt obtained.



   40.01(C)   Dates due.  All Business Tax Receipts shall be sold by
the City beginning July 1 of each Year, are due and payable on or before
September 30 of each Year, and expire on September 30 of the succeeding Year.
If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on
or before the first working day following September 30.



   40.01(D)   Partial Year payment.  Applicants for Business Tax
Receipts that apply after the beginning of the fiscal year (October 1) but
before April 1 of that fiscal year shall pay the full tax for one year and
Applicants that apply on or after April 1 of the fiscal year but before
September 30 of that fiscal year shall pay one-half the full tax for one
year, except as herein otherwise provided.



   40.01(E)   Amount of Business Tax.  Each Business shall pay a
Business Tax in the amount set forth below:



 


Category

 

Tax




Full Year

 

Partial Year





I.   Hotels, Motels, Apartments or Timeshares with 250 units or more
 

$6,381.40

 

$3,190.70



II.   Warehouse, Manufacturing Facility or Pharmacy with 50,000 square
feet or more
 

$4,254.26

 

$2,127.13



III.   Supermarkets
 

$3,342.63

 

1,671.32



IV.   Warehouse, Manufacturing Facility or Pharmacy between 20,000 square
feet and 49,999 square feet
 

$2,552.56

 

$1,276.28



V.   Warehouse, Manufacturing Facility or Pharmacy between 10,000 square
feet and 19,999 square feet;

Apartments or Timeshares with 100—249 units;

Hotels or Motels with 150—249 rooms

Country Clubs and Golf Course(s);

Athletic/Fitness Club with Pool
 

$1,519.37

 

$759.69



VI.   Limited Business

Home Occupation

Business with only a Post Office, Private Mail Box or Registered Office in
the City
 

$182.31

 

$91.16



VII.   Individual Professional Entity
 

$91.14

 

$45.57



VIII.   General Business (all other Businesses)
 

$273.48

 

$136.74





 



[Effective 10-1-2019:]



 


Category

 

Tax




Full Year

 

Partial Year





I.   Hotels, Motels, Apartments or Timeshares with 250 units or more
 

$6,700.47

 

$3,350.24



II.   Warehouse, Manufacturing Facility or Pharmacy with 50,000 square
feet or more
 

$4,466.97

 

$2,233.49



III.   Supermarkets
 

$3,509.76

 

$1,754.88



IV.   Warehouse, Manufacturing Facility or Pharmacy between 20,000 square
feet and 49,999 square feet
 

$2,680.19

 

$1,340.09



V.   Warehouse, Manufacturing Facility or Pharmacy between 10,000 square
feet and 19,999 square feet;

   Apartments or Timeshares with 100—249 units;

   Hotels or Motels with 150—249 rooms

   Country Clubs and Golf Course(s);

   Athletic/Fitness Club with Pool
 

$1,595.34

 

$797.67



VI.   Limited Business

   Home Occupation

   Business with only a Post Office, Private Mail Box or Registered Office
in the City
 

$191.43

 

$95.71



VII.   Individual Professional Entity
 

$95.70

 

$47.85



VIII.   General Business (all other Businesses)
 

$287.15

 

$143.58





 



   40.01(F)   Separate location.  A separate Business Tax Receipt
shall be obtained for each location of any Business located within the City .



   40.01(G)   Separate Business.



   40.01(G)(1)   Each Business entity registered with the State shall
constitute a single and separate Business , requiring a Business Tax Receipt
for each registered Business entity.



   40.01(G)(2)   A separate Business Tax Receipt shall be obtained for
each separate Business at the same location.



   40.01(G)(3)   Each receipt obtained by a Business shall be issued to
cover only the Business licensed thereby at the location and in the category
designated in such receipt.



   40.01(H)   Starting date of payment responsibility.  For purposes
of this Chapter of the Code, the starting date of a Business and the starting
date of a Business’s responsibility for payment of a Business Tax shall be
as follows:



   40.01(H)(1)   Commercial locations.  Upon the later of:



   40.01(H)(1)(a)   The effective date of the State filing; or, if
applicable,



   40.01(H)(1)(b)   The issuance of a Certificate of Use; or, if
applicable,



   40.01(H)(1)(c)   The effective date of a lease for commercial space.



   40.01(H)(2)   Home Occupations.  Upon the earlier of:



   40.01(H)(2)(a)   The issuance of a Business Tax Receipt for a Home
Occupation ; or



   40.01(H)(2)(b)   Upon transacting commerce from a Residential
Property .



   40.01(H)(3)   Mailboxes.  Upon the earlier of:



   40.01(H)(3)(a)   The effective date of a State or Federal filing
indicating the mailbox location within the City; or



   40.01(H)(3)(b)   The mailbox lease effective date.



   40.01(I)      Ending date of payment responsibility.  For
purposes of this Chapter of the Code, the ending date of a Business and the
ending date of a Business’s responsibility for payment of a Business Tax
shall be upon the completion of:



   40.01(I)(1)(a)   The filing of the Articles of Dissolution, as
provided by the State, with the City; or



   40.01(I)(1)(b)   The filing of confirmation with the City, as
provided by the State, that the Business has been administratively dissolved;
and



   40.01(I)(2)   The signing and filing of a sworn affidavit with the
City affirming that the Business no longer Transacts Commerce within the City.



   For the purposes of this Chapter of the Code , providing proof of an
involuntary dissolution is insufficient evidence of proof of the ending date
of a Business .



   40.01(J)   Receipt display.  Any Person issued a Business Tax
Receipt shall post the Business Tax Receipt in a conspicuous place in or
about such Person’s place of Business.



   40.01(K)   Refund of fees.  If the City Manager finds that a
Business Tax was collected incorrectly and a refund is warranted, the City
may issue a refund up to the difference between the amount actually paid to
the City and all amounts payable under a proper Business Tax Receipt.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-09, passed 4-16-2012; Am. Ord.
2015-06, passed 3-16-2015; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 3-20-2017; Am. Ord.
2019-02, passed 3-18-2019)



§ 40.02  BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT APPLICATION AND TERM.



   40.02(A)   Application.  To obtain a Business Tax Receipt,
Businesses shall complete a Business Tax Receipt form provided by the City
and submit the form to the City Manager.



   40.02(B)   Expiration.  All Business Tax Receipts issued under this
Chapter shall expire on September 30 of each Year. No Business Tax Receipt
shall be issued for more than one fiscal year.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.03  BUSINESS TAX EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS.



   40.03(A)   Exemptions for certain disabled Persons, the aged and
widows with minor dependents.



   40.03(A)(1)   All disabled Persons physically incapable of manual
labor, widows with minor dependents, and Persons 65 years of age or older,
with not more than one employee or helper, and who use their own capital
only, not in excess of $1,000.00, may engage in any Business without being
required to pay a Business Tax . The exemption provided by this Section shall
be allowed only upon the certificate of the county physician, or other
reputable physician, that the Applicant claiming the exemption is disabled,
the nature and extent of the disability being specified therein, and in case
the exemption is claimed by a widow with minor dependents, or a Person over
65 years of age, proof of the right to the exemption shall be made. Any
Person entitled to the exemption provided by this Section shall, upon
application and furnishing of the necessary proof as aforesaid, be issued a
Business Tax Receipt that shall have plainly stamped or written across the
face thereof the fact that it is issued under this Section, and the reason
for the exemption shall be written thereon.



   40.03(A)(2)   Neither this nor any other Law exempts any Person from
the payment of any amount required by Law for the issuance of a license to
sell intoxicating Liquors or malt and vinous beverages. Applicants granted a
Business Tax Receipt under this Section shall not be exempt from the other
provisions of this Chapter or the City Code .



   40.03(B)   Nonresident temporary or transitory services exemption. 
Any Person engaging in a Business regulated by the Department of Business and
Professional Regulation who has paid a Business Tax for the current year to
the county or municipality in the state where the Person’s permanent
Business location or branch office is maintained, shall be exempt from
obtaining a Business Tax Receipt from the City, for performing work or
services on a temporary or transitory basis in the City.



   40.03(C)   Charitable organization exemption.



   40.03(C)(1)   A Business Tax Receipt is not required of any
charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service, or other similar
organization that makes occasional sales or engages in fundraising projects
that are performed exclusively by the members, and the proceeds derived from
the activities are used exclusively in the charitable, religious, fraternal,
youth, civic, and service activities of the organization.



   40.03(C)(2)   A Person that is a nonprofit “Charitable
Institution” as defined in the City Code , and is therefore not a “
Business ” subject to payment of a Business Tax , or a Person that
qualifies for the charitable organization exemption in this Section, shall be
exempt from payment of a Business Tax upon filing a sworn statement to the
City Manager, under penalty of perjury and on a form provided by the City,
that such Person:



   40.03(C)(2)(a)   Is a nonprofit “Charitable Institution” as
defined in the City Code ; or



   40.03(C)(2)(b)   Qualifies for the charitable organization exemption
in § 40.03(C)(1) of the Code .



   40.03(D)   Religious exemption.  This Chapter does not require a
Business Tax Receipt for practicing the religious tenets of any church.



   40.03(E)   Motor vehicle exemption.  Vehicles used by any Person
receipted under this Chapter for the sale and delivery of tangible personal
property at wholesale or retail from his or her place of Business on which a
Business Tax is paid may not be construed to be separate places of Business,
and a Business Tax shall not be levied on such vehicles or the operators
thereof as salespersons or otherwise, any other Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.



   40.03(F)   Veteran’s credit.  Any honorably discharged veteran of
any branch of the armed forces of the United States who is disabled from
performing manual labor and a permanent resident of the State shall receive a
credit of $50.00 on any Business Tax Receipt granted under this Chapter. The
unremarried spouse of a deceased disabled veteran of any war in which the
United States armed forces participated is entitled to the same exemptions as
the disabled veteran.



   40.03(G)   Real estate broker associate or sales associate
exemption. Any individual licensed and operating as a real estate broker
associate or sales associate, under F.S. Chapter 475 is not required to apply
for, pay for or obtain a Business Tax Receipt.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-16, passed 9-12-2012)



§ 40.04  EVIDENCE OF ENGAGING IN BUSINESS.



   40.04(A)   One act constitutes evidence of engaging in Business. 
For purposes of this Chapter, any Person shall be presumed to be engaged in
Business in the City and thus responsible for paying a Business Tax, when
that Person does any of the following:



   40.04(A)(1)   Submits a State and/or Federal filing indicating a
Business address located within the City . Such filings include, but are not
limited to:



   40.04(A)(1)(a)   Filings with the Secretary of State indicating a
principal address located within the City ,



   40.04(A)(1)(b)   Filings regarding a Federal Employer Identification
Number (FEIN) or Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN), and



   40.04(A)(1)(c)   Filings regarding a sales tax certificate.



   40.04(A)(2)   Transacts Commerce from a Residential Property within
the City ,



   40.04(A)(3)   Utilizes a Residential Property as a location for an
address for Business correspondence,



   40.04(A)(4)   Executes a commercial lease for a location within the
City ,



   40.04(A)(5)   Holds an active license, permit or business tax
receipt issued by a governmental agency indicating that Person utilizes a
business or mailing address within the City ,



   40.04(A)(6)   Holds a Certificate of Use for a Commercial
Establishment located within the City , or



   40.04(A)(7)   Submits tangible personal property tax documentation
to the County that indicates a business address within the City .



   40.04(B)   Affidavit rebutting presumption.



   40.04(B)(1)   A Person that is presumed to be engaged in Business in
the City pursuant to § 40.04(A) may rebut the presumption by filing a sworn
statement to the City Manager, under penalty of perjury and on a form
provided by the City , that such Person is not engaged in Business in the
City (i.e. that the Person is not, from or within the City : manufacturing,
distributing, repairing, buying, selling, or offering for sale goods;
providing, scheduling, selling or offering for sale services; leasing
property for nonresidential purposes; or transacting any other commerce).



   40.04(B)(2)   The sworn statement must be filed with the City
Manager for each Fiscal Year in which a Person desires to rebut the
presumption of engaging in Business . It shall be the duty of the Person
filing the sworn statement to notify the City of any changes that affect the
continued accuracy of the sworn statement.



   40.04(B)(3)   A Person may rebut the presumption of engaging in
Business for current or prior fiscal years; however no refunds will be issued
for any fiscal year in which a Person fails to file the sworn statement
described in (B)(1) above prior to October 1 of the applicable fiscal year.



   40.04(C)   Advertising with address located in City.  Any Person
who by use of Signs, circulars, cards, websites, telephone books, electronic
communications, newspapers, letterhead, or any other means, advertises, holds
out, or represents that the Person engages in Business with an address
located within the City, is engaging in Business in the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 4-16-2012; Am. Ord.
2012-16, passed 9-12-2012; Am. Ord. 2015-03, passed 2-17-2015)



§ 40.05  BUSINESS TAX RECEIPT TRANSFERABILITY.



   40.05(A)   Upon application and presentation of the original
Business Tax Receipt , any Business Tax Receipt may be transferred from one
location to another location within the City upon payment of the transfer fee
of 10% of the annual Business Tax , not to exceed $25.00.



   40.05(B)   Any Business Tax Receipt may be transferred to a new
owner when there is a bona fide sale of the Business , upon payment of a
transfer fee of 10% of the annual Business Tax , not to exceed $25.00.



   40.05(C)   No Business Tax Receipt shall be transferred without
submission of a new application in accordance with § 40.02.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.06  PROOF OF STATE LICENSE OR REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR STATE
REGULATED BUSINESSES.



   40.06(A)   First-time Applicants.  Any Person applying for a
Business Tax Receipt for the first time, to engage in any Business regulated
by the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, or any board or
commission thereof, must exhibit an active State certificate, registration,
or license, or proof of copy of the same, before such Business Tax Receipt
may be issued.



   40.06(B)   Non-renewal of Business Tax Receipt.  If the City is
notified by the Department of Business and Professional Regulation that an
Applicant is a Person for whom a Business Tax Receipt should not be renewed
due to the suspension, revocation, or inactivation of such Person’s State
license, certificate, or registration, the City shall not renew such Business
Tax Receipt unless such Person can exhibit an active State certificate,
registration, or license.



   40.06(C)   Inapplicability of this Section.  This Section shall not
apply to the contractor related businesses regulated under F.S. §§ 489.113,
489.117, 489.119, 489.131, 489.511, 489.513, 489.521 or 489.537.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.07  PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY BUSINESS TAX.



   40.07(A)   Penalty.  Any Person who engages in any Business within
the City without first obtaining a Business Tax Receipt, if hereby required,
is subject to a penalty of 25% of the Business Tax due, in addition to any
other penalty provided by Law or ordinance.



   40.07(B)   Delinquency.  Business Tax Receipts that are not renewed
when due and payable are delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of
10% for the month of October, plus an additional 5% penalty for each
subsequent month of delinquency until paid. Each delinquency penalty shall be
applied to the amount equal to the Business Tax due plus all previous
outstanding delinquency penalties. However, the total delinquency penalty may
not exceed 25% of the Business Tax for the delinquent establishment. Any
money received shall be applied to the oldest delinquent Business Tax and
penalties first.



   40.07(C)   Except as otherwise provided, any Person who engages in
any Business covered by this Chapter who does not pay the required Business
Tax within 150 days after the initial notice of the tax due and who does not
obtain the required Business Tax Receipt is subject to civil actions and
penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys’ fees, additional
administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a
penalty equal to the annual amount of the Business Tax or $250.00, whichever
is less.



   40.07(D)   Collection of taxes, penalties and fees due from prior
years.  In the event the City determines that a Person has failed to pay the
Business Tax, the City shall submit a written notice to such Person
indicating the Person's failure to pay the Business Tax and requesting
payment. A Person who receives written notice of failure to pay a Business
Tax shall be liable for payment of all outstanding taxes, fees and penalties
due for the current Fiscal YearBusiness Tax and for payment of all
outstanding taxes, fees and penalties due from prior Fiscal Years from the
time that the Person first received written notice from the City that the
Person was liable for payment of a Business Tax.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 4-16-2012)



§ 40.08  COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING AND ZONING REGULATIONS REQUIRED.



   40.08(A)   Duty to comply with City Code.  Each Applicant for a
Business Tax Receipt shall state and set out the exact location at which such
Business shall be operated. It shall be the duty of the Applicant to ensure
the Business location complies with the City Code, rules and regulations,
including, but not limited to, all building and zoning regulations. The
issuance of a Business Tax Receipt by the City shall not signify that the
Business location is in compliance with any City Code, rule or regulation,
other than the payment of the Business Tax, nor may it be relied upon by the
Applicant or any other Person or entity as evidence of compliance with any
code, rule or regulation other than payment of the Business Tax.



   40.08(B)   Certificate of Use.  No Business Tax Receipt shall be
issued until a certificate of use has been issued in accordance with the City
Code, unless its Business does not require a certificate of use.



   40.08(C)   Affidavit Required.  In order to obtain an annual
Business Tax Receipt, each Applicant for a Business Tax Receipt shall submit
to the City an affidavit, on a form approved by the City Manager stating
whether any alterations have been made to the physical space since the
issuance of the certificate of use, and if so a description of the
alterations, and the Building Permit number for the alterations, if any. It
is a violation of this Section and punishable as provided in § 2.99 of this
Code to falsify the affidavit.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



SPECIFIC BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS



§ 40.10  ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES.



   An assisted living facility operating pursuant to F.S. Chapter 400,
Part III, shall not be granted a Business Tax Receipt if the State Agency for
Health Care Administration has so instructed the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.11  CONTRACTORS.



   Contractors will be required to provide proof of insurance and
certificate of competency as required under Florida Statutes at the time of
application for a Business Tax Receipt and/or renewal thereof.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.12  HEALTH STUDIOS; CONSUMER PROTECTION.



   No Business Tax Receipt for the operation of a health studio pursuant
to F.S. §§ 501.012 through 501.019, or ballroom dance studio pursuant to
F.S. § 501.143, shall be issued unless such business exhibits a current
license, registration, or letter of exemption from the Department of
Agriculture and Consumer Services. Upon presentation of the requisite
document from the Department and the required fee, a Business Tax Receipt
shall be issued by the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.13  MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.



   No Business Tax Receipt shall be issued or granted to any Applicant to
engage in the business of moving vehicles doing business from same as a
mobile vendor of food or beverages unless the Applicant has in his or her
possession and presents to the City Manager written approval from the Broward
County Health Department for the operation of said business.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.14  PEST CONTROL BUSINESS.



   No Business Tax Receipt shall be issued to any pest control business
regulated under F.S. Chapter 482, unless a current license has been procured
from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services for each of its
business locations in the City. Upon presentation of the requisite licenses
from the Department and the required fee, a Business Tax Receipt shall be
issued by the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.15  PHARMACIES AND PHARMACISTS.



   No Business Tax Receipt shall be issued to operate a retail pharmacy
unless the Applicant produces a current permit issued by the Board of
Pharmacy; however, no such Business Tax Receipt is required to practice the
profession of pharmacist. Upon presentation of the requisite licenses from
the Board of Pharmacy and the required fee, a Business Tax Receipt shall be
issued by the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.16  PRIVATE DETECTIVES AND CRIMINAL INVESTIGATORS.



   40.16(A)   All private detectives or criminal investigators
maintaining a physical office in the City are required to obtain a Business
Tax Receipt .



   40.16(B)   In addition to the above requirements, the following
prohibitions shall apply to any Person, firm, or corporation licensed by the
Secretary of State of this State pursuant to F.S. Chapter 493 to operate
under a Class “B” or Class “D” license:



   40.16(B)(1)   A receipt holder shall not use any designation or
trade name which implies or gives an impression that such Person, firm, or
corporation is associated with any Police Department, including but not
limited to using the word “police” or “Weston police” or “BSO” or
“Broward Sheriff’s Office” or any official seal or facsimile thereof of
the City, county or State on badges, cap shields, patches, automobiles,
decals, or advertisements within the City.



   40.16(B)(2)   Receipt holders shall not utilize uniforms or badges
capable of being associated or confused with or of the same color and with
similar insignia to the official uniforms of any Police Department.



   40.16(C)   Provisions of this Section shall not apply to any police
officer of the City when performing duties approved by his or her superiors.



   40.16(D)   Any violations of this Section may be punished up to the
maximum penalty provided in this Code.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.17  PSYCHOLOGISTS.



   No Applicant shall be issued a Business Tax Receipt for the practice of
psychology in the City without first procuring a current professional
certificate under the seal of the Broward County Administrator, in accordance
with the provisions of the Broward County Psychological Practice Ordinance. A
copy of said certificate shall be attached to each application form.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.18  SELLERS OF TRAVEL; CONSUMER PROTECTION.



   No Business Tax Receipt shall be issued to engage in business as a
seller of travel unless such business exhibits a current registration or
letter of exemption from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.
Upon presentation of the requisite document from the Department and the
required fee, a Business Tax Receipt shall be issued by the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.19  SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.



   For the purposes of this Section, solicitors and canvassers shall be
required to fulfill the requirements of this Chapter, where applicable, in
addition to fulfilling all other requirements of the City Code , prior to
engaging in business within the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 40.20  TELEMARKETING BUSINESSES; CONSUMER PROTECTION.



   No Business Tax Receipt shall be issued for the operation of a
telemarketing business under F.S. §§ 501.604 and 501.608, unless such
business exhibits a current license or registration from the Department of
Agriculture and Consumer Services or a current affidavit of exemption. Upon
presentation of the requisite document from the Department and the required
fee, a Business Tax Receipt shall be issued by the City.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 41:  PUBLIC SERVICE TAX



Section



   41.01   Payment of public service tax



   41.02   Seller’s duty to collect tax



   41.03   Records; inspection; audit



   41.04   Exemptions



   41.05   Computing of tax



 



   41.06   Penalty



§ 41.01  PAYMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE TAX.



   41.01(A)   Any Person using electricity, metered or bottled gas
(natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and fuel oils, within the
corporate limits of the City shall pay a public service tax at a rate of 10%
on the payments received by the seller. The tax shall be paid to the seller
of such electricity, metered or bottled gas, and fuel oils, at the time
payment is due to the seller, but not less than monthly.



   41.01(B)   Pursuant to F.S. § 166.231(1)(b), the tax herein imposed
shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charge and such charge shall
be separately stated on each bill.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 41.02  SELLER’S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX.



   41.02(A)   Duty to collect tax.  Every seller of electricity,
metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured),
and fuel oils shall collect a public service tax from each purchaser, for the
use of the City, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each
transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the 20th day of each
month, unto the City, all such taxes levied and collected during the
preceding month.



   41.02(B)   Timing for collection of tax.  It shall be unlawful for
any seller to collect the price of any purchase of electricity, metered or
bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and fuel oils
without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such
purchase or purchases, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such
tax without collecting the same from the purchaser.



   41.02(C)   Seller liable for failure to collect tax.  Any seller
failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any
purchase, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall
be liable to the City for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the
same had been actually paid to the seller, and the City Manager may cause to
be brought all suits and actions as may be necessary for the recovery of such
tax.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 41.03  RECORDS; INSPECTION; AUDIT.



   41.03(A)   Providers of electricity, metered or bottled gas
(natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured) and fuel oils within the
corporate limits of the City taxable in accordance with this Chapter shall
provide to the City, upon 60 days written notice of intent to audit by the
City, access to all applicable records for such services, except an extension
of this 60-day period shall be granted if reasonably requested by the
provider.



   41.03(B)   Any additional extension by the seller or the City shall
be granted only upon 30 days written notice prior to the expiration of the
existing extension from the requesting party except in cases of bona fide
emergency or waiver of the notice requirement by the other party.



   41.03(C)   The audit shall be conducted in accordance with Florida
Statutes, including the determination of tax due, refund due, and assessment
of interest and penalties.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 41.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   41.04(A)   Purchases by the United States Government, this State,
and all counties, school districts, municipalities in Florida, and by public
bodies exempted by Law or court order, are exempt from the tax authorized by
this Chapter.



   41.04(B)   The purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas
(natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and fuel oils within the
corporate limits of the City by any Religious Institution possessing a
consumer certificate of exemption issued under F.S. Chapter 212 is hereby
exempt from the public service tax levied by this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 41.05  COMPUTING OF TAX.



   41.05(A)   In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or
bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), and fuel oils
collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be
computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period provided
that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the
amount computed.



   41.05(B)   When a seller renders a bill to a purchaser to cover
purchases made during the particular period of time to which a bill is
applicable, the amount of the public service tax shall be stated separately
from other governmental charges and taxes and shall not be levied on such
taxes and charges.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 41.06  PENALTY.



   41.06(A)   Failure to pay any tax when due or failure to file any
required return shall result in the assessment of interest at the rate of 1%
per month of the delinquent tax from the date the tax was due until paid.



   41.06(B)   Failure to pay any tax when due or failure to file any
required return shall result in the assessment of a penalty of 5% per month
of the delinquent tax, not to exceed a total penalty of 25%. In no event
shall the penalty for failure to file a return be less than $15.00.



   41.06(C)   In the case of a fraudulent return or a willful intent to
evade payment of the tax, the seller making such fraudulent return or
willfully attempting to evade payment of the tax shall be liable for a
specific penalty of 100% of the tax.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 42:  HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION



Section



   42.01   Additional homestead exemption



§ 42.01  ADDITIONAL HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.



   42.01(A)   Requirements to obtain additional homestead exemption. 
A Person who meets each of the requirements set forth below shall be eligible
for an additional homestead exemption in the amount set forth below, in
accordance with F.S. § 196.075:



   42.01(A)(1)   The Person has legal or equitable title to the subject
real estate;



   42.01(A)(2)   The Person maintains upon such property the permanent
residence of the Owner ;



   42.01(A)(3)   The Person has attained the age of 65;



   42.01(A)(4)   The applicable household income does not exceed
$20,000.00, as adjusted pursuant to (C) below; and



   42.01(A)(5)   The taxpayer claiming the above exemption submits
annually to the Broward County Property Appraiser , not later than March 1 of
each year, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the
Florida Department of Revenue. The filing of this statement must be supported
by copies of any federal income tax returns for the prior year, any wage and
earnings statements (W-2 forms), and any other documents required by the
Florida Department of Revenue for each member of the household, to be
submitted by June 1 of each year. The taxpayer’s statement shall attest to
the accuracy of such copies. The Property Appraiser may not grant the
exemption without the required documentation.



   42.01(A)(6)   Amount of Additional Homestead Exemption. If the
amount of the assessed value of the property for a Person who has legal or
equitable title to the subject real estate has a just value less than
$250,000.00, as determined in the first tax year that the Owner applies and
who has maintained thereon the permanent residence of the Owner for at least
25 years, and is eligible for the exemption, the amount of the exemption is
equal to the assessed value of the Property, and otherwise the exemption is
equal to $50,000.00.



   42.01(B)   Application of Homestead Exemption.  Pursuant to and in
accordance with F.S. § 196.075, the additional homestead exemption as set
forth in this Section shall apply to all ad valorem property taxes levied by
the City , including, dependent special districts and municipal service
taxing units.



   42.01(C)   Household income.  For the purposes of subsection
42.01(A)(4) above, beginning January 1, 2001, the $20,000.00 household income
limitation shall, as prescribed by F.S. § 196.075, be adjusted annually, on
January 1 of each year by the percentage change in the average cost-of-living
index in the period January 1 through December 31 of the immediately prior
year compared with the same period for the year prior to that. The index is
the average of the monthly consumer price index figures for the stated
12-month period, relative to the United States as a whole, issued by the
United States Department of Labor.



   42.01(D)   Joint title.  If title is held jointly with right of
survivorship, the Person residing on the property and otherwise qualifying
may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead exemption.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2017-05, passed 5-15-2017)



CHAPTER 43:  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND COST RECOVERY



Section



   43.01   Applicability of the cost recovery program



   43.02   Fee imposed



   43.03   Initial deposit



   43.04   Project accounts; supplemental deposits



   43.05   Records of administrative work performed



§ 43.01  APPLICABILITY OF THE COST RECOVERY PROGRAM.



   The cost recovery program shall apply to all review requests unless
specifically exempt pursuant to State or Federal Law .



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 43.02  FEE IMPOSED.



   There is hereby imposed an administrative fee for the various costs of
the City’s administrative and outside fee consultant processing and review
of applications, submissions, or requests concerning Development,
utilization, or improvement of real estate in the City (including, but not
limited to, review and processing of plat applications, applications for site
data records, proposed on-site and off-site water distributions/transmission
main and Sewer collection/force main facilities, installation of utility
lines and pipes, land use plan proposed amendments, planned or existing
Street , pavement, Sidewalk , Street marker Signs , seawall, bridge
installation, culvert or Drainage facilities, modifications to site plans,
applications for use variances, applications for physical development
variances, all Building inspections, applications for and periodic review of
development of regional impact orders, document review in Developments
involving unified control, a change in zoning, pre- and post-permit
conferences and project reviews (specifically including, but not limited to,
the Development, monitoring, and completion of critical path governmental
approval reports and all review and monitoring incident to or in any way
related to such reports), and certain Building plan and bridge installation
plan reviews and inspections (hereafter, “review requests”), such fee to
be equal in amount to the City’s actual costs, in terms of staff and
outside fee consultants’ time expended in such review and processing,
including costs associated with special arrangements necessary to ensure the
orderly operations of public hearings.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 7-2-2018)



§ 43.03  INITIAL DEPOSIT.



   43.03(A)   Deposit Required.  Persons who file any review request
that necessitates administrative or outside fee consultant review and
processing shall pay, prior to or at the time the review request is made, an
initial preliminary deposit that shall be credited toward the fee charged for
such review and processing, and shall pay additional deposits as may be
required from time to time.



   43.03(B)   Deposit Amount.  The amount of the initial deposit for
the different types of review requests shall be established, and from time to
time amended, by resolution of the City Commission. It is the express intent
of the City Commission in enacting this cost recovery program that the
City’s costs of administrative and outside fee consultant review and
processing of review requests, as required or necessitated now or in the
future by the City’s ordinances, resolutions, policies, or procedures,
shall be borne by the Person initiating the review request.



   43.03(C)   Cost Recovery Affidavit. Any person who pays an initial
deposit pursuant to this section shall execute a cost recovery affidavit on a
form approved by the City Attorney.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 7-2-2018)



§ 43.04  PROJECT ACCOUNTS; SUPPLEMENTAL DEPOSITS.



   43.04(A)   Project accounts.  When the Person pays the initial
deposit, a financial account for said Person’s review request (the
“project account”) will be opened and maintained throughout the entire
review process until the Person receives a Certificate Of Occupancy, the
Building and Zoning Department determines that no further action is necessary
for the review and processing of the review request, or the Applicant
voluntarily withdraws. At any of these times the project account will be
closed and any remaining funds therein shall be refunded to the Person
depositing same no later than six months after the project accounts closing
date. The project account will be monitored on a periodic basis.



   43.04(B)   Supplemental deposits.  Whenever the account balance is
zero or negative, a supplemental deposit will be required before any further
review or processing continues. The Person making the initial deposit will be
notified when a supplemental deposit will be required. Several supplemental
deposits may be necessary depending on the complexity of the review request.



   43.04(C)   Notification.  Except as provided herein, any
notification provided in this Section for supplemental deposits from the City
to a Person initiating a review request shall be deemed sufficient if made by
written notification. It shall be the duty of Persons initiating review
requests to provide on the filed review request a continuously updated
address where said Persons or their agents can be notified. If an attempt to
notify a Person initiating a review request or his or her agent is frustrated
because such addresses were not correct or up to date when the notification
attempt was made, such frustrated attempt shall be deemed sufficient notice
for purposes of this Section.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 43.05  RECORDS OF ADMINISTRATIVE WORK PERFORMED.



   43.05(A)   The staff of the various departments of the City and the
City’s outside fee consultants who are involved in the review and
processing of review requests shall maintain records of the time expended and
tasks conducted regarding each such request.



   43.05(B)   A debit based upon the time expended and the applicable
hourly rate shall be charged against the project account.



   43.05(C)   For purposes of this program, the applicable hourly rate
shall be equal to a staff person’s actual hourly rate of pay (if such
person is paid by the hour) or an approximation of his or her hourly
compensation (based upon a weekly salary divided by 40 hours, together with
an additional factor reflecting said person’s hourly value of fringe and
pension benefits), if said staff person is a person who is compensated on a
salary basis.



   43.05(D)   The applicable hourly rate for review and processing by
the City’s outside fee consultants shall equal their actual hourly charge
for such review and processing.



   43.05(E)   A debit against the project account shall also be made
that shall reflect the costs of administering this program and for the
City’s legal services. All records of time expended, together with the
corresponding costs, shall be provided to the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 44:  TECHNICAL RESCUE AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES COST RECOVERY



Section



   44.01   Recovery of costs for technical rescues and hazardous
substance responses



§ 44.01  RECOVERY OF COSTS FOR TECHNICAL RESCUES AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE
RESPONSES.



   44.01(A)   Liability for Costs Incurred.



   44.01(A)(1)   Each Person that discharges, releases or disseminates
any hazardous substance within the City, and each Person that owns or is in
authorized possession of a Structure , Building or property located within
the City, to which any City personnel, agents or contractors respond in
connection with a Hazardous Substance or Technical Rescue Incident or due to
a report of the presence of a Hazardous Substance or a combination of both,
whether or not the response is ultimately deemed necessary to effect a rescue
or abate a hazard, shall be liable, jointly and severally, to the City for
all costs incurred that are associated with such effort, including but not
limited to the costs of use of vehicles, equipment, materials and personnel,
and shall be deemed to have committed an act punishable as provided in §
2.99 of the Code .



   44.01(A)(2)   The provisions of this Section shall only apply to any
Person that violates any Law , rule or regulation of any governmental entity,
or whose act or omission to act is intentional, negligent, or occurs as a
result of the existence of any defective or faulty machinery, mechanism or
equipment of any kind.



   44.01(B)   Invoices.  All responsible Persons shall pay all costs
under this Section within 45 days after the City provides an itemized invoice
to the responsible Person.



   44.01(C)   Liens for unpaid invoice.  Any invoice that remains
unpaid for a period of more than 90 days after submission may, at the option
of the City, be filed in the Public Records of Broward County as a lien
against the land, which was the subject of the response and enforced by
foreclosure proceedings. Such lien shall, subject to the provisions of the
Florida Constitution and Florida Law, continue for a period of 20 years and
be coequal with the lien of all State, county, district and municipal taxes,
superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims (regardless of when
created or recorded, if recorded) until paid.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 45:  PAYMENTS RECEIVED BY THE CITY



Section



   45.01   Procedure upon receipt of payments



   45.02   Cost recovery for verification of proper payment received



§ 45.01  PROCEDURE UPON RECEIPT OF PAYMENTS.



   45.01(A)   Partial payments.  Payments submitted to the City in an
amount less than the full amount due to the City, which amount may include
past due payment obligations, penalties and fees, shall be deemed a
“partial payment” and shall be processed in accordance with this Section.



   45.01(B)   Acceptance not deemed satisfaction of debt.  The
City’s acceptance of any partial payment shall not constitute satisfaction
of any debt or payment.



   45.01(C)   Priority of payment.  Funds received as partial payment
of a debt shall be allocated in the following order:



   45.01(C)(1)   Past due payment obligations; then



   45.01(C)(2)   Penalties and late fees; then



   45.01(C)(3)   New payment obligations.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 45.02  COST RECOVERY FOR VERIFICATION OF PROPER PAYMENT RECEIVED.



   45.02(A)   Receipts.  If verification of proper payment is
necessary, the City may issue a receipt acknowledging delivery of currency,
but shall not issue a receipt acknowledging that the proper payment has been
received until the City receives confirmation of the proper amount received.



   45.02(B)   Administrative costs.  The City Manager is authorized to
charge Persons submitting payments to the City with the actual costs incurred
by the City, if any, for currency transportation and for verification that
the City has received proper payment from such Person.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 46:  LIENS



Section



   46.01   Priority of City liens



§ 46.01  PRIORITY OF CITY LIENS.



   46.01(A)   Intent.  This Section is not to be read in conflict with
pertinent State law or City or county ordinances pertaining to the placing of
liens or levying of assessments by municipalities for any reason, or the
enforcement of same through foreclosure proceedings. This Section shall apply
to every action filed after the effective date of this Section, without
regard to the date on which the cause of action accrued.



   46.01(B)   Exception for code enforcement liens.  Code enforcement
liens are governed by Chapter 31 of this Code and shall not be subject to the
provisions of this § 46.01.



   46.01(C)   Placement of lien for charges, special assessments.



   46.01(C)(1)   The City shall have a lien on all lands or premises
situated within the City limits for all charges or special assessments levied
against that property for improvements made thereto or lienable services
rendered thereon, until paid in full. All such unpaid costs and liens shall
bear interest at the rate provided for in F.S. § 55.03(1) regarding interest
on judgments, and said interest shall accrue until paid in full. These liens
shall be superior and prior to all other liens with the exception of State,
county, and municipal tax liens when notice of the lien has been filed in the
Public Records of Broward County.



   46.01(C)(2)   The notice of lien statement shall contain a legal
description of the Premises , the expenses and costs incurred, the date of
such expenses, notice that the City claims a lien for this amount, and notice
that interest on the unpaid charges shall accrue at the rate provided for in
F.S. § 55.03(1) for interest on judgments. A copy of the notice of lien
shall be mailed to the Owner of the property, if the mailing address of the
Owner is available.



   46.01(D)   Foreclosure.



   46.01(D)(1)   Any liens placed against real property pursuant to
this Section may be foreclosed upon by the City in the manner provided by
State law for the foreclosure of mortgages on property, if the lien remains
unpaid for 30 days after it has been recorded in the Public Records of
Broward County.



   46.01(D)(2)   The costs incurred for collection, including legal
fees and costs related to a foreclosure action, shall be recovered along with
all amounts due to the City under the lien. In any action filed by the City
to enforce a City lien, the City shall be entitled to recover reasonable
attorneys’ fees in addition to all other amounts secured by the lien.



(Ord. 2010-11, passed 10-4-2010)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC SAFETY



   Chapter



      50.   FIRE AND SAFETY



      51.   AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS AND STOP THE BLEED KITS



      52.   PROHIBITED ACTS



      53.   ANIMAL CARE AND REGULATION



CHAPTER 50:  FIRE AND SAFETY



Section



   50.01   Lock boxes



   50.02   Hazardous materials information boxes



Remote Control Access



   50.15   Gated communities



Fire Prevention Code



   50.50   Fire Codes; Inspectors



   50.51   Duties of Fire Marshal



   50.52   Authority for inspections



   50.53   Annual fire safety permit/inspection fees



   50.54   Fire safety permits, licenses service fees and plan review
fees



   50.55   Fire Department connections: anti-theft lockdown procedure



§ 50.01  LOCK BOXES.



   50.01(A)   Installation of lock box.  In all new and existing
Buildings and at gated entrances to communities, condominium complexes,
apartment complexes, industrial/commercial complexes, or other facilities
providing limited access, there shall be installed a lock box when the Fire
Chief determines that access to or within a Structure or an area is unduly
difficult because of secured openings, or where immediate access is necessary
for life-saving or firefighting purposes. The lock box shall be a type
approved by the Fire Chief, and shall contain:



   50.01(A)(1)   Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the
interior or exterior of such Buildings , complexes, or facilities.



   50.01(A)(2)   Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.



   50.01(A)(3)   Keys to locked electrical rooms.



   50.01(A)(4)   Keys to elevator controls.



   50.01(A)(5)   Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Chief.



   50.01(B)   Change of keys.  If at any time the keys stored in the
lock box change, then the BuildingOwner or manager is to notify the Fire
Department and supply new keys to the Fire Chief.



   50.01(C)   Location determination.  The Fire Chief shall determine
the location of lock boxes.



   50.01(D)    Exemptions.  This Section shall not apply to the
Construction, improvement, or renovation of any Single-Family residential
Building, with the exception of entrance gates.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 50.02  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INFORMATION BOXES.



   50.02(A)   Contents.  In addition to the keys provided for in §
50.01, all new and existing Buildings where the occupant is required to
possess a hazardous materials license issued by Broward County shall be
required to install a separate hazardous materials information box. The
hazardous materials information box shall be a type approved by the Fire
Chief and shall contain:



   50.02(A)(1)   A copy of all hazardous materials licenses.



   50.02(A)(2)   A copy of all Manufacturer’s Safety Data Sheets
(MSDS) for materials stored within the Building .



   50.02(A)(3)   A copy of the hazardous materials spill incident
management plan.



   50.02(B)   Change of information.  If at any time the information
stored in the lock box changes, then the BuildingOwner or manager is to
notify the Fire Department.



   50.02(C)   Location determination.  The Fire Chief shall determine
the location of lock boxes.



   50.02(D)    Exemptions.  This Section shall not apply to the
Construction, improvement, or renovation of any Single-Family residential
Building.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



REMOTE CONTROL ACCESS



§ 50.15  GATED COMMUNITIES.



   50.15(A)   Remote control system requirement.  Gated communities
within the City shall install, at their expense, a remote control system at
each entry point into their community in compliance with this Section.



   50.15(B)   System specifications.  The remote control system
required by this Section is the “Linear Access Pro Receiver/Transmitter
System,” or any compatible system that meets the following specifications:



   50.15(B)(1)   Wireless based systems;



   50.15(B)(2)   Gate operators are capable of remote activation from a
distance of up to 250 feet by the use of a radio-frequency, programmable
transmitter;



   50.15(B)(3)   Transmitters are block-coded into the access Pro
Receiver, or compatible receiver;



   50.15(B)(4)   Transmitters are capable of individual deletion from
the system at any time;



   50.15(B)(5)   Outputs:



   50.15(B)(5)(a)   Relay:  two form “C” relays, related at one
amp @ two volts AC or DC;



   50.15(B)(5)(b)   LED display:  three eight-segment displays to
provide system activity and programming information;



   50.15(B)(5)(c)   LED indicators:  front panel indicators are used
in conjunction with LED display to provide transmitter and radio activity;



   50.15(B)(6)   Inputs:



   50.15(B)(6)(a)   RF:  integral 318 MHz super regenerative receiver
with -94 dBm sensitivity (nominal); receives MegaCode format transmitters;



   50.15(B)(6)(b)   Open request terminal: contact closure to ground
activates access relay;



   50.15(B)(6)(c)   Open button:  pressing activates access relays;
also used to clear trouble codes from MGT;



   50.15(B)(6)(d)   Keypad:  integral 15-key silicone rubber keypad
for system programming and interrogation;



   50.15(B)(7)    Power:  12 to 24 volts AC or DC, 250 mA maximum.



   50.15(C)   Access for Public Safety Personnel.  Public Safety
Personnel shall be authorized to gain access to any gated community within
the City to perform the duties of such Public Safety Personnel in accordance
with Law.



   50.15(D)   Maintenance.  Maintenance of the installed remote
control system(s) shall be the responsibility of the community where it/they
are installed.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 50.50  FIRE CODES; INSPECTORS.



   50.50(A)   The City adopts the Fire Codes as part of the City Code.



   50.50(B)   The Fire Chief shall designate, subject to the approval
of the City Manager, a fire code official as Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal
shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the
Fire Codes, under the direction and supervision of the Fire Chief. Certified
fire safety inspectors may also be designated by the Fire Marshal to enforce
the Fire Codes. Any violations of the Fire Codes may be enforced pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 31 of the City Code.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 9-12-2012)



§ 50.51  DUTIES OF FIRE MARSHAL.



   50.51(A)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to enforce all
applicable Laws and codes. In addition, the Fire Marshal shall participate in
public education in fire and life safety.



   50.51(B)   The Fire Marshal shall have such other powers and perform
such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this Chapter and as
may be conferred and imposed from time to time by Law . The Fire Chief may
delegate any powers and duties under this Chapter to the Fire Marshal.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 50.52  AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTIONS.



   In addition to required inspections under StateLaw , the Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal or any Inspectors, upon complaint of any Person or whenever
deemed necessary, shall inspect all Buildings and Premises within their
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 50.53  ANNUAL FIRE SAFETY PERMIT/INSPECTION FEES.



   The City is hereby authorized to include a fire safety
permit/Inspection fee in the City’s annual fire Assessment against
Buildings and Structures within the City to provide funding for the cost of
providing such fire safety Inspection services in accordance with StateLaw .



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 50.54  FIRE SAFETY PERMITS, LICENSES SERVICE FEES AND PLAN REVIEW FEES.



   The City is hereby authorized to collect permits, licenses, service and
plan review fees to recover costs associated with such services and work.
Fire safety service and plan review fees shall be set by a resolution of the
City Commission. The City administration shall be authorized to adopt
administrative policies regarding the collection of fees which will be based
on federal, State, Broward County and City recognized reimbursement for costs
for apparatus equipment and actual or average costs for all City personnel,
subcontractors and other City departments requested by fire rescue.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 50.55  FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS: ANTI-THEFT LOCKDOWN PROCEDURE.



   All fire department connections on all Structures shall be secured by
an anti-theft lockdown procedure that is authorized by the International Fire
and Building Codes and authorized by NFPA 1 (National Fire Protection
Association).  The anti-theft lockdown procedure shall be implemented for
all fire department connections on all Structures no later than December 31,
2014.



(Ord. 2014-14, passed 5-19-2014)



CHAPTER 51:  AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS AND STOP THE BLEED KITS



Section



   51.01   Intent



   51.02   Automated external defibrillator devices and stop the bleed
kits required



   51.03   Installation and operation



   51.04   Violations



   51.05   Restrictions on locked stairwells



§ 51.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent of the City and the purpose of this Chapter:



   51.01(A)   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
by requiring the installation of Automated External Defibrillator Devices and
Stop the Bleed Kits within certain Buildings in the City;



   51.01(B)   To provide for the inspection of each Automated External
Defibrillator Device and to provide for verification of the presence of Stop
the Bleed Kits within the City; and



   51.01(C)   To provide for the payment of Automated External
Defibrillator inspection and Stop the Bleed Kit verification fees.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-3-2019)



§ 51.02  AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR DEVICES AND STOP THE BLEED KITS
REQUIRED.



   Automated External Defibrillator Devices and Regular Stop the Bleed
Kits, as described in Section 51.03(C)(2), shall be installed in the
following Buildings located within the geographical boundaries of the City
and Large Stop the Bleed Kits, as described in Section 51.03(C)(3), shall be
installed in places of occupancy that hold 500 or more persons:



   51.02(A)   Places of Public Assembly as defined in the Florida
Building Code (Large Stop the Bleed Kits required);



   51.02(B)   OfficeBuildings in excess of 20,000 square feet;



   51.02(C)   Gymnasiums, fitness centers and indoor recreational
centers in excess of 1,500 square feet;



   51.02(D)   Restaurants with 100 or more seats including indoor,
Outdoor and Bar;



   51.02(E)   Commercial and retail spaces in excess of 35,000 square
feet; and



   51.02(F)   All Hotels and Motels.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-3-2019)



§ 51.03  INSTALLATION AND OPERATION.



   51.03(A)   Time of inspections.  The City shall inspect all
Automated External Defibrillator Devices for operation and shall verify the
presence of Stop the Bleed Kits prior to being placed in service or available
for use, and on an annual basis.



   51.03(B)   Requirements.  Automated External Defibrillator Devices
and Stop the Bleed Kits shall be:



   51.03(B)(1)   Conspicuously located in plain view of the primary
public entrance, with unobstructed access;



   51.03(B)(2)   Housed in a cabinet with a clear window in the door,
an audible alarm signaling the opening of the door, permanently affixed to a
wall, and whose top is no more than 48 inches above the floor;



   51.03(B)(3)   The Automated External Defibrillator Device shall be
located below a Sign having a minimum area of 70 square inches and containing
the letters “AED” and the universally recognizable “AED” symbol,
which shall be placed no more than 60 inches, on center, above the floor;



   51.03(B)(4)   Readily accessible and immediately available when
needed for On-Site employees and the general public, including disabled
Persons; and



   51.03(B)(5)   Placed near the elevator(s) in the first floor lobby,
if the Building contains an elevator.



   51.03(B)(6)   The Stop the Bleed Kit shall be located below a
three-way Sign having a minimum area of 70 square inches with a City supplied
Stop the Bleed Kit (SBK) sticker affixed to it. The sticker may also be
placed on the cabinet containing the Stop the Bleed Kit .



   51.03(C)(1)   Content requirement for Automated External
Defibrillator Devices.  Automated External Defibrillator Devices shall
contain adult and pediatric pads and bandage scissors.



   51.03(C)(2)   Content Requirement for Regular Stop the Bleed Kits. 
Regular Stop the Bleed Kits, shall minimally contain:



   51.03(C)(2)(a)   Two commercially manufactured tourniquets;



   51.03(C)(2)(b)   Four gloves;



   51.03(C)(2)(c)   One scissor;



   51.03(C)(2)(d)   Two three-inch gauze rolls:



   51.03(C)(2)(e)   Instructional Booklet on Bleeding Control;



   51.03(C)(2)(f)   Two gauze combine pads.



   51.03(C)(2)(g)   One marker.



   51.03(C)(3)   Content Requirement for Large Stop the Bleed Kits. 
Large Stop the Bleed Kits for places of occupancy that hold 500 or more
Persons shall minimally contain:



   51.03(C)(3)(a)   Eight commercially manufactured tourniquets;



   51.03(C)(3)(b)   Eight gloves;



   51.03(C)(3)(c)   Two scissors;



   51.03(C)(3)(d)   Eight three-inch gauze rolls:



   51.03(C)(3)(e)   Instructional Booklet on Bleeding Control;



   51.03(C)(3)(f)   Eight gauze combine pads.



   51.03(C)(3)(g)   One marker.



   51.03(D)   Manufacturer’s guidelines.  All Automated External
Defibrillator Devices and Stop the Bleed Kits shall be used in accordance
with manufacturer’s guidelines.



   51.03(E)   Owner’s responsibilities.  It shall be the
responsibility of the Owner of the Building to:



   51.03(E)(1)   Install Automated External Defibrillator Devices and
Stop the Bleed Kits ;



   51.03(E)(2)   Provide all necessary training for appropriate use; and



   51.03(E)(3)   Maintain Automated External Defibrillator Devices and
Stop the Bleed Kits in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommended
maintenance requirements and as required herein.



   51.03(E)(4)   Verify and properly maintain the contents of the Stop
the Bleed Kit .



   51.03(F)   Replacement.  If an Automated External Defibrillator
Device or Stop the Bleed Kit is removed for repair, a replacement shall be
provided.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-3-2019)



§ 51.04  VIOLATIONS.



   51.04(A)   Inoperative.  No  Person shall render an Automated
External Defibrillator Device inoperative except during such time as the
Automated External Defibrillator Device is being serviced, tested, repaired,
or recharged, or except pursuant to court order.



   51.04(B)   Obliterate serial number.  No  Person shall obliterate
the serial number on an Automated External Defibrillator Device for purposes
of falsifying service records.



   51.04(C)   Improperly service.  No  Person shall improperly
service, recharge, repair, test, or inspect an Automated External
Defibrillator Device.



   51.04(D)   Improper use of certificate.  No  Person shall use the
inspection certificate of another  Person .



   51.04(E)   Hold inspection certificate.  No  Person shall hold an
inspection certificate and allow another  Person to use said inspection
certificate number.



   51.04(F)   Expired Stop the Bleed Kit.  No  Person shall maintain
an expired Stop the Bleed Kit.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-3-2019)



§ 51.05  RESTRICTIONS ON LOCKED STAIRWELLS.



   51.05(A)   Scope.  This Section shall apply only to the following
Buildings:



   51.05(A)(1)   Places of Public Assembly as defined in the Florida
Building Code;



   51.05(A)(2)   OfficeBuildings in excess of 20,000 square feet;



   51.05(A)(3)   Gymnasiums, fitness centers and indoor recreational
centers in excess of 1,500 square feet;



   51.05(A)(4)   Restaurants with 100 or more seats including indoor,
Outdoor and Bar;



   51.05(A)(5)   Commercial and retail spaces in excess of 35,000
square feet; and



   51.05(A)(6)   All Hotels and Motels.



   51.05(B)   Prohibition.  No Person shall lock and no Building Owner
and/or manager shall allow to be locked any door to a stairwell during the
Building ’s normal business hours. The normal business hours of a Building
for each day shall begin upon the earliest opening of a unit within the
Building for business and shall end with the latest closing of a unit that
day.



   51.05(C)   Exemptions.  The prohibition set forth in subsection
51.05(B) shall not apply to:



   51.05(C)(1)   The restriction of ingress through the locking of a
door to a stairwell that opens on the outside of the Building; and



   51.05(C)(2)   The restriction of ingress and egress through the
locking of a door or other access point to a stairwell that opens to the Roof
of the Building.



   51.05(D)   Compliance.  Person s receiving a Notice of Violation
pursuant to this Section shall have five days to correct the violation.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-3-2019)



CHAPTER 52:  PROHIBITED ACTS



Section



   52.01   Adoption of state offenses and county ordinances



   52.02 through 52.14  Reserved



   52.15   Swimming and boating in lakes and canals prohibited



   52.16   Open burning prohibited



   52.17   Loitering prohibited



   52.18   Take-off and landing of unmanned aerial vehicles prohibited



Littering



   52.25   Streets, sidewalks, and other public places



   52.26   Receptacles to be secure



   52.27   Gutters



   52.28   Motor vehicle occupants



   52.29   Trucks and other vehicles



   52.30   Water bodies



   52.31   Handbills



   52.32   Utility poles, public structures, and public buildings



   52.33   Private property



Sexual Violators



   52.45   Sexual violator residency prohibition



Noise



   52.50   Loud and raucous noise; exemptions



   52.51   Complaints



   52.52   Prohibited noise



Synthetic Substances



   52.60   Prohibiting the distribution, sale, offer for distribution
or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for
distribution or sale of synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense



   52.61 through 52.64  Reserved



   52.65   Prohibiting the distribution, sale, offer for distribution
or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for
distribution or sale of synthetic stimulant bath salts, synthetic cathinones,
synthetic amphetamines and other synthetic stimulants that mimic illegal drugs



   52.66    Reserved



   52.67   Prohibited use of nicotine vaporizers



Irrigation System



   52.70   Unauthorized use of City's irrigation system prohibited.



Timeshare Units



   52.75   Timeshare units.



§ 52.01  ADOPTION OF STATE OFFENSES AND COUNTY ORDINANCES.



   52.01(A)   State misdemeanors.  It shall be unlawful for any Person
to commit, within the corporate limits of the City, any act that is or shall
be recognized by the Laws of the State as a misdemeanor.



   52.01(B)   Broward County misdemeanors.  It shall be unlawful for
any Person to commit, within the corporate limits of the City, any act that
is or shall be recognized as a violation of any Broward County ordinance that
is effective within the City.



   52.01(C)   Penalties.  Any Person convicted of violating this
Section, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld, shall be punished in
accordance with the penalty clause of the State Statute that the Person was
convicted of violating.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§§ 52.02 THROUGH 52.14  RESERVED.



§ 52.15  SWIMMING AND BOATING IN LAKES AND CANALS PROHIBITED.



   52.15(A)   Swimming.  No Person shall swim, wade or bathe in any
lakes or canals within the City.



   52.15 (B)   Boating.  No Person shall bring into or operate any
boat, canoe, or other watercraft in any lakes or canals within the City.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.16  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.



   52.16(A)   Outdoor fires.  No Person shall ignite, cause to be
ignited, permit to be ignited, allow, burn or maintain any Outdoor fire.



   52.16(B)   Exemptions.  The following activities, uses and devices
shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in subsection 52.16(A), if
and only if they are conducted or used in a safe and responsible manner:



   52.16(B)(1)   Outdoor, noncommercial preparation of food;



   52.16(B)(2)   Tiki torches;



   52.16(B)(3)   Patio fireplaces;



   52.16(B)(4)   Prescribed burns conducted by the City Fire
Department; and



   52.16(B)(5)   Training exercises conducted by the City Fire
Department.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.17  LOITERING PROHIBITED.



   52.17(A)   Prohibition.  It is unlawful for any Person to Loiter or
prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding
individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable
alarm or immediate concern for the safety of Persons or property in the
vicinity.



   52.17(B)   Circumstances; duty of LawEnforcement Officer.  Among
the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such an alarm
or immediate concern is warranted is the fact that the Person takes flight
upon appearance of a LawEnforcement Officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object.
Unless flight by the Person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a
LawEnforcement Officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this
Section, afford the Person the opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate
concern that would otherwise be warranted by requesting the Person to
identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No
Person shall be convicted of an offense under this Section if the
LawEnforcement Officer did not comply with this procedure or if it appears at
trial that the explanation given by the Person is true and, if believed by
the Officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern.



   52.17(C)   Loitering after warning; obstructing free passage.  It
shall be unlawful for any Person, after first being warned by a
LawEnforcement Officer, or where a “No Loitering” Sign or Signs have been
posted, to Loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon public or quasi-public
Sidewalk, Street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of
Private Property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct
unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; nor shall
any Person block or obstruct or prevent the free access to the entrance to
any Building open to the public.



   52.17(D)   Signage. It shall be the responsibility of Persons owning
or occupying places of business within the City to post “No Loitering”
Signs at each public entrance to the property. The Sign shall be at least 12
inches by 18 inches, and shall read as follows: “No Loitering - Weston City
Code § 52.17.”



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.18  TAKE-OFF AND LANDING OF UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   The take-off and landing of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles is prohibited in
all Public Places without written authorization by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2018-16, passed 11-19-2018)



LITTERING



§ 52.25  STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.



   No Person shall throw, deposit or dump Litter in or upon any Street ,
Sidewalk , or other Public Place within the City except in public
receptacles, in Authorized Private Receptacles for collection, or in county
or municipal dumps.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.26  RECEPTACLES TO BE SECURE.



   No Person placing Litter in public receptacles or in Authorized Private
Receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to allow it to be carried or
deposited by the elements upon any Street , Sidewalk , or other Public Place
or upon Private Property.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.27  GUTTERS.



   No Person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, Street , or other
Public Place within the City the accumulation of Litter from any Building or
Lot or from any public or private Sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the Sidewalk in front of and surrounding their
Premises free of Litter .



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.28  MOTOR VEHICLE OCCUPANTS.



   No Person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit Litter upon any Street or other Public Place within the City, or upon
Private Property, except in public or Private Receptacles.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.29  TRUCKS AND OTHER VEHICLES.



   No Person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
City unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents, or Litter from being blown or deposited upon any Street , alley, or
other Public Place or upon Private Property. Nor shall any Person drive or
move any vehicles or truck within the City, the wheels or tires of which
carry onto or deposit in any Street , alley, or other Public PlaceLitter or
foreign matter of any kind.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.30  WATER BODIES.



   No Person shall throw, deposit, or dump Litter in any fountain, pond,
lake, stream, bay, canal, or any other body of water within the City.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.31  HANDBILLS.



   52.31(A)   Throwing or depositing Commercial and Noncommercial
Handbills in Public Places; prohibition.  No Person shall throw or deposit
any Commercial or Noncommercial Handbill in or upon any Sidewalk, Street, or
other Public Place within the City. Provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful on any Sidewalk, Street, or other Public Place within the City for
any Person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof,
any Commercial or Noncommercial Handbill to any Person willing to accept it,
except to the extent prohibited by § 71.10.



   52.31(B)   Placing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on
vehicles; prohibition.  No Person shall throw or deposit any Commercial or
Noncommercial Handbill in or upon any unoccupied vehicle. Provided, however,
that it shall not be unlawful in any Public Place for a Person to hand out or
distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a Commercial or
Noncommercial Handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it, except to the extent prohibited by § 71.10.



   52.31(C)   Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly
posted; prohibition.  No Person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any
Commercial or Noncommercial Handbill upon any Private Premises if requested
by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said Premises in a
conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a Sign bearing the words “No
Trespassing,” “No Solicitors,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No
Advertisement,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the
occupants of said Premises do not desire to be molested or have their right
of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such Premises .



   52.31(D)   Distributing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills at
inhabited Private Premises; prohibition.



   52.31(D)(1)   No Person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any
Commercial or Noncommercial Handbill in or upon Private Premises that are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to
the Owner , occupant, or other Person then present in or upon such Private
Premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited Private Premises that
are not posted, as provided in this Section, such Person, unless requested by
anyone upon such Premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such
handbill in or upon such inhabited Private Premises if such handbill is so
placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or
drifted about such Premises or Sidewalks , Streets, or other Public Places,
except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal
Law or regulations.



   52.31(D)(2)   The provisions of this subsection 52.31(D) shall not
apply to the distribution of mail by the United States Postal Service, nor to
newspapers; except that newspapers shall be placed on Private Property in
such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any Street , Sidewalk , or other Public Place or upon Private Property.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.32  UTILITY POLES, PUBLIC STRUCTURES, AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS.



   No Person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or
device calculated to attract the attention of the public to any public
UtilityPole , or upon any public Structure or Building , except as may be
authorized or required by Law .



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.33  PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   52.33(A)   Occupied Private Property.  No Person shall throw,
deposit, or dump Litter on any occupied Private Property within the City,
whether owned by such Person or not; except that the Owner or Person in
control of Private Property may maintain Authorized Private Receptacles for
collection in such a manner that Litter will be prevented from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any Street, Sidewalk, or other Public Place
or upon any Private Property.



   52.33(B)   Vacant Lots.  No Person shall throw, deposit or dump
Litter on any open or vacant Private Property within the City, whether owned
by such Person or not.



   52.33(C)   Owner to maintain Premises free of Litter.  The Owner or
Person in control of any Private Property shall at all times maintain the
Premises free of Litter; provided, however, that this Section shall not
prohibit the storage of Litter in Authorized Private Receptacles for
collection.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



SEXUAL VIOLATORS



§ 52.45  SEXUAL VIOLATOR RESIDENCY PROHIBITION.



   52.45(A)   Residency restrictions.  It is unlawful for any Sexual
Violator, as that term is defined in the Code, to Reside within 2,500 feet of
any school, day care center, Public School bus stop, Park or playground.



   52.45(B)   Owner and landlord responsibility.  It shall be a
violation of the City Code for a landlord or Owner of Residential Property in
the City to rent or lease a residence to a Sexual Violator, if the Sexual
Violator intends to Reside at the property and if the property is located
within 2,500 feet of a school, day care center, Public School bus stop, Park
or playground, unless the landlord or Owner can establish that, prior to
entry of a lease, he or she used reasonable due diligence and was unable to
determine that the Tenant is a Sexual Violator. Any Person violating this
provision is subject to the code enforcement procedures set forth in Chapter
31.



   52.45(C)    Exemptions.



   52.45(C)(1)   The provisions of subsection 52.45(A) of this Section
shall not prohibit a Person who is registered with the State of Florida as a
Sexual Violator , sexual offender or sexual predator whose FDLE Sexual
Violator registration records show an address within the City on July 5, 2005
from continuing to Reside at the address even if it is within 2,500 feet of
any school, day care center, Public School bus stop, Park or playground,
provided that no other address(es) located outside of the City is registered
with the FDLE for more than a combined consecutive 180 days.



   52.45(C)(2)   The provisions of subsection 52.45(A) shall not
prohibit a Person who is registered with the State of Florida as a Sexual
Violator , sexual offender or sexual predator from continuing to Reside at
his or her registered address solely because a school, day care center,
Public School bus stop, Park or playground is subsequently built or
established within 2,500 feet of his or her registered address, provided that
after such school, day care center, Public School bus stop, Park or
playground is subsequently built or established no other address(es) located
outside of the City is registered with the FDLE for more than a combined
consecutive 180 days.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-09, passed 5-2-2016)



NOISE



§ 52.50  LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE; EXEMPTIONS.



   52.50(A)   Violation.   It shall be unlawful for any Person to
willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any Loud and
Raucous Noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its volume
level, duration, character, and time of day annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety of reasonable Persons of
ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the City. The term includes the
kind of noises prohibited by the activities enumerated in § 52.52. The term
also includes the kinds of noises generated by the activities enumerated in
§ 52.52. The term shall be limited to Loud and Raucous Noise heard upon the
public and private Streets, upon other public lands or waters, in any public
or private Park, in any school or public Building or upon the grounds thereof
while in use, in any house of worship or hospital or upon the grounds thereof
while in use, upon any parking lot open to members of the public as invitees
or licensees, or heard in any occupied commercial or residential unit or upon
the grounds thereof. The terms “loud or disturbing”, “annoyance or
inconvenience,” “disturb the peace and quiet”, and other like terms
referring to noise where used in other Sections of this subchapter shall be
construed to mean “Loud and Raucous.” The terms “inhabitants” and
“occupants” and other like terms where used in other sections of this
subchapter shall be construed to mean reasonable Persons of ordinary
sensibilities.



   52.50(B)   Responsible parties.  Any Person, Owner, agent, or
supervisor in charge of operating, ordering, directing, or allowing the
operation or maintenance of a device or machine creating Loud and Raucous
Noise as prohibited in this subchapter shall be deemed guilty of committing
an offense and violating this subchapter and be subject to the penalties
provided in § 2.99.



   52.50(C)   Exemptions.  The term Loud and Raucous Noise does not
include noise or sound generated by the following:



   52.50(C)(1)   Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls.



   52.50(C)(2)   Radios, sirens, horns, and bells on police, fire, and
other emergency response vehicles.



   52.50(C)(3)   Activities on or in municipal and school facilities
and on or in other publicly owned property and facilities, provided that such
activities have been authorized by the Owner of such property or facilities
or its agents.



   52.50(C)(4)   Religious worship activities, including but not
limited to bells and organs.



   52.50(C)(5)   Any City services, including but not limited to
sanitation and Refuse collection and Utility repairs.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.51  COMPLAINTS.



   52.51(A)   Any citizen wishing to register a complaint of Loud or
Raucous Noise in violation of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
required to sign a sworn statement in order for a LawEnforcement Officer to
investigate and cite an alleged offender.



   52.51(B)   This requirement shall not preclude a LawEnforcement
Officer from citing any alleged offender based on his or her own observations
whether or not a complaint has been made.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 52.52  PROHIBITED NOISE.



   The following acts are prohibited:



   52.52(A)   Engines.



   52.52(A)(1)   Exhaust.  The discharge into the open air of the
exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine except through a muffler
or other device that will effectively prevent Loud and Raucous Noises
therefrom.



   52.52(A)(2)   Pile drivers; restricted hours.  The operation
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day or at any time on
Sunday, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day of any pile driver, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, dredge, electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is
attended by Loud and Raucous Noise.



   52.52(A)(3)   Blowers.  The operation of any blower or power fan or
any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes Loud and
Raucous Noise, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled or such
engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to prevent Loud and
Raucous Noise.



   52.52(B)   Horns and signaling devices.  The sounding of any horn,
whistle, or other audible signaling device so as to create a Loud and Raucous
Noise.



   52.52(C)   Televisions, radios, amplifiers, and phonographs.  The
using or operating of, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any
television, radio, amplifier, musical instrument, phonograph, or other device
for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to cause Loud and
Raucous Noise.



   52.52(D)   Sound devices for advertising purposes.  The operation
in the City of any radio, television, or other musical or mechanical
instrument or device of any kind whereby the sounds therefrom are cast
directly upon public Streets and places and where such devices are maintained
and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the
passing public and that are so placed in any moving or non-moving wagon,
truck, vehicle, or aircraft or in any stationary location whereby
announcements or broadcasts are made, or music is played, unless a permit
therefor shall have been granted by the City Manager.



   52.52(D)(1)   Any Person desiring a permit shall make application to
the City Manager for such permit. The application shall be accompanied by an
application fee, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the City
Commission. If it shall appear to the City Manager that the issuance of such
permit will not adversely affect the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of
the City, or will not create a Traffic hazard, or will not be otherwise
detrimental to the public safety, such permit shall be issued.



   52.52(D)(2)   The City Manager is hereby given the power and
authority to designate, if any permit is granted, the conditions of such
permit, and such conditions shall be imposed so that the peace and quiet of
the inhabitants of the City and public safety shall not be interfered with.



   52.52(D)(3)   If any Person should be granted a permit in accordance
with this Section and shall violate the terms and conditions thereof, the
City Manager is hereby authorized to revoke the permit.



   52.52(E)   Yelling and shouting.  Yelling, shouting, whistling, or
singing at any time or place so as to create a Loud and Raucous Noise between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, on any day.



   52.52(F)   Animals and birds.  The keeping of any Animal, bird, or
fowl that causes frequent or continued Loud and Raucous Noise.



   52.52(G)   Defect in vehicle or load.  The use of any Motor Vehicle
so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud grating,
grinding, rattling, or other Loud and Raucous Noise or that is not equipped
with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation so as to
prevent Loud and Raucous Noise.



   52.52(H)   Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum or other
instrument or device to create a Loud and Raucous Noise.



   52.52(I)   Vehicle horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device,
including anti-theft alarms, on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other
vehicle: while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is
approaching apparently out of control; or while in motion, except as a danger
signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle
is intended. The sounding of any horn or signal device, including anti-theft
alarms, on any vehicle whether or not in motion for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time is hereby declared to be a Loud and Raucous Noise.



   52.52(J)   Construction or repairing of Buildings or site
Development.  The erection (including Excavating), demolition, alteration,
or repair of any Building so as to create a Loud and Raucous Noise other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any weekday or Saturday,
except for the Construction or repair of Buildings or site Development within
a Hospital Zoning District. Such activity is prohibited on Sunday, New
Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, or
Christmas Day. In case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, a permit to allow activity prohibited by this Section may be
granted by the City Manager for a period not to exceed three working days or
less while the emergency continues. Such permit may be renewed for successive
periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the City
Manager should determine that the public health and safety necessitates the
issuance of such a permit and will not be unduly impaired by the erection,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any Building or the Excavation of
Streets and Highways within the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the
following day, or on Sunday, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day, he or she may grant
permission for such work to be done within such hours or within a shorter
time period during such hours, upon application being made at the time the
permit for the work is issued or during the progress of the work.



   52.52(K)   Music.  No Person licensed under the State beverage Law
shall allow or permit, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following morning, instrumental music whether live from musicians or from
recordings, singing, or other forms of entertainment in any room where beers,
wines, Liquors, or other Alcoholic Beverages are sold or offered for sale,
indoors or Outdoors, except when such room is soundproofed in order that the
sounds therefrom may not disrupt the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. It
is intended hereby that in soundproofed rooms music, singing, and other forms
of entertainment may be conducted during the hours that Alcoholic Beverages
may be sold in accordance with §§ 83.01et seq.



   52.52(L)   Pool pumps, fans, and air conditioners.  It shall be
unlawful to create any excessive and unnecessary Loud and Raucous Noise by
the use or operation of any noise-creating air conditioner or compressor
unit, the operation of which causes such excessive and unnecessary Loud and
Raucous Noise, unless such noise is muffled and deadened by adequate noise
suppression and muffling devices to eliminate annoyance and disturbance to
Persons within the range of hearing.



   52.52(M)   Loading, unloading, unpacking.  It shall be unlawful for
any Person engaged in loading, unloading, packing, unpacking, or opening
crates, boxes, or containers, including, without limitation, the loading or
unloading of any Motor Vehicles or truck Trailers onto any truck transport to
create excessive and unnecessary Loud and Raucous Noises. It shall further be
unlawful to leave diesel-powered or other engines idling, thereby creating
Loud and Raucous Noises, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.



   52.52(N)   Outdoor Amusements.  It shall be unlawful for the Owner
of any Outdoor amusement or any Person employed at any such place to operate
or conduct such business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of
each day, whereby Loud and Raucous Noise emitting therefrom disturbs the
peace and quiet of Persons of any occupied Building.



   52.52(O)   Fuel Stations.  It shall be unlawful for the Owner of
any Fuel Station located within 300 feet of any inhabited Dwelling, hospital
or Hotel in the City, or any Person employed thereat, to carry on or conduct
any business that causes Loud and Raucous Noises between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each day.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 2-3-2014)



SYNTHETIC SUBSTANCES



§ 52.60  PROHIBITING THE DISTRIBUTION, SALE, OFFER FOR DISTRIBUTION OR
SALE, PURCHASE WITH INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE OR SELL OR PUBLIC DISPLAY FOR
DISTRIBUTION OR SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID HERBAL INCENSE.



   52.60(A)   Purpose and intent. The City Commission finds and
declares that the products and synthetic substances described hereunder are
commonly used as alternatives to marijuana. The Commission further finds that
these synthetic substances are particularly appealing to youth, and that
these synthetic substances are potentially dangerous to users in the short
term and that the long term effects are not yet known. The Commission finds
that the products which contain these synthetic substances often use a
disclaimer that the product is “not for human consumption” to avoid
regulations requiring the manufacturer to list the product's active
ingredients. The Commission finds that drug designers and chemists can
quickly create new Synthetic Drugs once federal or state law makes a
particular Synthetic Drug illegal. As such, the Commission finds there is a
need to declare illegal the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or
sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for
distribution or sale of synthetic substances that mimic illegal controlled
substances that have not yet themselves been categorized as illegal
controlled substances under federal or state law. The Commission further
finds that it is proper and necessary for the Commission to exercise its
authority to safeguard and protect the public health, safety and welfare by
taking this action.



   52.60(B)   Application. This Section shall be applicable within the
City to the fullest extent allowed by law.



   52.60(C)   Conflict.  Any applicable Broward County ordinance
governing this subject area that is more stringent than this Section or that
declares illegal a substance that is not declared illegal by this Section
shall remain enforceable within the City.



   52.60(D)   Distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale and
purchase with intent to distribute or sell Synthetic Cannabinoid Herbal
Incense prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any store owner, store manager,
store purchasing agent or other Person to distribute, sell, offer for
distribution or sale or purchase with intent to distribute or sell any
Synthetic Cannabinoid Herbal Incense.



   52.60(E)   Public display for distribution or sale of Synthetic
Cannabinoid Herbal Incense prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any store
owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other Person to publicly
display for distribution or sale any Synthetic Cannabinoid Herbal Incense.



   52.60(F)   Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense
to prosecution of a violation of this Section if the distribution, sale,
offer for distribution or sale, public display for distribution or sale or
purchase with intent to distribute or sell of Synthetic Cannabinoid Herbal
Incense is pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician
or dentist authorized in the State of Florida to direct or prescribe such act.



   52.60(G)   Seizure and destruction of Synthetic Cannabinoid Herbal
Incense.Synthetic Cannabinoid Herbal Incense prohibited herein may be seized
by law enforcement officers and may be destroyed in the same manner used to
destroy narcotics and contraband substances, after its use for evidentiary
purposes in any judicial proceeding is no longer required.



   52.60(H)   Injunctive relief. The City shall have the authority to
seek an injunction against any Person violating the provisions of this
Section. In any action seeking an injunction, the City shall be entitled to
collect its enforcement expenses, including forensic costs, law enforcement
costs and reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred at trial and on appeal.



   52.60(I)   Subsequent federal or state action. If Congress or a
federal agency amends federal law to include a particular substance or
otherwise enacts or amends a federal law providing for criminal penalties for
the prohibitions of substances set forth in this Section, then upon the
effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this Section
addressed by federal law shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations
of this Section committed prior to the Congress or a federal agency enacting
a federal law, as described above, may be prosecuted.



   If the Florida Legislature amends the controlled substance schedules in
F.S. § 893.01 to include a particular substance or otherwise enacts, or
amends a State statute providing for criminal penalties for the prohibitions
of substances set forth in this Section, then upon the effective date of such
enactment or amendment, the provisions of this Section addressed by the State
statute shall no longer be deemed effective.



   If the Florida Attorney General pursuant to the rulemaking authority
provided in F.S. Chapter 893 adds a particular substance to the controlled
substance schedules in F.S. § 893.01, then upon the effective date of such
enactment or amendment, the provisions of this Section addressed by the
rulemaking action shall no longer be deemed effective.



   Any violations of this Section committed prior to the Florida
Legislature enacting such a statute or the Florida Attorney General
promulgating rules may be prosecuted.



   52.60(J)   Penalty. Any store owner, store manager, store purchasing
agent or other Person violating any provision of this Section shall be
punishable as provided in § 2.99 of the Code.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-24-2012)



§§ 52.61 THROUGH 52.64  RESERVED.



§ 52.65  PROHIBITING THE DISTRIBUTION, SALE, OFFER FOR DISTRIBUTION OR
SALE, PURCHASE WITH INTENT TO DISTRIBUTE OR SELL OR PUBLIC DISPLAY FOR
DISTRIBUTION OR SALE OF SYNTHETIC STIMULANT BATH SALTS, SYNTHETIC CATHINONES,
SYNTHETIC AMPHETAMINES AND OTHER SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS THAT MIMIC ILLEGAL
DRUGS.



   52.65(A)   Purpose and intent. The City Commission finds and
declares that the products and synthetic substances described hereunder are
commonly used as alternatives to amphetamines, cocaine, ecstasy and other
illegal drugs. The City Commission further finds that these synthetic
substances are particularly appealing to youth, and that these synthetic
substances are potentially dangerous to users in the short term and the long
term effects are not yet known. The City Commission finds that the products
which contain these synthetic substances often use a disclaimer that the
product is “not for human consumption” to avoid regulations that require
the manufacturer to list the product’s active ingredients. The City
Commission finds that drug designers and chemists can quickly create new
Synthetic Drugs once federal or state law makes a particular Synthetic Drug
illegal. As such, the City Commission finds that  there is a need to declare
illegal the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale, purchase with
intent to distribute or sell or public display for distribution or sale of
synthetic substances that mimic illegal controlled substances, even though
such synthetic substances have not yet themselves been categorized as illegal
controlled substances under federal or state law. The City Commission further
finds that it is proper and necessary for the Commission to exercise its
authority to safeguard and protect the public health, safety and welfare by
taking this action.



   52.65(B)   Application. This Section shall be applicable within the
City to the fullest extent allowed by law.



   52.65(C)   Conflict. Any applicable Broward County ordinance
governing this subject area that is more stringent than this Section or that
declares illegal a substance that is not declared illegal by this Section
shall remain enforceable within the City.



   52.65(D)   Distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale and
purchase with intent to distribute or sell Synthetic Stimulant bath salts and
Synthetic Stimulants prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any store owner,
store manager, store purchasing agent or other Person to distribute, sell,
offer for distribution or sale or purchase with intent to distribute or sell
any Synthetic Stimulant bath salts as defined herein or any Synthetic
Stimulants as defined herein.



   52.65(E)   Public display for distribution or sale of Synthetic
Stimulant bath salts and Synthetic Stimulants prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any store owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other
Person to publicly display for distribution or sale any Synthetic Stimulant
bath salts as defined herein or any Synthetic Stimulants as defined herein.



   52.65(F)   Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense
to prosecution of a violation of this Section if the distribution, sale,
offer for distribution or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or
public display for distribution or sale of Synthetic Stimulant bath salts as
defined herein or Synthetic Stimulants as defined herein is pursuant to the
direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized in
the State of Florida to direct or prescribe such act.



   52.65(G)   Seizure and destruction of Synthetic Stimulant bath salts
and Synthetic Stimulants. Synthetic Stimulant bath salts and Synthetic
Stimulants prohibited herein may be seized by law enforcement officers and
may be destroyed in the same manner used to destroy narcotics and contraband
substances, after its use for evidentiary purposes in any judicial proceeding
is no longer required.



   52.65(H)   Injunctive relief. The City shall have the authority to
seek an injunction against any Person violating the provisions of this
Section. In any action seeking an injunction, the City shall be entitled to
collect its enforcement expenses, including forensic costs, law enforcement
costs and reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred at the trial level and
on appeal.



   52.65(I)   Subsequent federal or state action. If Congress or a
federal agency amends federal law to include a particular substance or
otherwise enacts or amends a federal law providing for criminal penalties for
the prohibitions of substances set forth in this Section, then upon the
effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this Section
addressed by federal law shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations
of this Section committed prior to Congress or a federal agency enacting a
federal law may be prosecuted.



   If the Florida Legislature amends the controlled substance schedules in
F.S. § 893.01 to include a particular substance or otherwise enacts, or
amends a State statute providing for criminal penalties for the prohibitions
of substances set forth in this Section, then upon the effective date of such
enactment or amendment, the provisions of this Section addressed by the State
statute shall no longer be deemed effective.



   If the Florida Attorney General pursuant to the rulemaking authority
provided in F.S. Chapter 893 adds a particular substance to the controlled
substance schedules in F.S. § 893.01, then upon the effective date of such
enactment or amendment, the provisions of this Section addressed by the
rulemaking shall no longer be deemed effective.



   Any violations of this Section committed prior to the Florida
Legislature enacting such a statute or the Florida Attorney General
promulgating rules may be prosecuted.



   52.65(J)   Penalty.  Any store owner, store manager, store
purchasing agent or other Person violating any provision of this Section
shall be punishable as provided in § 2.99 of the Code.



(Ord. 2012-18, passed 9-24-2012)



§ 52.66  RESERVED.



§ 52.67  PROHIBITED USE OF NICOTINE VAPORIZERS.



   52.67(A)   Enclosed Indoor Workplaces. A person shall not use a
Nicotine Vaporizer in any Enclosed Indoor Workplace within the City, except
as otherwise provided in Section 52.67(B).



   52.67(B)   Exceptions. The use of a Nicotine Vaporizer may be
permitted in each of the following places:



   52.67(B)(1)   Private Residence. A private residence whenever it is
not being used commercially to provide child care, adult care, or health
care, or any combination thereof. For the purpose of this subsection, “used
commercially” means any time during which the owner, lessee, or other
person occupying or controlling the use of the private residence is
furnishing in the private residence, or causing or allowing to be furnished
in the private residence, child care, adult care, or health care, or any
combination thereof, and receiving or expecting to receive compensation
therefor;



   52.67(B)(2)   Retail Tobacco Shop and Retail Vaporizer Shop. A
Retail Tobacco Shop or Retail Vaporizer Shop that complies with all
applicable provisions of the City Code;



   52.67(B)(3)   Designated Smoking Guest Room. A Designated Smoking
Guest Room At Public Lodging Establishments;



   52.67(B)(4)   Stand-Alone Bar. A Stand-Alone Bar that complies with
all applicable provisions of Chapter 561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 567, and 568,
Florida Statutes; and



   52.67(B)(5)   Smoking Cessation Program, Medical Or Scientific
Research. An Enclosed Indoor Workplace, to the extent that the use of a
Nicotine Vaporizer is an integral part of a smoking cessation program
approved by the Florida Department of Health, or medical or scientific
research conducted therein. The proprietor or other person in charge of an
Enclosed Indoor Workplace where a smoking cessation program, medical
research, or scientific research is conducted or performed must conspicuously
post, or cause to be posted, signs stating that use of Nicotine Vaporizers is
permitted for such purposes in designated areas in the Enclosed Indoor
Workplace.



(Ord. 2014-24, passed 12-1-2014)



IRRIGATION SYSTEM



§ 52.70  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CITY'S IRRIGATION SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   No Person shall tamper with, tap into, or connect in any manner with
the City's Irrigation system, without written authorization from the City.



(Ord. 2013-02, passed 5-6-2013)



TIMESHARE UNITS



§ 52.75  TIMESHARE UNITS.



   Timeshare units shall not be used as a permanent residency, and the
occupants shall not use the address of the Timeshares as their residential or
business address for any purpose.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 6-1-2015)



CHAPTER 53:  ANIMAL CARE AND REGULATION



Section



   53.01   Adoption of the Broward County Animal Care and Adoption
Ordinance



   53.02   Wild animals



   53.03   Animal display prohibited



   53.04   Civil action or proceeding



§ 53.01  ADOPTION OF THE BROWARD COUNTY ANIMAL CARE AND ADOPTION ORDINANCE.



   The City adopts and incorporates the Broward County Animal Care and
Adoption Ordinance as part of the City Code.



(Ord. 2013-09, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 53.02  WILD ANIMALS.



   The keeping or confinement of Wild Animals shall be prohibited in all
zoning districts, except the Agricultural/Estate District (AE), where Wild
Animals may be kept provided that all applicable State Laws and regulations
are met.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 53.03  ANIMAL DISPLAY PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful to display Animals for a commercial purpose on Public
Property and private non-Residential Property, except within the interior of
a retail establishment whose primary purpose is the sale of Animals.



(Ord. 2010-12, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-09, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 53.04  CIVIL ACTION OR PROCEEDING.



   In addition to the penalties provided in this Chapter and in the
Broward County Animal Care and Adoption Ordinance for the violation of the
provisions hereof, the City may institute any lawful civil action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain or abate any acts or failures to act under
this Chapter or the Broward County Animal Care and Adoption Ordinance, which
constitute a public nuisance.



(Ord. 2013-09, passed 9-23-2013)



TITLE VI:  EMERGENCIES



   Chapter



      60.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      61.   DISASTER ACCESS AND DEBRIS REMOVAL



      62.   STORM SHUTTERS REGULATIONS



      63.   HURRICANE REGULATIONS



      64.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 60:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   60.01   Applicability of Florida Statutes



   60.02   Emergency management structure



   60.03   Powers, duties and responsibilities



   60.04   Declaration of a state of local emergency pertaining to a
disaster



   60.05   Declaration of a state of local emergency pertaining to acts
of violence



§ 60.01  APPLICABILITY OF FLORIDA STATUTES.



   The City adopts the procedures set forth in F.S. Chapters 252 and 870.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 60.02  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE.



   60.02(A)   Director of Emergency Management.  The City Manager
shall act as the Director of Emergency Management.



   60.02(B)   Implementation.  The City Manager shall implement,
manage and report on all actions authorized and taken under the provisions of
this Chapter, as soon as reasonably practicable.



   60.02(C)   Coordination of actions.  The City Manager shall plan
for the coordination of those actions necessary for the creation and
maintenance of an effective Emergency response capability to prepare for and
manage Emergency conditions.



   60.02(D)   Absence or unavailability of Mayor.  For purposes of
this Chapter, the Alternate Presiding Officer shall act in the absence or
unavailability of the Mayor; the Second Alternate Presiding Officer shall act
in the absence or unavailability of the Mayor and the Alternate Presiding
Officer; and the remaining Commissioner with the longest tenure (or if of
equal tenure, the Commissioner whose last name is first alphabetically) shall
act in the absence or unavailability of the Mayor, Alternate Presiding
Officer and Second Alternate Presiding Officer.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 60.03  POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   60.03(A)   Powers, duties and responsibilities.  The City Manager
shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities:



   60.03(A)(1)   Emergency response plan.  To direct the creation,
revision and the exercise of Emergency response plans consistent with State
and Broward County Emergency plans for the mitigation of, preparation for,
response to, and recovery from Emergencies, and to exercise all powers
permitted by F.S. Chapter 252.



   60.03(A)(2)   Funding.  To recommend funding to the City Commission
for the creation and maintenance of an Emergency response capability as
provided in this Chapter.



   60.03(A)(3)   Emergency operations control center.  To plan for and
develop an Emergency operations control center to include equipment,
staffing, and operational procedures necessary for the management and control
of Emergency conditions.



   60.03(A)(4)   Emergency awareness program.  To develop and manage
the City’s Emergency awareness public information program.



   60.03(A)(5)   Public assistance.  To apply for public assistance or
other Disaster relief funding.



   60.03(A)(6)   Orders. To issue orders necessary for the protection
of life and property, establishment of public order, and control of adverse
conditions affecting public welfare resulting from an Emergency, and to adopt
orders issued by Federal, State or Broward County Emergency management
agencies.



   60.03(A)(7)   Emergency expenditures.  To utilize funds of the City
as necessary to cope with the Emergency, including Emergency expenditures, as
appropriated by the City Commission for Emergencies.



   60.03(A)(8)   Emergency contracts.  During a state of emergency or
during a state of local emergency, to enter into contracts addressing
situations arising out of the Emergency.



   60.03(B)   Declaration of state of emergency.  The City Manager and
the Mayor jointly shall have the power, duty and responsibility to declare a
state of local emergency pursuant to § 60.04 and to declare a state of
emergency pursuant to § 60.05, and the City Manager shall inform the City
Commission of the reasons for and status of events requiring the declaration.



   60.03(C)   Curfew.



   60.03(C)(1)   Declaration of curfew.  The City Manager and the
Mayor jointly shall have the power, duty and responsibility to establish or
remove a curfew for the duration, or any portion, of a state of local
emergency pertaining to a Disaster or of a state of emergency pertaining to
acts of violence. Should a curfew remain in effect at the time of the first
available City Commission meeting, the City Commission may take such actions
as deemed necessary, with regard to such curfew.



   60.03(C)(2)   Exemptions from curfew.  A curfew shall not apply to
those providing essential Emergency services, including law enforcement, fire
and medical services, water, Sewer, electric, gas and communications
Emergency repairs and to other governmental Emergency management personnel
and their designated Emergency response contractors and to the City’s
officials, employees, or essential contractors, and to any other Persons as
designated by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 60.04  DECLARATION OF A STATE OF LOCAL EMERGENCY PERTAINING TO A DISASTER.



   60.04(A)   Joint authority.  The City Manager and the Mayor jointly
shall have the authority to declare a state of local emergency, pursuant to
F.S. Chapter 252, regarding an Emergency pertaining to a Disaster.



   60.04(B)   Duration.  The duration of a state of local emergency
shall be limited to seven days for Emergencies Pertaining To Disasters, and
may be extended as necessary in seven day increments, in accordance with F.S.
§ 252.38.



   60.04(C)   Notice.  Upon the declaration of a state of local
emergency, the City Manager shall, if practicable, post a written notice of
such declaration upon the bulletin board at City Hall, and shall, as promptly
as practicable, file in the office of the City Clerk a notice of a declared
state of local emergency, or Emergency measure declared or ordered and
promulgated by virtue of Florida Statutes. The City Manager shall notify the
local media and residents as soon as possible and in the manner most
practicable and expeditious, utilizing the City’s media resources available
at the time.



   60.04(D)   Meeting of the City Commission.  Upon the declaration of
a state of local emergency, the City Manager shall advise the City Commission
as to the status of the state of local emergency, and may, at any time after
a declaration of a state of local emergency, call a meeting of the City
Commission, and the City Commission may take such actions as deemed necessary.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-23, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 60.05  DECLARATION OF A STATE OF LOCAL EMERGENCY PERTAINING TO ACTS OF
VIOLENCE.



   60.05(A)   Joint authority.  The City Manager and the Mayor jointly
shall have the authority to declare a state of emergency, pursuant to F.S.
Chapter 870, regarding an Emergency Pertaining To Acts of Violence.



   60.05(B)   Duration.  A state of emergency shall commence upon the
declaration and shall terminate at the end of a period of 72 consecutive
hours thereafter, unless prior to the end of the 72-hour period the City
Manager and the Mayor jointly, or the City Commission, shall have terminated
the state of emergency. Any extension of the 72-hour period shall be
accomplished by request from the City Manager and the Mayor jointly and the
concurrence of the City Commission by resolution, unless the nature of the
Emergency renders a meeting of the City Commission impossible. If it is not
possible for the City Commission to meet, the City Manager and the Mayor
jointly shall have the authority to extend such 72-hour period.



   60.05(C)   Notice.  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency,
the City Manager shall, if practicable, post a written notice of such
declaration upon the bulletin board at City Hall and shall, as promptly as
practicable, file in the office of the City Clerk a notice of a declared
state of emergency, or Emergency measure declared or ordered and promulgated
by virtue of Florida Statutes. The City Manager4 shall notify the local media
and residents as soon as possible and in the manner most practicable and
expeditious, utilizing the City’s media resources available at the time.



   60.05(D)   Meeting of the City Commission.  Upon the declaration of
a state of emergency, the City Manager shall ensure that a meeting of the
City Commission shall be called as soon as possible, in order to apprise the
City Commission as to the status of the state of emergency, and the City
Commission may take such actions as deemed necessary.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 61:  DISASTER ACCESS AND DEBRIS REMOVAL



Section



   61.01   Purpose



   61.02   Findings of fact



   61.03   Access for emergency response and disaster debris removal



   61.04   Collection and removal of disaster debris, generally



   61.05   Disaster debris from residential property



   61.06   Disaster debris from nonresidential property



   61.07   Determination of immediate threat to life, health or safety



   61.08   Indemnification, defense and hold harmless



§ 61.01  PURPOSE.



   The City needs an efficient and effective system for disposing of
Disaster Debris . The Disaster Access and Debris Removal Ordinance is
designed to advise property Owners of their duties and responsibilities with
respect to Disaster Debris , to provide for an efficient system for
collection and removal of Disaster Debris, to eliminate threats to health,
safety and welfare created by Disaster Debris , and to establish a process by
which the City may evaluate and, if necessary, remove debris from Private
Rights-Of-Way within the City in the event of an immediate threat to life,
public health, safety and property.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 61.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   The City Commission finds that Disaster Debris can pose a serious and
immediate threat to life, health, safety and welfare, and poses an immediate
threat of significant damage to improved property.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 61.03  ACCESS FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND DISASTER DEBRIS REMOVAL.



   61.03(A)   Clearance of Disaster Debris by City.  The City, through
its contract agents, provides basic life safety services to the public. In
order to facilitate Emergency response to Disasters that have caused Disaster
Debris to be produced throughout the City, the City will clear Disaster
Debris from Public and Private Rights-Of-Way throughout the City.



   61.03(B)   Access.  Upon declaration of a state of emergency
affecting the City or the declaration of a state of local emergency by the
City, and until the state of emergency and/or state of local emergency has
been lifted or otherwise ceased, communities with Private Rights-Of-Way,
whether gated or ungated, shall allow unlimited access through all community
entrances to the City and its agents for response to emergencies and
circumstances that pose serious and immediate threats to the life, health
and/or safety of the public.



   61.03(C)   Facilitation of access.  To facilitate unlimited access
throughout communities with Private Rights-Of-Way:



   61.03(C)(1)   Community entrances with gatehouses that are staffed
shall provide access to the City’s agents and vehicles upon display of
proper identification;



   61.03(C)(2)   Community entrances with gatehouses that are staffed
less than 24 hours a day shall keep gates open when the gatehouses are not
staffed; and



   61.03(C)(3)   Community entrances without staffed gatehouses shall
keep gates open 24 hours a day.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 61.04  COLLECTION AND REMOVAL OF DISASTER DEBRIS, GENERALLY.



   61.04(A)   Serious and immediate threat.  The City will only remove
Disaster Debris if the City Manager determines, pursuant to § 61.07, that
the presence of Disaster Debris throughout the City is so widespread or of
such a severe nature as to pose a serious and immediate threat to life,
health and/or safety.



   61.04(B)   Removal only from Public and Private Rights-Of-Way.  The
City will only remove Disaster Debris piles from Public and Private
Rights-Of-Way.



   61.04(C)   Prioritization.  The City will only remove Disaster
Debris piles that have been collected and located as required by § 61.05.
The City may prioritize the removal of different types or quantities of
Disaster Debris.



   61.04(D)   Compliance with laws and City Code.  All actions of
property Owners, or their agents, to collect, reduce, remove or otherwise
dispose of Disaster Debris shall comply with all provisions of Federal and
State law, and with the City Code.



   61.04(E)   Removal of only Disaster Debris.  Burning of Disaster
Debris is prohibited at all times. The City will not remove Large Stumps or
Limbs or any Debris that is not a direct result of the Disaster, including
Debris generated by Land Clearing operations, house cleaning efforts or other
attempts to have the City remove Debris that is not Disaster Debris.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 61.05  DISASTER DEBRIS FROM RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   61.05(A)   Responsibility.  Residential PropertyOwners are
responsible for the collection and removal of Disaster Debris from their
property, except to the extent the City is responsible for removal of
Disaster Debris from Private Rights-Of-Way as provided in § 61.07 of the
City Code.



   61.05(B)   Piling requirement.  As provided in §§ 61.04 and
61.07, the City may remove Disaster Debris collected from Residential
Property. Residential PropertyOwners desiring the City to remove Disaster
Debris shall collect and locate in piles all Disaster Debris as required by
this Section before the City ’s Last Pass for removal of Disaster Debris.
Disaster Debris piles put out for removal after the City makes its Last Pass
will not be removed by the City .



   61.05(C)   Segregation requirement.  Residential PropertyOwners
must segregate Structural Debris piles from Vegetative Debris piles, and
these piles must be segregated from Household Waste. Household Waste shall be
bagged and placed in Garbage cans. Structural Debris and Vegetative Debris
shall not be bagged, except that loose Vegetative Debris may be placed in
large plastic bags.



   61.05(D)   Placement of piles.  Residential PropertyOwners shall
place Disaster Debris piles:



   61.05(D)(1)   In front of their residence in the Swale area
immediately adjacent to the edge of the public or private Roadway ; and



   61.05(D)(2)   In such a manner as to allow ingress and egress to all
Residential Properties.



   61.05(E)   Combination of piles.  Residential PropertyOwners may
combine their several piles of segregated Disaster Debris into larger piles
to accomplish this requirement.



   61.05(F)   Damage to Sidewalks or mailboxes.  The City and its
agents shall not be responsible for damage to Sidewalks or mailboxes when
Disaster Debris is placed on or adjacent thereto.



   61.05(G)   City determination.  If the City determines that:



   61.05(G)(1)   Residential PropertyOwner ’s Structural Debris ,
Vegetative Debris and/or Household Waste is commingled, or has not been
collected in accordance with § 61.05, the Residential PropertyOwner shall
have 48 hours to properly segregate the Disaster Debris . If the Residential
PropertyOwner fails to properly segregate his or her Disaster Debris within
48 hours, then the Residential PropertyOwner is required to remove and
dispose of the Disaster Debris at his or her expense;



   61.05(G)(2)   Any Disaster Debris from Nonresidential Property,
including community property, has been commingled with the Disaster Debris of
a Residential PropertyOwner , then the City will not remove the Disaster
Debris and the Residential PropertyOwner is required to remove the Disaster
Debris piles at his or her expense; or



   61.05(G)(3)   Any Disaster Debris has been moved or transported by a
motorized machine, then the City will not remove the Disaster Debris and the
Residential PropertyOwner is required to remove the Disaster Debris at his or
her expense.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 61.06  DISASTER DEBRIS FROM NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   61.06(A)   Commingling.  The City will not remove Disaster Debris
that has come from or been commingled with Disaster Debris from:



   61.06(A)(1)   Nonresidential Property;



   61.06(A)(2)   Landscaped Medians or cul-de-sacs in communities with
Private Rights-Of-Way ; or



   61.06(A)(3)   Privately owned parks or other privately owned
properties that are not residential.



   61.06(B)   Disposal of all Disaster Debris.  Nonresidential
Property Owners, including entities owning community property, shall collect,
reduce, remove and otherwise dispose of all Disaster Debris on their property
within 60 days of the end of the disaster.



   61.06(C)   Prohibition of commingling.  Nonresidential Property
Owners, including entities owning community property, shall not:



   61.06(C)(1)   Move Disaster Debris from their property to
Residential Property ; or



   61.06(C)(2)   Collect their Disaster Debris and commingle it with a
Residential PropertyOwner ’s Disaster Debris piles.



   61.06(D)   Tub grinding operations.  Tub grinding operations or any
other operation to reduce Disaster Debris from Nonresidential Property must
be conducted at least 200 feet away from Residential Property.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 61.07  DETERMINATION OF IMMEDIATE THREAT TO LIFE, HEALTH OR SAFETY.



   61.07(A)   Determination.  The City Manager shall determine whether
the presence of Disaster Debris is so widespread or of such a severe nature
as to pose a serious and immediate threat to life, health and/or safety of
the public as provided in this Section.



   61.07(B)   Assessment.  In the event that a disaster has caused or
is causing the presence of Disaster Debris in the City, or any part thereof,
the City Manager shall determine the scope of the disaster, the scope of the
Disaster Debris spread, and the nature of the Disaster Debris. After
compiling this information, the City Manager shall assess the seriousness and
immediacy of threats to life, health and/or safety posed by Disaster Debris
present throughout the City.



   61.07(C)   Elimination of immediate threat.  It is in the public
interest to remove Disaster Debris where City action is necessary to
eliminate an immediate threat to life and/or public health and/or public
safety.



   61.07(D)   Public interest.  The City Manager shall determine,
based upon his or her assessment of the seriousness and immediacy of threats
to life, health and/or safety posed by Disaster Debris, whether it is in the
public interest to remove Disaster Debris anywhere in the City.



   61.07(D)(1)   The City Manager shall consider the presence and/or
imminent development of any of the following dangers or aggravating factors
in assessing whether the removal of Disaster Debris from public property is
in the public interest:



   61.07(D)(1)(a)   Downed or disabled power lines or other Utility
connections;



   61.07(D)(1)(b)   Glass, metal or other sharp Debris ;



   61.07(D)(1)(c)   Biological or chemical waste and/or contaminants;



   61.07(D)(1)(d)   Risk of fire;



   61.07(D)(1)(e)   Risk of infestation by vermin;



   61.07(D)(1)(f)   Risk of disease spread or illness;



   61.07(D)(1)(g)   Risk of preventing or impairing Emergency response;



   61.07(D)(1)(h)   Risk of the collapse of Structures ;



   61.07(D)(1)(i)   Risk of Disaster Debris becoming wind-blown
projectiles;



   61.07(D)(1)(j)   Risk of attractive nuisance; or



   61.07(D)(1)(k)   Impairment of drainage by Disaster Debris , and
risks associated therewith.



   61.07(D)(2)   The City Manager shall also consider any other danger
or aggravating factor he or she finds applicable to assessing whether the
removal of Disaster Debris is in the public interest.



   61.07(E)   Removal from Private Rights-of-Way. If the Property Owner
has executed an agreement with the City in accordance with § 61.08 of the
City Code, the City shall remove Disaster Debris from Private Right-Of-Way
adjacent to Residential Property when (i) the Disaster Debris is determined
by the City Manager , in the City Manager 's sole discretion in accordance
with this Section, to pose an immediate threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the public in the area or an immediate threat of significant
damage to improved property within the City, and (ii) the City receives
written approval from FEMA to remove the Disaster Debris from the Private
Right-Of-Way adjacent to Residential Property. The Property Owner shall be
responsible for the removal of Disaster Debris from the Private Right-Of-Way
if the City Manager does not make a determination of immediate threat as
provided in this Section, or if the City does not receive written approval
from FEMA to remove the Disaster Debris from the Private Right-Of-Way. In
order to determine that there is such an immediate threat sufficient to
warrant removal of Disaster Debris from Private Right-Of-Way adjacent to
Residential Property within the City, the City Manager shall first consider
the factors in this subsection and make a written finding as to whether the
presence and/or imminent development of any of the dangers or aggravating
factors below exists:



   61.07(E)(1)   There is a significant likelihood that rescue vehicles
will be significantly hindered from rendering emergency services to property
should the debris be allowed to remain in place absent City removal;



   61.07(E)(2)   The type of Disaster Debris is such that it may
reasonably cause disease, illness, or sickness which could injure or
adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of those residing and
working in the area if it is allowed to remain;



   61.07(E)(3)   The clearing is necessary to effectuate orderly and
expeditious restoration of citywide utility services including, but not
limited to, power, water, sewer, and telephone;



   61.07 (E)(4)   The Disaster Debris is determined to be dangerous or
hazardous to persons or property;



   61.07(E)(5)   The Disaster Debris prevents garbage collection
thereby creating a public health hazard;



   61.07(E)(6)   The Disaster Debris contains contaminants which have a
reasonable likelihood of leaching into the soil and/or aquifer of the City ;



   61.07(E)(7)   The Disaster Debris has a substantial negative impact
in preventing or adversely affecting emergency repairs to buildings and/or
property;



   61.07(E)(8)   The Disaster Debris presents a reasonable danger of
being transported by wind and/or water into the surrounding areas of the City
and thereby increasing the cost of recovery and removal;



   61.07(E)(9)   The Disaster Debris poses a significant likelihood of
producing mold which would be injurious to public health;



   61.07(E)(10)   The presence of the Disaster Debris significantly
adversely impacts the City 's recovery efforts;



   61.07(E)(11)   The Disaster Debris significantly interferes with
drainage or water runoff, so as to be a significant hazard in the event of
significant rainfall;



   61.07(E)(12)   The sheer volume of the Disaster Debris is such that
it is impractical and unreasonable to remove in an orderly and efficient
manner absent action by the City ;



   61.07(E)(13)   The type, extent and nature of the Disaster Debris is
such that it would cause much greater damage if the debris was not removed
immediately; or



   61.07(E)(14)   If the clearance of the Disaster Debris will aid the
City 's recovery operations or aid the health, safety, or welfare of the
residents of the City .



   61.07(F)   Promulgation of rules and forms.  The City Manager shall
promulgate any rules and forms necessary to detail determinations made
pursuant to this Section.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016; Am. Ord.
2017-06, passed 7-3-2017)



§ 61.08  INDEMNIFICATION, DEFENSE AND HOLD HARMLESS.



   Prior to the City, or the City's authorized agent, entering Private
Rights-Of-Way to clear and/or remove Disaster Debris, the Owner of the
Private Rights-Of-Way shall execute the City's standard form Agreement for
Disaster Removal agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold the Federal
government and the City and their agencies, employees, officers and agents,
harmless for claims arising from the City’s removal of Disaster Debris. The
Mayor and the City Manager are authorized to execute the City's standard form
Agreement for Disaster Debris Removal on behalf of the City.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 4-4-2016)



CHAPTER 62:  STORM SHUTTERS REGULATIONS



Section



   62.01   Storm shutters placed on structures certified for occupancy



   62.02   Storm shutters - time of closure



   62.03   Permissible storm shutters



§ 62.01  STORM SHUTTERS PLACED ON STRUCTURES CERTIFIED FOR OCCUPANCY.



   Storm shutters are encouraged for all Structures certified for
occupancy in the City. Permanently installed storm shutters shall be
installed and designed in conformance with the standards set forth in the
Building Code .



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 62.02  STORM SHUTTERS - TIME OF CLOSURE.



   Consistent with the provisions regarding storm shutters as defined and
set forth in the Building Code , it is prohibited to maintain storm shutters
in a closed/secured position on a Structure except:



   62.02(A)   Tropical Storm or Hurricane conditions forecasted.  When
the City falls within the National Hurricane Center’s five-day Track
Forecast Cone for a tropical storm or hurricane and for a period of ten days
after the City is no longer within any five-day Track Forecast Cone; or



   62.02(B)   Unoccupied Residential Dwelling Unit exception.  On an
unoccupied residential Dwelling Unit at any time during the period from June
1 through November 30 of each Year; or



   62.02(C)   Testing and maintenance.  For up to 24 hours for testing
and maintenance purposes; or



   62.02(D)   Extension of time.  When the City Manager, in his or her
discretion, issues an extension of time during which storm shutters may be
maintained in a closed/secured position on the Structure.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 62.03  PERMISSIBLE STORM SHUTTERS.



   Any type of storm shutters that meet the requirements for storm
shutters set forth in the Building Code may be installed within the City,
notwithstanding any rules or regulations of any Homeowner’s, condominium or
other maintenance Association .



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 63:  HURRICANE REGULATIONS



Section



   63.01   Hurricane preparations



§ 63.01  HURRICANE PREPARATIONS.



   63.01(A)   The Building Code.  In the event that a Hurricane Watch
is issued by the appropriate governmental entity with the authority to issue
a watch, the Owner, occupant or user of a Construction site or Premises
certified for occupancy shall comply with the requirements of the Building
Code in addition to the requirements specified herein, by taking all steps
necessary to Secure the Construction site or Premises, including removal or
securing of potentially hazardous or loose objects.



   63.01(B)   Special hurricane inspections.



   63.01(B)(1)   In the event that a Hurricane Watch is issued by the
appropriate governmental entity, all materials in exposed areas outside of
Structures certified for occupancy by the City shall be removed from the
exterior of the Premises, unless such materials have been permanently affixed
to the ground or the Structure . Orders to comply shall be written and given
to a Person on the Premises most logically responsible for maintenance
thereof, or if no Person is present, orders may be given by facsimile to the
responsible entity if such entity is known.



   63.01(B)(2)   Any Person receiving an order from the City’s
Building Official or City’s Code Enforcement Officer to comply with this
Section shall comply with said order within the time specified on that order,
but no later than 12 hours before the anticipated arrival of hurricane force
winds (winds of 74 mph or greater).



   63.01(B)(3)   In situations where a Person fails to Secure a site or
premises consistent with this Section and pursuant to the orders of the
City’s Building Official or City’s Code Enforcement Officer , the City
may enter and Secure the site or Premises for purposes of correcting the
violation. The authority to enter and Secure a site or Premises for such
purposes shall extend to any agency, company or firm retained by the City to
effect compliance. In either situation, the Person responsible for the
violation shall reimburse the City for its costs of cleaning up, clearing and
Securing the site or Premises, including all costs associated with retaining
an agency, company or firm to effect such compliance. This shall also include
reimbursement for costs related to demolition or other measures deemed
necessary to correct hazardous structural conditions.



   63.01(C)   Construction Waste and Construction materials.



   63.01(C)(1)   It shall be the joint responsibility of any Owner of
real property upon which Construction is occurring, or any contractor
responsible for said Construction, to ensure that all road Rights-Of-Way and
properties in the area remain free at all times of all Construction Waste and
Trash resulting from such Construction.



   63.01(C)(2)   During Severe Weather, it shall be a violation of this
Section for an Owner of real property upon which Construction is occurring or
any contractor responsible for said Construction, to have on or near that
property loose Construction Debris. Any loose Construction Debris shall be
Secured and contained. The Construction site must be cleared of loose
Construction Debris pursuant to this Section.



   63.01(C)(3)   During Severe Weather, it shall be a violation of this
Section for an Owner of the real property upon which Construction is
occurring, or any contractor responsible for said Construction, to have on
that property loose Construction material, including Roof tiles, that are not
fastened or Secured to the ground or to a permanent Structure .



   63.01(C)(4)   Media broadcasts or notices issued by the appropriate
governmental entity of Severe Weather are deemed sufficient notice to the
Owner of real property upon which Construction is occurring, or any
contractor responsible for said Construction, to Secureloose Construction
Debris and loose Construction materials against the effects of hurricane
force winds.



   63.01(C)(5)   Materials stockpiled on top of any Structure under
Construction shall be permanently installed by the property Owner or
contractor upon a warning of Severe Weather; provided, however, in the event
such installation cannot be timely completed, then the property Owner or
contractor shall:



   63.01(C)(5)(a)   Band together the Construction materials and fasten
them to the top of the Structure in such a manner so as not to present a
threat of their becoming airborne during Severe Weather; or



   63.01(C)(5)(b)   Remove the Construction materials from the top of
the Structure and fasten down to the ground; or



   63.01(C)(5)(c)   Remove the Construction materials from the job
site; or



   63.01(C)(5)(d)   Store the Construction materials inside a enclosed
Structure .



   63.01(C)(6)   Roll-off Containers and Construction and Demolition
DebrisContainers shall be emptied and Secured, or removed from the site.



   63.01(C)(7)   The City’s Building Official or City’s Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a citation for each violation of this
Section. Prior to the issuance of any citation for a violation of this
Section, the City’s Building Official or City’s Code Enforcement Officer
shall attempt to provide a written notice to the Owner of the real property
upon which Construction is occurring or any contractor responsible for said
Construction. That notice shall specifically set a time period (reasonably
calculated by the City’s Building Official or City’s Code Enforcement
Officer ) for correction of the violation. In the event the City takes
Emergency actions to Secure a property considered in violation of this
Section, the property Owner shall be responsible for all costs associated
therewith and shall be billed for all charges and expenses incurred by the
City.



(Ord. 2010-13, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 64:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section




General




   64.01   Scope



   64.02   Purpose



   64.03   Coordination with the Florida Building Code



   64.04   Warning



   64.05   Disclaimer of liability



   64.06   Conflict



   64.07   Areas to which this chapter applies



   64.08   Basis for establishing flood hazard areas



   64.09   Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas



   64.10   Other laws



   64.11   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   64.12   Interpretation



   64.13   Terms defined in the Florida Building Code



   64.14   Terms not defined



   64.15   Definitions




Designation and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator




   64.20   Designation



   64.21   General



   64.22   Applications and permits



   64.23   Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations



   64.24   Modifications of the strict application of the requirements
of the Florida Building Code



   64.25   Notices and orders



   64.26   Inspections



   64.27   Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator



   64.28   Floodplain management records




Permits and Procedures




   64.30   Permits required



   64.31   Floodplain Development Permits or approvals



   64.32   Application for a permit or approval



   64.33   Validity of permit or approval



   64.34   Expiration



   64.35   Suspension or revocation



   64.36   Other permits required



   64.37   Site plans and construction




Inspections




   64.40   Inspections



Variances and Appeals



   64.50   General



   64.51   Appeals



   64.52   Limitations on authority to grant variances



   64.53   Restrictions in floodways



   64.54   Historic buildings



   64.55   Functionally dependent uses



   64.56   Considerations for issuance of variances



   64.57   Conditions for issuance of variances




Violations




   64.60   Violations



   64.61   Authority



   64.62   Unlawful continuance




Flood Resistant Development




   64.70   Buildings and structures exempt from the Florida Building
Code



   64.71   Specific methods of construction and requirements



   64.72   Subdivision minimum requirements



   64.73   Site improvements, utilities and limitations



   64.74   Manufactured homes



   64.75   Recreational vehicles



   64.76   Tanks



   64.77   General requirements for other development




Other




   64.80   Fiscal impact statement



   64.81   Applicability



GENERAL



§ 64.01  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this Floodplain Management Ordinance, (hereinafter
referred to as "this Chapter") shall apply to all Development that is wholly
within or partially within any Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to
the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and
Utility installations; Construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement,
improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of Buildings,
Structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code;
placement, installation, or replacement of Manufactured Homes and
manufactured Buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of
Recreational Vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other
Development.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.02  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this Chapter and the Flood load and Flood resistant
Construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish
minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to Flooding through
regulation of Development in Flood Hazard Areas to:



   64.02(A)   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and
public service during times of Flooding;



   64.02(B)   Require the use of appropriate Construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize future Flood damage;



   64.02(C)   Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving,
Excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other
Development which may increase Flood damage or erosion potential;



   64.02(D)   Manage the alteration of Flood Hazard Areas,
Watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of Development on the
natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain;



   64.02(E)   Minimize damage to public and private facilities and
utilities;



   64.02(F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and Development of Flood Hazard Areas;



   64.02(G)   Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds
for Flood control projects and response to and recovery from Flood events; and



   64.02(H)   Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of
Federal Regulations, Section 59.22.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.03  COORDINATION WITH THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.



   This Chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction
with the Florida Building Code.  Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition
of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.04  WARNING.



   The degree of Flood protection required by this Chapter and the Florida
Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  Larger Floods can and will occur.  Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes.  This Chapter does not imply that
land outside of mapped Special Flood Hazard Areas, or that uses permitted
within such Flood Hazard Areas, will be free from Flooding or Flood damage. 
The Flood Hazard Areas and Base Flood Elevations contained in the Flood
Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements
of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise
these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.  No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use
is implied or expressed by compliance with this Chapter.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.05  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City
Commission of the City of Weston or by any officer or employee thereof for
any Flood damage that results from reliance on this Chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.06  CONFLICT.



   Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.07  AREAS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES. 



   This Chapter shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of
Weston, as established in § 64.08.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.08  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   The Flood Insurance Study for Broward County, Florida and Incorporated
Areas dated August 18, 2014, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and
the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent
amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of
this Chapter and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing Flood
Hazard Areas. Studies and maps that establish Flood Hazard Areas are on file
at the City Clerk's Office located in City Hall.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.09  SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL DATA TO ESTABLISH FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   To establish Flood Hazard Areas and Base Flood Elevations, pursuant to
§ 64.37, the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional
data.  Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed
professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community
indicates that ground elevations:



   64.09(A)   Are below the closest applicable Base Flood Elevation,
even in areas not delineated as a Special Flood Hazard Areas on a FIRM, the
area shall be considered as Flood Hazard Area and subject to the requirements
of this Chapter and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building
Code.



   64.09(B)     Are above the closest applicable Base Flood Elevation,
the area shall be regulated as a Flood Hazard Area unless the Applicant
obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the Special Flood
Hazard Area.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.10  OTHER LAWS.



   The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any
provisions of local, state or federal Law.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.11  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This Chapter supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of
Development in Flood Hazard Areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or
abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land
Development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management
regulations, or the Florida Building Code.  In the event of a conflict
between this Chapter and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall
govern.  This Chapter shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or
easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be
governed by this Chapter.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.12  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   64.12(A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   64.12(B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   64.12(C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.13  TERMS DEFINED IN THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.



   Where terms are not defined in this Chapter and are defined in the
Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
that code.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.14  TERMS NOT DEFINED.



   Where terms are not defined in this Chapter or the Florida Building
Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.15  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall,
apply to the Code provisions of this Chapter 64 only:



   ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories or
Height of a Building or Structure.



   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation,
change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional
area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of
modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the Base Flood.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a Variance.



   ASCE 24.  A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction
that is referenced by the Florida Building Code.  ASCE 24 is developed and
published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA.



   BASE FLOOD.  A Flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The Base Flood
is commonly referred to as the "100 year Flood" or the "1%-annual chance
Flood."



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the Base Flood, including wave
height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



   BASEMENT.  The portion of a Building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.  [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



   DESIGN FLOOD. The Flood associated with the greater of the following
two areas:  [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



      (1)   Area with a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance
of Flooding in any year; or



      (2)   Area designated as a Flood Hazard Area on the
community's Flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.



   DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION.  The elevation of the "Design Flood,"
including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's
legally designated Flood hazard map.  In areas designated as Zone AO, the
Design Flood Elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade
of the Building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the
Flood hazard map.  In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is
not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to
two feet.  [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to, Buildings or other Structures, tanks,
temporary Structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or
materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, Excavations, drilling
operations or any other land disturbing activities.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The placement of fill, Excavation, Buildings, permanent
Structures or other Development into a Flood Hazard Area which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of riverine Flood Hazard Areas.



   EXISTING BUILDING AND EXISTING STRUCTURE. Any Buildings and Structures
for which the "Start Of Construction" commenced before June 29, 1998. [Also
defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A Manufactured Home
Park Or Subdivision for which the Construction of facilities for servicing
the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the Construction of Streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before June 29, 1998. 



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the Construction of facilities for
servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the Construction of Streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA).  The federal agency that,
in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood
Insurance Program.



   FLOOD OR FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land from:  [Also defined in FBC, B,
Section 1612.2.]



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Any Construction material capable of
withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining
any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair.  [Also defined in FBC,
B, Section 1612.2.]



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  The greater of the following two areas:  [Also
defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



      (1)   The area within a floodplain subject to a 1% or greater
chance of Flooding in any year.



      (2)   The area designated as a Flood Hazard Area on the
community's Flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  The official map of the community on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both Special
Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
[Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface
elevations of the Base Flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in
FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The office or position designated and
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Chapter (may be
referred to as the Floodplain Manager).



   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT OR APPROVAL.  An official document or
certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or
concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific Development activities
that are located in Flood Hazard Areas and that are determined to be
compliant with this Chapter.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other riverine Watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the Base
Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.]



   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS.  An engineering analysis of the impact
that a proposed Encroachment into a Floodway is expected to have on the
Floodway boundaries and Base Flood Elevations; the evaluation shall be
prepared by a qualified Florida licensed Engineer using standard engineering
methods and models. 



   FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.  The family of codes adopted by the Florida
Building Commission, including:  Florida Building Code, Building; Florida
Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida
Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building
Code, Fuel Gas. 



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water,
including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities; the term does not include long term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to Construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a
Structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any Structure that is determined eligible for the
exception to the Flood Hazard Area requirements of the Florida Building Code,
Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC).  An official determination issued by FEMA
that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood
Insurance Study.  Letters of Map Change include:



      (1)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA):  An amendment based on
technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a
designated Special Flood Hazard Area.  A LOMA amends the current effective
Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of
a property, or Structure is not located in a Special Flood Hazard Area.



      (2)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR):  A revision based on
technical data that may show changes to Flood zones, Flood elevations,
Special Flood Hazard Area boundaries and Floodway delineations, and other
planimetric features. 



      (3)   Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F):  A
determination that a Structure or Parcel Of Land has been elevated by fill
above the Base Flood Elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within
the Special Flood Hazard Area.  In order to qualify for this determination,
the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the
community's floodplain management regulations.



      (4)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR):  A formal
review and comment as to whether a proposed Flood protection project or other
project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with
respect to delineation of Special Flood Hazard Areas.  A CLOMR does not
revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon
submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map
Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.



   LIGHT-DUTY TRUCK.  As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any Motor Vehicle
rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a
vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle
frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is:



      (1)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of
property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or



      (2)   Designed primarily for transportation of Persons and has
a capacity of more than 12 Persons; or



      (3)   Available with special features enabling off-Street or
off-Highway operation and use.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area of a
Building or Structure, including Basement, but excluding any unfinished or
flood-resistant enclosure, other than a Basement, usable solely for vehicle
parking, Building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the Structure in violation of the non-elevation
requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24.  [Also defined in FBC,
B, Section 1612.2.]



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A Structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square
feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities.  The term "Manufactured Home" does not include a "Recreational
Vehicle" or "Park Trailer."  [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.]



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more Manufactured Home Lots for rent or
sale.



   MARKET VALUE. The price at which a property will change hands between a
willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to
buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts.  As used
in this Chapter, the term refers to the Market Value of Buildings and
Structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel.  Market
Value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, Actual Cash
Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of Construction), or
tax Assessment value adjusted to approximate Market Value by a factor
provided by the Property Appraiser.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of administration of this Chapter
and the Flood resistant Construction requirements of the Florida Building
Code, Structures for which the "Start Of Construction" commenced on or after
June 29, 1998, and includes any subsequent improvements to such Structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A Manufactured Home Park
Or Subdivision for which the Construction of facilities for servicing the
Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the Construction of Streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after June 29, 1998.



   PARK TRAILER.  A transportable unit which has a body width not
exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to
provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities
necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances.  [Defined in
F.S. § 320.01]



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle, including a Park Trailer, which is:
[see in F.S. 320.01)



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by
a Light Duty Truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent Dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of Flooding in any given year.  Special Flood Hazard Areas
are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
[Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.]



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The date of issuance for New Construction and
Substantial Improvements to Existing Structures, provided the actual Start Of
Construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, Addition, placement, or
other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance.  The
actual Start Of Construction means either the first placement of permanent
Construction of a Building (including a Manufactured Home) on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the Construction
of columns.



   Permanent Construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of Streets or walkways,
Excavation for a Basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of
temporary forms or the installation of accessory Buildings such as garages or
sheds not occupied as Dwelling Units or not part of the main Buildings.  For
a Substantial Improvement, the actual "Start Of Construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
Building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the Building.  [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.]



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a Building or
Structure whereby the cost of restoring the Building or Structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the Market Value of the
Building or Structure before the damage occurred.  [Also defined in FBC, B
Section 1612.2.]



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
Addition, or other improvement of a Building or Structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the Market Value of the Building or Structure before
the improvement or repair is started.  If the Structure has incurred
"Substantial Damage," any repairs are considered Substantial Improvement
regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a Building required to correct
existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the
Building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter, or
the Flood resistant Construction requirements of the Florida Building Code,
which permits Construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted
by this Chapter or the Florida Building Code.



   WATERCOURSE. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic
feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



DESIGNATION AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR



§ 64.20  DESIGNATION.



   The City Manager is designated as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other
employees.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.21  GENERAL.



   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Chapter consistent
with the intent and purpose of this Chapter and may establish policies and
procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such
interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of
waiving requirements specifically provided in this Chapter without the
granting of a Variance pursuant to §§ 64.50 through 64.57.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.22  APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.



   The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent
offices of the community, shall:



   64.22(A)   Review applications and plans to determine whether
proposed new Development will be located in Flood Hazard Areas;



   64.22(B)   Review applications for modification of any existing
Development in Flood Hazard Areas for compliance with the requirements of
this Chapter;



   64.22(C)   Interpret Flood Hazard Area boundaries where such
interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a
Person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to Appeal the
interpretation;



   64.22(D)   Provide available Flood elevation and Flood hazard
information;



   64.22(E)   Determine whether additional Flood hazard data shall be
obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an Applicant;



   64.22(F)   Review applications to determine whether proposed
Development will be reasonably safe from Flooding;



   64.22(G)   Issue Floodplain Development Permits Or Approvals for
Development other than Buildings and Structures that are subject to the
Florida Building Code, including Buildings, Structures and facilities exempt
from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this Chapter is
demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and



   64.22(H)   Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building
Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for
Buildings and Structures in Flood Hazard Areas comply with the applicable
provisions of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.23  SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT AND SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.



   For applications for Building Permits to improve Buildings and
Structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, change of occupancy, Additions, rehabilitations, renovations,
Substantial Improvements, repairs of Substantial Damage, and any other
improvement of or work on such Buildings and Structures, the Floodplain
Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:



   64.23(A)   Estimate the Market Value, or require the Applicant to
obtain an appraisal of the Market Value prepared by a qualified independent
appraiser, of the Building or Structure before the Start Of Construction of
the proposed work; in the case of repair, the Market Value of the Building or
Structure shall be the Market Value before the damage occurred and before any
repairs are made;



   64.23(B)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to
repair a damaged Building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs
of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the Market Value of the
Building or Structure;



   64.23(C)   Determine and document whether the proposed work
constitutes Substantial Improvement or repair of Substantial Damage; and



   64.23(D)   Notify the Applicant if it is determined that the work
constitutes Substantial Improvement or repair of Substantial Damage and that
compliance with the Flood resistant Construction requirements of the Florida
Building Code and this Chapter is required.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.24  MODIFICATIONS OF THE STRICT APPLICATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE
FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests submitted to the
Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the
Flood load and Flood resistant Construction requirements of the Florida
Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a
Variance pursuant to §§ 64.50 through 64.57. 



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.25  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local
agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this Chapter.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.26  INSPECTIONS.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as
specified in § 64.40 for Development that is not subject to the Florida
Building Code, including Buildings, Structures and facilities exempt from the
Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect Flood
Hazard Areas to determine if Development is undertaken without issuance of a
permit.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.27  OTHER DUTIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not
limited to:



   64.27(A)   Establish, in coordination with the Building Official,
procedures for administering and documenting determinations of Substantial
Improvement and Substantial Damage made pursuant to § 64.23;



   64.27(B)   Require that Applicants proposing Alteration Of A
Watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency
Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such
notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);



   64.27(C)   Require Applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic
Engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the
data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if
the analyses propose to change Base Flood Elevations, Flood Hazard Area
boundaries, or Floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within
six months of such data becoming available;



   64.27(D)   Review required design certifications and documentation
of elevations specified by this Chapter and the Florida Building Code and
this Chapter to determine that such certifications and documentations are
complete; and



   64.27(E)   Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the
corporate boundaries of the City of Weston are modified.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.28  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT RECORDS.



   Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of
public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently
keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary
for the administration of this Chapter and the Flood resistant Construction
requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate
Maps; Letters of Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of
permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes Substantial
Improvement or repair of Substantial Damage; required design certifications
and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and
this Chapter; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state
related to alterations of Watercourses; assurances that the Flood carrying
capacity of altered Watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to
Appeals and Variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and
records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this Chapter and the Flood
resistant Construction requirements of the Florida Building Code.  These
records shall be available for public inspection at the City Clerk's Office
located in City Hall through a public records request.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



PERMITS AND PROCEDURES



§ 64.30  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Any Owner or Owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "Applicant") who
intends to undertake any Development activity within the scope of this
Chapter, including Buildings, Structures and facilities exempt from the
Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any Flood
Hazard Area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and
the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s)
and approval(s).  No such permit or approval shall be issued until
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable
codes and regulations has been satisfied. 



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.31  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS OR APPROVALS.



   64.31(A)   Floodplain Development Permits Or Approvals shall be
issued pursuant to this Chapter for any Development activities not subject to
the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Buildings,
Structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code.  Depending
on the nature and extent of proposed Development that includes a Building or
Structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a Floodplain
Development Permit Or Approval is required in addition to a Building Permit. 



   64.31(B)   Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59
and 60), Floodplain Development Permits Or Approvals shall be required for
the following Buildings, Structures and facilities that are exempt from the
Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by Law, which are
subject to the requirements of this Chapter:



   64.31(B)(1)   Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the
railroad.



   64.31(B)(2)   Nonresidential farm Buildings on farms, as provided in
F.S. § 604.50.



   64.31(B)(3)   Temporary Buildings or sheds used exclusively for
Construction purposes.



   64.31(B)(4)   Mobile or modular Structures used as temporary offices.



   64.31(B)(5)   Those Structures or facilities of electric utilities,
as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation,
transmission, or distribution of electricity.



   64.31(B)(6)   Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of
Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this
paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a
thatched Roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that
does not incorporate any electrical, Plumbing, or other non-wood features.



   64.31(B)(7)   Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in
area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and
delivered on site and have walls, Roofs, and a floor constructed of granite,
marble, or reinforced concrete.



   64.31(B)(8)   Temporary housing provided by the Department of
Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system.



   64.31(B)(9)   Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are
not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such Structures are located in
Flood Hazard Areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.32  APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT OR APPROVAL.



   To obtain a Floodplain Development Permit Or Approval the Applicant
shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the
community. The information provided shall:



   64.32(A)   Identify and describe the Development to be covered by
the permit or approval.



   64.32(B)   Describe the land on which the proposed Development is to
be conducted by legal description, Street address or similar description that
will readily identify and definitively locate the site.



   64.32(C)   Indicate the Use and occupancy for which the proposed
Development is intended.



   64.32(D)   Be accompanied by a site plan or Construction documents
as specified in § 64.37.



   64.32(E)   State the valuation of the proposed work.



   64.32(F)   Be signed by the Applicant or the Applicant's authorized
agent.



   64.32(G)   Give such other data and information as required by the
Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.33  VALIDITY OF PERMIT OR APPROVAL.



   The issuance of a Floodplain Development Permit Or Approval pursuant to
this Chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any
violation of this Chapter, the Florida Building Codes, or any other Chapter
of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications,
Construction documents, and information shall not prevent the Floodplain
Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.34  EXPIRATION.



   A Floodplain Development Permit Or Approval shall become invalid unless
the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its
issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of
180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than
180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be
demonstrated.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.35  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a
Floodplain Development Permit Or Approval if the permit was issued in error,
on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in
violation of this Chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement
of this community.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.36  OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Floodplain Development Permits and Building Permits shall include a
condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained
before commencement of the permitted Development, including but not limited
to the following:



   64.36(A)   South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036.



   64.36(B)   Florida Department of Health for onsite Sewage treatment
and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C.



   64.36(C)   Florida Department of Environmental Protection for
activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055.



   64.36(D)   Florida Department of Environmental Protection for
activities that affect Wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction
with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.



   64.36(E)   Federal permits and approvals.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.37  SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION.



   64.37(A)   Information for Development in Flood Hazard Areas. The
site plan or Construction documents for any Development subject to the
requirements of this Chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as
applicable to the proposed Development:



   64.37(A)(1)   Delineation of Flood Hazard Areas, Floodway boundaries
and Flood zone(s), Base Flood Elevation(s), and ground elevations if
necessary for review of the proposed Development.



   64.37(A)(2)   Where Base Flood Elevations, or Floodway data are not
included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be
established in accordance with § 64.37(C)(2) or (3).



   64.37(A)(3)   Where the parcel on which the proposed Development
will take place will have more than 50 Lots or is larger than five acres and
the Base Flood Elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood
Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with §
64.37(C)(1).



   64.37(A)(4)   Location of the proposed activity and proposed
Structures, and locations of Existing Buildings And Structures.



   64.37(A)(5)   Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of
any filling, grading, or Excavation.



   64.37(A)(6)   Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount,
type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description
of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed
fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose.



   64.37(A)(7)   Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed
Alteration Of A Watercourse.



   64.37(B)   Submission Waiver. The Floodplain Administrator is
authorized to waive the submission of site plans, Construction documents, and
other data that are required by this Chapter but that are not required to be
prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature
of the proposed Development is such that the review of such submissions is
not necessary to ascertain compliance with this Chapter.



   64.37(C)   No BFE Identified. Where Flood Hazard Areas are
delineated on the FIRM and Base Flood Elevation data have not been provided,
the Floodplain Administrator shall:



   64.37(C)(1)   Require the Applicant to include Base Flood Elevation
data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices.



   64.37(C)(2)   Obtain, review, and provide to Applicants Base Flood
Elevation and Floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other
source or require the Applicant to obtain and use Base Flood Elevation and
Floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source.



   64.37(C)(3)   Where Base Flood Elevation and Floodway data are not
available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the
Floodplain Administrator to not reasonably reflect Flooding conditions, or
where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically
incorrect or otherwise inadequate:



   64.37(C)(3)(a)   Require the Applicant to include Base Flood
Elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted Engineering
practices; or 



   64.37(C)(3)(b)   Specify that the Base Flood Elevation is three feet
above the Highest Adjacent Grade at the location of the Development, provided
there is no evidence indicating Flood depths have been or may be greater than
three feet.



   64.37(C)(4)   Where the Base Flood Elevation data are to be used to
support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the Applicant that the
analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed Engineer in a format
required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the Applicant to
satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees.



   64.37(D)   Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to
the location and nature of the proposed Development activity, and in addition
to the requirements of this section, the Applicant shall have the following
analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed Engineer for submission with
the site plan and Construction documents:



   64.37(D)(1)   For Development activities proposed to be located in a
regulatory Floodway, a Floodway Encroachment Analysis that demonstrates that
the Encroachment of the proposed Development will not cause any increase in
Base Flood Elevations; where the Applicant proposes to undertake Development
activities that do increase Base Flood Elevations, the Applicant shall submit
such analysis to FEMA as specified in § 64.37(E) and shall submit the
Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and
Construction documents.



   64.37(D)(2)   For Development activities proposed to be located in a
riverine Flood Hazard Area for which Base Flood Elevations are included in
the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and Floodways have not been
designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the
cumulative effect of the proposed Development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated Flood Hazard Area Encroachments, will not increase
the Base Flood Elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.  This requirement does not apply in isolated Flood Hazard Areas
not connected to a riverine Flood Hazard Area or in Flood Hazard Areas
identified as Zone AO or Zone AH.



   64.37(D)(3)   For Alteration Of A Watercourse, an engineering
analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which
demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the Watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the
altered Watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the
channel's flood-carrying capacity; the Applicant shall submit the analysis to
FEMA as specified in § 64.37(E).



   64.37(E)   Submission of additional data. When additional
hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional
analyses are submitted to support an application, the Applicant has the right
to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the Base Flood Elevations,
change Floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of Flood Hazard Areas shown
on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes.  The analyses
shall be prepared by a Florida licensed Engineer in a format required by
FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility
of the Applicant.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



INSPECTIONS



§ 64.40  INSPECTIONS.



   64.40(A)   Development for which a Floodplain Development Permit Or
Approval is required shall be subject to inspection.



   64.40(A)(1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all
Development, including Development other than Buildings and Structures, to
determine compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the conditions
of issued Floodplain Development Permits Or Approvals.



   64.40(B)   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the
Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect Buildings,
Structuresand facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the conditions of issued
Floodplain Development Permits Or Approvals. 



   64.40(B)(1)   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the
Florida Building Code, Lowest Floor inspection. Upon placement of the Lowest
Floor, including Basement, and prior to further vertical Construction, the
Owner of a Building, Structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building
Code, or the Owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the Floodplain
Administrator:



   64.40(B)(1)(a)   If a Design Flood Elevation was used to determine
the required elevation of the Lowest Floor, the certification of elevation of
the Lowest Floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional
surveyor; or



   64.40(B)(1)(b)   If the elevation used to determine the required
elevation of the Lowest Floor was determined in accordance with §
64.37(C)(3)(b), the documentation of Height of the Lowest Floor above Highest
Adjacent Grade, prepared by the Owner or the Owner's authorized agent.



   64.40(B)(2)   Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the
Florida Building Code, Final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the
Owner or Owner's authorized agent shall submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a final certification of elevation of the Lowest Floor or final
documentation of the Height of the Lowest Floor above the Highest Adjacent
Grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified
in § 64.40(B)(1). 



   64.40(C)   Manufactured Homes inspection. The Floodplain
Administrator, or designee, shall inspect Manufactured Homes that are
installed or replaced in Flood Hazard Areas to determine compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon
placement of a Manufactured Home, certification of the elevation of the
Lowest Floor shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator or designee.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



VARIANCES AND APPEALS



§ 64.50  GENERAL.



   The City Commission shall hear and decide on requests for Appeals and
requests for Variances from the strict application of this Chapter. Pursuant
to F.S. § 553.73(5), the City Commission shall hear and decide on requests
for Appeals and requests for Variances from the strict application of the
Flood resistant Construction requirements of the Florida Building Code.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.51  APPEALS.



   The City Commission shall hear and decide Appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this
Chapter.  Any Person aggrieved by the decision of City Commission may Appeal
such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.52  LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY TO GRANT VARIANCES.



   The City Commission shall base its decisions on Variances on technical
justifications submitted by Applicants, the considerations for issuance in §
64.56, the conditions of issuance set forth in § 65.57, and the comments and
recommendations of the Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official. 
The City Commission has the right to attach such conditions as it deems
necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this Chapter. 



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.53  RESTRICTIONS IN FLOODWAYS.



   A Variance shall not be issued for any proposed Development in a
Floodway if any increase in Base Flood Elevations would result, as evidenced
by the applicable analyses and certifications required in § 64.37(D).



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.54  HISTORIC BUILDINGS.



   A Variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or
rehabilitation of a historic Building that is determined eligible for the
exception to the Flood resistant Construction requirements of the Florida
Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings,  upon a
determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will
not preclude the Building's continued designation as a historic Building and
the Variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the Building. If the proposed work precludes the Building's
continued designation as a historic Building, a Variance shall not be granted
and the Building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be
subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.55  FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USES.



   A Variance is authorized to be issued for the Construction or
Substantial Improvement necessary for the conduct of a Functionally Dependent
Use, as defined in this Chapter, provided the Variance meets the requirements
of § 64.53, is the minimum necessary considering the Flood hazard, and all
due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that
minimize Flood damage during occurrence of the Base Flood.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.56  CONSIDERATIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.



   In reviewing requests for Variances, the City Commission shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable
provisions of the Florida Building Code, this Chapter, and the following:



   64.56(A)   The danger that materials and Debris may be swept onto
other lands resulting in further injury or damage;



   64.56(B)   The danger to life and property due to Flooding or
erosion damage;



   64.56(C)   The susceptibility of the proposed Development, including
contents, to Flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future
Owners;



   64.56(D)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
Development to the community;



   64.56(E)   The availability of alternate locations for the proposed
Development that are subject to lower risk of Flooding or erosion;



   64.56(F)   The compatibility of the proposed Development with
existing and anticipated Development;



   64.56(G)   The relationship of the proposed Development to the
comprehensive plan and Floodplain management program for the area;



   64.56(H)   The safety of access to the property in times of Flooding
for ordinary and Emergency vehicles;



   64.56(I)    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and Debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and



   64.56(J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after Flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as Sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, Streets and
bridges.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.57  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF VARIANCES.



   Variances shall be issued only upon:



   64.57(A)   Submission by the Applicant, of a showing of good and
sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration,
or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this Chapter
or the required elevation standards;



   64.57(B)   Determination by the City Commission that:



   64.57(B)(1)   Failure to grant the Variance would result in
exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that
render the Lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or
inconvenience do not constitute hardship;



   64.57(B)(2)   The granting of a Variance will not result in
increased Flood Heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public or conflict with existing local Laws and ordinances; and



   64.57(B)(3)   The Variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
Flood hazard, to afford relief;



   64.57(C)   Receipt of a signed statement by the Applicant that the
Variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the
Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
Parcel Of Land; and



   64.57(D)   If the request is for a Variance to allow Construction of
the Lowest Floor of a new Building, or Substantial Improvement of a Building,
below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from
the Floodplain Administrator to the Applicant for the Variance, specifying
the difference between the Base Flood Elevation and the proposed elevation of
the Lowest Floor, stating that the cost of federal Flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor
elevation (up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage), and
stating that Construction below the Base Flood Elevation increases risks to
life and property.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



VIOLATIONS



§ 64.60  VIOLATIONS.



   Any Development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building
Code but that is regulated by this Chapter that is performed without an
issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not
fully comply with this Chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this
Chapter.  A Building or Structure without the documentation of elevation of
the Lowest Floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required by this Chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed
to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.61  AUTHORITY.



   For Development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building
Code but that is regulated by this Chapter and that is determined to be a
violation, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of
violation or stop work orders to Owners of the property involved, to the
Owner's agent, or to the Person or Persons performing the work.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.62  UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.



   Any Person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that Person is
directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Law.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT



§ 64.70  BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES EXEMPT FROM THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE.



   Pursuant to § 64.31(B), Buildings, Structures, and facilities that are
exempt from the Florida Building Code, including Substantial Improvement or
repair of Substantial Damage of such Buildings, Structures, and facilities,
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Flood load and Flood
resistant Construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the
Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed Buildings shall comply
with the requirements of § 64.77.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.71  SPECIFIC METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION AND REQUIREMENTS.



   Pursuant to Broward County Administrative Provisions for the Florida
Building Code, the following specific methods of Construction and
requirements apply:



   64.71(A)   Additional elevation (freeboard) for Single Family and
Duplex Dwellings. For Dwellings in Special Flood Hazard Areas, the minimum
elevation requirements in the Florida Building Code, Residential, shall be to
or above the Base Flood Elevation plus one foot.



   64.71(B)    Limitations on enclosed areas below elevated Buildings.
For Dwellings in Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following limitations apply
to enclosed areas below elevated buildings:



   64.71(B)(1)   Access shall be the minimum necessary to allow for
only parking of vehicles (garage door), limited storage of maintenance
equipment in connection with the Premises (standard exterior door), or entry
to the living area (stairway or elevator).



   64.71(B)(2)   The interior portion shall not be temperature
controlled, partitioned, or finished into separate room.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 64.72  SUBDIVISION MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   64.72(A)   Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including
proposals for Manufactured Home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to
determine that:



   64.72(A)(1)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize Flood damage and will be reasonably safe from Flooding;



   64.72(A)(2)   All public utilities and facilities such as Sewer,
gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate Flood damage; and



   64.72(A)(3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
Flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed Structures.



   64.72(B)   Subdivision Plats. Where any portion of proposed
subdivisions, including Manufactured Home parks and subdivisions, lies within
a Flood Hazard Area, the following shall be required:



   64.72(B)(1)   Delineation of Flood Hazard Areas, Floodway boundaries
and Flood zones, and Design Flood Elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown
on preliminary Plats;



   64.72(B)(2)   Where the subdivision has more than 50 Lots or is
larger than five acres and Base Flood Elevations are not included on the
FIRM, the Base Flood Elevations determined in accordance with § 64.37(C)(1);
and



   64.72(B)(3)   Compliance with the site improvement and utilities
requirements of § 64.73.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.73  SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS.



   64.73(A)   Minimum requirements. All proposed new Development shall
be reviewed to determine that:



   64.73(A)(1)   Such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize Flood damage and will be reasonably safe from Flooding;



   64.73(A)(2)   All public utilities and facilities such as Sewer,
gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate Flood damage; and 



   64.73(A)(3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
Flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed Structures.



   64.73(B)   Sanitary Sewage facilities. All new and replacement
Sanitary Sewage facilities, private Sewage treatment plants (including all
pumping stations and collector systems), and On-Site waste disposal systems
shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite Sewage
treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and
Discharge from the facilities into Flood waters, and impairment of the
facilities and systems.



   64.73(C)   Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water
supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well
Construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 



   64.73(D)   Limitations on sites in regulatory Floodways. No
Development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land
disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the
regulatory Floodway unless the Floodway Encroachment Analysis required in §
64.37(C)(1) demonstrates that the proposed Development or land disturbing
activity will not result in any increase in the Base Flood Elevation.



   64.73(E)   Limitations on Encroachments in Flood Hazard Areas
without Base Flood Elevations.  No Encroachment, including fill, Buildings
and Structures, shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal
to two times the width of the stream (measured at the top of bank) or 20 feet
each side from the top of the bank, whichever is greater, unless an analysis
equivalent to the analysis specified in § 64.37(D)(2) demonstrates that such
Encroachment does not increase the Base Flood Elevation more than one foot.



   64.73(F)   Limitations on placement of fill.  Subject to the
limitations of this Chapter, fill shall be designed to be stable under
conditions of Flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of
floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related
erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support
Buildings and Structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the
requirements of the Florida Building Code. 



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.74  MANUFACTURED HOMES.



   64.74(A)   General. All Manufactured Homes installed in Flood Hazard
Areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. §
320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and
the requirements of this Chapter.



   64.74(B)   Floodway. The placement of Manufactured Homes in
Floodways is prohibited, except for replacement of Manufactured Homes in
existing Manufactured Home parks or subdivisions.



   64.74(C)   Foundations. All new Manufactured Homes and replacement
Manufactured Homes installed in Flood Hazard Areas shall be installed on
permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the
foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section
R322.2 and this Chapter.



   64.74(D)   Anchoring.  All new Manufactured Homes and replacement
Manufactured Homes shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize Flood damage and shall be Securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance.



   64.74(E)   Elevation. Manufactured Homes that are placed, replaced,
or substantially improved shall comply with § 64.74(E)(1) or 64.74(E)(2), as
applicable.



   64.74(E)(1)   General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the
requirements of § 64.74(E)(2), all Manufactured Homes that are placed,
replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a
Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision; (b) in a New Manufactured Home Park Or
Subdivision; (c) in an Expansion To An Existing Manufactured Home Park Or
Subdivision; or (d) in an Existing Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision upon
which a Manufactured Home has incurred "Substantial Damage" as the result of
a Flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above
the elevation required, as applicable to the Flood Hazard Area, in the
Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) and § 64.71. 



   64.74(E)(2)   Elevation requirement for certain existing
Manufactured Home Parks Or Subdivisions. Manufactured Homes that are not
subject to § 64.73(E)(1), including Manufactured Homes that are placed,
replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an Existing
Manufactured Home Park Or Subdivision, unless on a site where Substantial
Damage as result of Flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either
the:



   64.74(E)(2)(a)   Bottom of the frame of the Manufactured Home is at
or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential
Section R322.2 (Zone A); or



   64.74(E)(2)(b)   Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
not less than 36 inches in Height above grade.



   64.74(F)   Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated Manufactured
Homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code,
Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas and § 64.71.



   64.74(G)   Utility equipment.  Utility equipment that serves
Manufactured Homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, Plumbing, and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with
the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.75  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   64.75(A)   Temporary Placement. Recreational Vehicles and Park
Trailers placed temporarily in Flood Hazard Areas shall:



   64.75(A)(1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or



   64.75(A)(2)   Be fully licensed and ready for Highway use, which
means the Recreational Vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system,
is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanent attachments such as Additions, rooms, stairs,
decks and porches.



   64.75(B)   Permanent placement. Recreational Vehicles and Park
Trailers that do not meet the limitations in § 64.75(A) for temporary
placement shall meet the requirements of § 64.74 for Manufactured Homes.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.76  TANKS.



   64.76(A)   Underground tanks.  Underground tanks in Flood Hazard
Areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the
Design Flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty.



   64.76(B)   Above-ground tanks, not elevated.  Above-ground tanks
that do not meet the elevation requirements of § 64.76(C) shall be permitted
in Flood Hazard Areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed
and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the Design
Flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the
effects of flood-borne Debris.



   64.76(C)   Above-ground tanks, elevated.  Above-ground tanks in
Flood Hazard Areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the Design
Flood Elevation on a supporting Structure that is designed to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the Design
Flood.  Tank-supporting Structures shall meet the foundation requirements of
the applicable Flood Hazard Area.



   64.76(D)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings,
outlets and vents shall be:



   64.76(D)(1)   At or above the Design Flood Elevation or fitted with
covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the Design Flood; and



   64.76(D)(2)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the Design Flood.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.77  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR OTHER DEVELOPMENT.



   64.77(A)   General requirements. All Development, including man-made
changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions
are not specified in this Chapter or the Florida Building Code, shall:



   64.77(A)(1)   Be located and constructed to minimize Flood damage;



   64.77(A)(2)   Meet the limitations of § 64.73(D) if located in a
regulated Floodway;



   64.77(A)(3)   Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
during conditions of the Design Flood;



   64.77(A)(4)   Be constructed of Flood Damage-Resistant Materials; and



   64.77(A)(5)   Have mechanical, Plumbing, and electrical systems
above the Design Flood Elevation, except that minimum electric service
required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted
below the Design Flood Elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of
the electrical part of Building code for wet locations.



   64.77(B)   Fences in regulated Floodways.  Fences in regulated
Floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such
as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of §
64.73(D).



   64.77(C)   Retaining walls, Sidewalks and driveways in regulated
Floodways.  Retaining walls and Sidewalks and driveways that involve the
placement of fill in regulated Floodways shall meet the limitations of §
64.73(D).



   64.77(D)   Roads and Watercourse crossings in regulated Floodways. 
Roads and Watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts,
low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel
from one side of a Watercourse to the other side, that encroach into
regulated Floodways shall meet the limitations of § 64.73(D).  Alteration
Of A Watercourse that is part of a road or Watercourse crossing shall meet
the requirements of § 64.37(D)(3).



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



OTHER



§ 64.80  FISCAL IMPACT STATEMENT.



   In terms of design, plan application review, Construction and
inspection of Buildings and Structures, the cost impact as an overall average
is negligible in regard to the local technical amendments because all
Development has been subject to the requirements of the local Floodplain
management ordinance adopted for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.  In terms of lower potential for Flood damage, there will
be continued savings and benefits to consumers.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



§ 64.81  APPLICABILITY.



   For the purposes of jurisdictional applicability, this Chapter shall
apply in the City of Weston.  This Chapter shall apply to all applications
for Development, including Building Permit applications and subdivision
proposals, submitted on or after June 29, 1998.



(Ord. 2014-11, passed 5-5-2014)



TITLE VII:  MOTOR VEHICLES AND VESSELS



   Chapter



      70.   SERVICING AND STORAGE



      71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL AND ENFORCEMENT



      72.   PARKING PROHIBITION



      73.   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WEIGHT AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS



CHAPTER 70:  SERVICING AND STORAGE



Section



   70.01   Servicing, storage, and sales of motor vehicles and vessels



§ 70.01  SERVICING, STORAGE, AND SALES OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND VESSELS.



   70.01(A)   Free flow of Traffic.  No Person shall interfere with
the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian Traffic in normal courses on Public
Rights-Of-Way.



   70.01(B)   Mobile condition.  All parked and stored Motor Vehicles
within the City shall be maintained in a condition that they may move under
their own power at any time except for vehicles that may be under repair in
garages, body shops, or other enclosed Buildings used for the purposes as
provided for below.



   70.01(C)   Repairs.  Repair of Motor Vehicles, Trailers, or Vessels
or Parts thereof shall be made within a permanent fully enclosable Structure
except:



   70.01(C)(1)   Minor repairs including, but not limited to, changing
a battery, replacing flat tires, and/or oil changes if done on an
intermittent and on an as-needed basis provided the Motor Vehicle , Trailer ,
or Vessel is titled and/or registered to the property Owner at the address
where the repair work is being conducted; and



   70.01(C)(2)   Emergency road service.



   70.01(D)   Above ground level repairs.  No Motor Vehicle, Trailer,
or Vessel may be handled, stored, or repaired on blocks or otherwise
supported by any device designed to support such property above the ground
except within the confines of an enclosed garage, body shop, or other
Building properly used for such purposes.



   70.01(E)   Sales, leases, rentals.  No Motor Vehicle, Trailer, or
Vessel shall be offered for sale, lease, or rental on Public Property within
the City. Motor Vehicles being offered for sale on private Residential
Property are permitted provided there is only one Motor Vehicle being offered
for sale at any one time at any one residence and the property being offered
for sale is currently registered or titled in the name of the occupant of the
residence.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC CONTROL AND ENFORCEMENT



Section



   71.01   Adoption of F.S. Chapter 316



   71.02   Traffic control and enforcement



   71.03   Operation of golf carts on public and private Rights-Of-Way



   71.04 through 71.09  Reserved



   71.10   Prohibition of Right-Of-Way vendors and solicitors on
certain roads



§ 71.01  ADOPTION OF F.S. CHAPTER 316.



   The Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law , F.S. Chapter 316, is hereby
adopted, and shall be in full force and effect in order to ensure the
regulation of Traffic throughout the City.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 71.02  TRAFFIC CONTROL AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The City shall exercise jurisdiction over any private road or roads, or
over any limited access road or roads owned or controlled by a special
district, or Association located within its boundaries, provided that the
City and the special district, or Association , owning or controlling such
road or roads enter into a written agreement approved by the City Commission,
for the City’s Traffic control jurisdiction over the road or roads
encompassed by such agreement.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 71.03  OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   71.03(A)   The operation of Golf Carts on Public Rights-Of-Way , or
Private Rights-Of-Way that are subject to an agreement with the City for
Traffic control and enforcement, is prohibited, except as otherwise provided
for in this Section.



   71.03(B)   Seasonal Delivery Personnel are prohibited from using
Golf Carts within Residential Areas on Public Rights-Of-Way that have a
posted speed limit of 30 to 35 mph. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Seasonal
Delivery Personnel are permitted to use Golf Carts on Public Rights-Of-Way
within Residential Areas that have a posted speed limit of 30 mph or less for
the limited purpose of delivering express envelopes and packages having a
maximum size of 130 inches for the combined length and girth and weighing not
more than 150 pounds from midnight October 15 until midnight December 31 of
each year.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§§ 71.04 THROUGH 71.09  RESERVED.



§ 71.10  PROHIBITION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY VENDORS AND SOLICITORS ON CERTAIN
ROADS.



   No Person shall act as a Right-Of-Way Vendor or Solicitor in or upon
Royal Palm Boulevard, Glades Parkway, Weston Road, Bonaventure Boulevard,
Saddle Club Road or Indian Trace Boulevard (including the Swales and Medians
abutting such roads). Right-Of-Way Vendors or Solicitors are permitted on
other Public Rights-Of-Way , but are prohibited from placing, displaying or
storing any merchandise on the Public Rights-Of-Way except on their Person.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING PROHIBITION



Section



   72.01   Disabled parking spaces



   72.02   Parking prohibited



   72.03   Parking in designated official use only spaces



   72.04   Parking on residential property



   72.05   Use of off-street parking and loading



   72.06   Commercial vehicle and trailer parking on nonresidential
property



   72.07   Access for vehicles other than automobiles



   72.08   Reserved



   72.09   Parking, stopping and standing in fire lanes



   72.10   Parking on public property



Administration and Enforcement



   72.90   Parking enforcement



   72.91   Failure to comply with notice of violation



   72.92   Administrative appeal



 



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  DISABLED PARKING SPACES.



   72.01(A)   Disabled parking spaces.  No Person shall Stop, Stand,
or Park a vehicle within any parking space designated and marked for disabled
parking in accordance with F.S. § 316.1955 unless such vehicle displays a
parking permit issued pursuant to F.S. § 320.0848, or a license plate issued
under F.S. §§ 320.084, 320.0842, 320.0843, or 320.0845, and such vehicle is
transporting a Person eligible for the parking permit issuance pursuant to
F.S. § 320.0848; however, any Person who is chauffeuring a disabled Person
shall be allowed, without need for an identification parking permit,
momentary parking in any such parking space, for the purpose of loading or
unloading such disabled Person; and no penalty shall be imposed upon the
driver for such momentary parking.



   72.01(B)   Violation.



   72.01(B)(1)   Whoever violates this Section or F.S. § 316.1955
shall be penalized as provided in § 72.99.



   72.01(B)(2)   Any unattended vehicle parked in violation of
subsection 72.01(A) or F.S. § 316.1955 may, in addition to the fines
provided for herein, be removed and the expense of the removal be charged to
the Owner of the vehicle.



   72.01(B)(3)   Fines collected because of violations of subsection
72.01(A) or F.S. § 316.1955 shall be deposited in a separate City account to
be used in the following manner:



   72.01(B)(3)(a)   One-third shall be used to defray expenses for the
administration of the collection of fines.



   72.01(B)(3)(b)   Two-thirds shall be used to provide funds to
improve accessibility and equal opportunity to qualified physically disabled
Persons in the City and to provide funds to conduct public awareness programs
in the City concerning physically disabled Persons.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.02  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No Person shall Park any Motor Vehicle upon any public Street or
Right-Of-Way or on any Public or Private Property in other than a space
marked for parking with appropriate pavement stripes. This provision shall
not apply to residentially zoned properties (and the Rights-Of-Way adjacent
thereto), to property actually occupied by a Single-Family Residence , Public
Schools, and/or municipal facilities, nor authorized vehicles engaged in the
Construction, maintenance or inspection of Roadway facilities or Landscaping .



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-22, passed 11-21-2016)



§ 72.03  PARKING IN DESIGNATED OFFICIAL USE ONLY SPACES.



   No Person shall Park any Motor Vehicle in any space designated as an
official use only space unless so authorized by the City to do so for the
purpose of conducting official business of the City.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.04  PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   72.04(A)   Parking on front, side or rear Lawns.  No vehicles shall
be parked on front, side, or rear Lawns when visible from any adjacent Street
or neighboring property.



   72.04(B)   Parking on Swales.  Vehicles may Park on Swales within
the Public Right-Of-Way, in the direction of Traffic, provided that vehicles
shall not block access to driveways, and shall not be parked on or across
Sidewalks, or over a catch basin.



   72.04(C)   Commercial vehicles, trailers, and vehicles with exposed
Debris, equipment or materials.



   72.04(C)(1)   No Commercial Vehicles shall be parked or stored on
any property unless in a fully enclosed garage, except commercial vehicles
may be parked temporarily throughout the day during periods of approved
Construction permitted by the City or when being used for pick up, delivery,
or the furnishing of commercial services.



   72.04(C)(2)   No Trailers , boats, or habitable Motor Vehicles of
any nature shall be parked or stored on any property unless in a fully
enclosed garage, except temporarily for routine cleaning, loading, or
unloading of motor homes or recreational vehicles. No living quarters shall
be maintained while such motor home or recreational vehicle is so parked.



   72.04(C)(3)   All Debris , equipment or materials in the bed or any
other unenclosed area of a vehicle shall be covered with a suitable cover and
properly Secured, so as to prevent the Debris , equipment or materials from
being visible or blown by the wind. Debris , equipment or materials in any
vehicle shall only be allowed to remain exposed and unsecured temporarily
when actively being used or removed. If the Debris , equipment or materials
has the potential of becoming airborne, then such Debris , equipment or
materials must remain properly Secured at all times, except when being loaded
or unloaded.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.05  USE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   72.05(A)   Approved parking spaces.  Parking spaces approved in
conformance with this Section may be used only for parking of vehicles of
Owners, Tenants, employees, and customers utilizing the Building or site
served by such required parking space.



   72.05(B)   Prohibited uses and activities.  The following uses and
activities shall not be permitted in required off-street parking facilities:



   72.05(B)(1)   Parking to serve an Off-SiteBuilding ;



   72.05(B)(2)   Storage, repair, or commercial display of any
vehicles, equipment, or merchandise;



   72.05(B)(3)   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, and accessory
equipment on nonresidentially zoned or used property;



   72.05(B)(4)   Parking of any vehicle that due to its size, shape,
contents, or location creates an obstruction or public safety hazard or which
cannot be contained within a single designated parking space; and



   72.05(B)(5)   Overnight parking or storage of any Commercial
Vehicles or Trailers owned, operated, or used in the business of a commercial
occupant of a Building exhibiting commercial lettering in excess of four
inches in height, and/or commercial Logos in excess of two square feet within
100 feet of any Public Right-Of-Way.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.06  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE AND TRAILER PARKING ON NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   72.06(A)   No Commercial Vehicle shall be parked or stored on
Nonresidential Property unless such vehicle is owned or operated by the Owner
or Tenant of the property, except Commercial Vehicles may be parked
temporarily throughout the day during periods of approved Construction
permitted by the City or when being used for pick-up, delivery, or the
furnishing of commercial services. A Commercial Vehicle may also be parked
temporarily while the vehicle’s Owner and/or occupant is visiting a
commercial Development.



   72.06(B)   No Trailers , boats, or habitable Motor Vehicles of any
nature shall be parked or stored on Nonresidential Property, except to the
extent permitted by a seasonal sales use or special event permit.



   72.06(C)   All Debris , equipment or materials in the bed or any
other unenclosed area of a vehicle shall be covered with a suitable cover and
properly Secured, so as to prevent the Debris , equipment or materials from
being visible or blown by the wind. Debris , equipment or materials in any
vehicle shall only be allowed to remain exposed and unsecured temporarily
when actively being used or removed. If the Debris , equipment or materials
has the potential of becoming airborne, then such Debris , equipment or
materials must remain properly Secured at all times, except when being loaded
or unloaded.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.07  ACCESS FOR VEHICLES OTHER THAN AUTOMOBILES.



   Required parking spaces, Parking Aisles , and driveways shall not be
used as loading or parking areas for any type of vehicle other than
automobiles.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.08  RESERVED.



§ 72.09  PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING IN FIRE LANES.



   No Motor Vehicles , except for emergency vehicles, shall Park , Stop or
Stand in a fire lane, except when actually engaged in the loading or
unloading of a disabled passenger.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.10  PARKING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No Vehicle shall be Parked on Public Property except during official
hours of operation of the Public Property, without written consent from the
City Manager.



(Ord. 2017-08, passed 8-21-2017)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.90  PARKING ENFORCEMENT.



   72.90(A)   Parking citation.  Whenever any vehicle is found parked
in violation of any Section of Chapter 71 or Chapter 72, such action is
unlawful, and the Enforcement Officer or parking enforcement specialist
finding such vehicle so parked shall issue a parking citation in a form to be
approved by the City Manager and shall conspicuously affix the citation to
the vehicle in violation. The citation shall notify the Person responsible
for the vehicle to pay a fine in an amount set forth in § 72.99 within ten
business days at the place specified on the citation, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays.



   72.90(B)   Late fee.  If the fine indicated on the citation is not
paid within ten business days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays, a late fee of $12.00 shall be assessed for that violation to cover
additional administrative costs.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.91  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   If an alleged violator does not respond to a notice or citation issued
and affixed to the subject Motor Vehicle within a period of ten working days
from the date of issuance, then the Clerk of the Courts of Broward County
shall notify the alleged violator that if the applicable amount of the
citation and the late fee are not paid within a period of ten working days
from the date of notice, proceedings may be instituted in which a fine may be
imposed in excess of that shown on the notice of citation.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.92  ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.



   72.92(A)   File appeal.  Any Person wishing to contest a parking
violation citation may appeal such citation by making a written request for
an administrative hearing to the Clerk of the Courts of Broward County within
ten working days of the date the citation was issued.



   72.92(B)   Hearing date.  The Clerk of the Courts of Broward County
shall set the hearing within 60 calendar days of the date the citation was
issued, giving the Person issued the citation at least seven working days’
advance notice of the date of the hearing, such days excluding Saturday,
Sunday and legal holidays. The notice shall be sent by regular mail to the
address of the registered Owner of the vehicle or, in the event that the
driver of the vehicle is not the Owner, the driver’s address if the driver
requests a hearing.



   72.92(C)   Powers.



   72.92(C)(1)   The Person issued the citation may:



   72.92(C)(1)(a)   Be represented by counsel;



   72.92(C)(1)(b)   Call and examine witnesses;



   72.92(C)(1)(c)   Introduce exhibits;



   72.92(C)(1)(d)   Examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter;
and



   72.92(C)(1)(e)   Impeach any witness.



   72.92(C)(2)   Process for hearings.  All hearings shall be
conducted, insofar as practical, in accordance with the Florida Rules of
Civil Procedure and the Florida Evidence Code. However, the general nature of
the hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. All irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other
evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable and prudent Persons in
the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such
evidence may be received in written form, and all testimony of parties and
witnesses shall be made under Oath. Hearsay evidence may be used for the
purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but it shall not be
sufficient to itself support a finding, unless it would be admissible over
objections in civil actions. Any interested party or Person may make
application and upon good cause shown may be allowed by the hearing Officer,
in the reasonable exercise of such Officer’s discretion, to intervene in a
pending proceeding.



   72.92(D)   Non-resident contest citation.  Any Person who receives
a parking citation may contest the citation in writing. Such Person must
submit a written request to contest the citation by mail, accompanied by all
evidence upon which the Person relies, within ten working days of the date
the citation was issued. The written request to contest the citation by mail
and evidence must be sent to the Clerk of the Courts of Broward County. The
Clerk of the Courts of Broward County shall present the case to a hearing
Officer within 60 calendar days of the date the citation was issued. The
evidence presented must include a notarized statement by the Person cited,
which statement must identify the citation at issue by its number and date of
issuance, must set forth the name and correct address of the Person cited and
may contain argument in defense against the citation. The hearing officer
will not consider any statement that is not notarized. The evidence submitted
may include notarized statements of the witnesses. Such statements must
include the name and address of each witness as well as the basis of the
witness’ knowledge about the facts asserted in the statement. The evidence
submitted may also include such documents that are relevant and material to
the disposition of the citation. All evidence submitted is subject to the
evidentiary rules set forth above.



   72.92(E)   Orders.  Pursuant to Florida law, any Person who elects
to appear before a hearing Officer, or to contest a citation by mail, shall
be deemed to have waived the right to pay the civil penalty amount set forth
on the citation. The hearing or consideration of mailed-in admissible
evidence will be decided within 30 calendar days after the request for
hearing was made or the evidence to be considered was received. After a
hearing or consideration of mailed-in admissible evidence, the hearing
Officer shall make a determination based on the greater weight of the
evidence as to whether a parking violation has been committed and shall issue
an order imposing a civil penalty of $257.00 for any violation of a disabled
parking Law or ordinance or a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00 for a
violation of any other parking ordinance or violation of Law, in addition to
applicable late fees. The hearing officer may grant additional time to pay
the civil penalty amount and late fees; otherwise such fines are due and
payable within ten working days from the date the order of the hearing
officer was issued. All orders shall be in writing and shall be signed and
dated by the hearing officer. If, at the conclusion of the hearing, or
consideration of mailed-in admissible evidence, the hearing officer orders a
dismissal of the citation because no violation was found, the hearing officer
shall so state and issue an order of dismissal in writing signed and dated by
the hearing officer, which shall contain findings of the facts supporting the
order. A copy of such order will be forwarded to the alleged violator. An
order of the hearing officer may be appealed by the filing of a petition of a
writ of certiorari in the Circuit Court of the Seventeenth Judicial Circuit
in and for Broward County by any party receiving an adverse ruling within 30
calendar days from the date the order was issued.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



 


Violation Category

 

Fine



Disabled
 

$257.00 (1) (2)



Fire Lane
 

$105.00 (1)



Fire Hydrant
 

$105.00 (1)



All Other
 

$105.00 (1)



(1)   Includes $5.00 surcharge for the purpose of funding school crossing
guard programs as permitted by F.S. § 318.21(11)(a).


(2)   Includes $2.00 assessment for the purpose of funding teen court
programs as permitted by F.S. § 938.19, and implemented by § 10-5 of the
Broward County Code of Ordinances.



 



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 73:  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WEIGHT AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS



Section



   73.01   Purpose



   73.02   Adoption



   73.03   Jurisdiction



   73.04   Violation



   73.05   Maximum weights



   73.06   Weight and load unlawful; special fuel and motor fuel tax
enforcement; inspection; penalty; review



   73.07   Special permits



   73.08   Weight, load, limits lowered



   73.09   Damage to streets, roadways, highways; liability of driver
and owner



§ 73.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare upon the Streets, Roadways and Highways of the City by
regulating the wheel and Axle Loads and gross vehicle weights of certain
vehicles; to provide for the assessment of fees; and to provide penalties for
the violation of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.02  ADOPTION.



   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the City expressly adopts
the weight and load restrictions and enforcement procedures for Commercial
Vehicles as promulgated in F.S. Chapter 316, Rules and Regulations contained
in 49 C.F.R. 390-397 and North American Driver Out-of-Service Criteria.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.03  JURISDICTION.



   The jurisdiction for determining restrictions as to oversize/overweight
vehicles is given to the City by the State through the provisions of F.S.
Chapter 316, specifically §§ 316.006 and 316.555.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.04  VIOLATION.



   It is a violation of this Chapter for any Person to drive or move, or
for the Owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any
Street , Roadway or Highway in the City, any vehicle or vehicles of a size or
weight exceeding the limitations stated in this Chapter or otherwise in
violation of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.05  MAXIMUM WEIGHTS.



   73.05(A)   Weight limitation.  The gross weight imposed on the
Street, Roadway or Highway by the wheels of any one axle of a vehicle shall
not exceed 20,000 pounds.



   73.05(B)   Maximum load.  Subject to the limit upon the weight
imposed upon the Streets, Roadways and Highways through any one axle as set
forth herein, the total weight with load imposed upon the Street, Roadway or
Highway by all the axles of a vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not
exceed the gross weight given for the respective distance between the first
and last axle of the vehicle or combination of vehicles, measured
longitudinally to the nearest foot as set forth in the following table:



 

Distance in Feet Between First and Last Axles
 
Maximum Load in Pounds on all Axles of Vehicles or Combination of Vehicles




4
 
40,000


5
 
40,000


6
 
40,000


7
 
40,000


8
 
40,000


9
 
44,140


10
 
44,980


11
 
45,810


12
 
46,640


13
 
47,480


15
 
49,150


16
 
49,980


17
 
50,810


18
 
51,640


19
 
52,480


20
 
53,310


21
 
54,140


22
 
54,980


23
 
55,810


24
 
56,640


25
 
57,470


26
 
58,310


27
 
59,140


28
 
59,970


29
 
60,810


30
 
61,640


31
 
62,470


32
 
63,310


33
 
64,140


34
 
64,970


35
 
65,800


36
 
66,610




 



   73.05(C)   Gross weight formula.  With respect to those Highways
not in the Interstate Highway System, in all cases in which it exceeds
StateLaw in effect on January 4, 1975, the overall gross weight on the
vehicle or combination of vehicles, including all enforcement tolerances,
shall be as determined by the following formula:



W = 500(LN + 12N + 36)



          N - 1



            Where W = overall gross weight of the vehicle to the
nearest 500 pounds; L = distance in feet between the extreme of the external
axles; and N = number of axles on the vehicle. However, such overall gross
weight of any vehicle of combination of vehicles may not exceed 80,000 pounds
including all enforcement tolerances.



   73.05(D)   Exemption from axle spacing requirements.  Dump trucks,
concrete mixing trucks, trucks engaged in waste collection and disposal, and
fuel oil and gasoline trucks designed and constructed for special type work
or use, when operated as a single unit, shall be subject to all safety and
operational requirements of Law, except that any such vehicle need not
conform to the axle spacing requirements of this Section provided that such
vehicle shall be limited to a total gross load, including the weight of the
vehicle, of 20,000 pounds per axle plus Scale Tolerances and shall not exceed
550 pounds per inch width tire surface plus Scale Tolerances. No vehicle
operating pursuant to this Section shall exceed a gross weight, including the
weight of the vehicle and Scale Tolerances, of 70,000 pounds. Any vehicle
violating the weight provisions of this Section shall be penalized as
provided in § 73.06.



   73.05(E)   Rules, enforcement and notice.  The City shall adopt
rules consistent with the Department of Transportation to implement this
Section, shall enforce this Section and the rules adopted hereunder, and
shall publish and distribute tables and other publications as deemed
necessary to inform the public.



   73.05(F)   Vehicles in excess of gross weight limitation.  Except
as hereinafter provided, no vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the
gross weights specified in subsections 73.05(B), 73.05(C) and 73.05(D) shall
be permitted to travel on the public Streets, Roadways or Highways within the
City.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.06  WEIGHT AND LOAD UNLAWFUL; SPECIAL FUEL AND MOTOR FUEL TAX
ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION; PENALTY; REVIEW.



   73.06(A)   Weighing of vehicle.  Any designated Officer of the City
or of the Department of Transportation having reason to believe that the
weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful is authorized to require the driver
to Stop and submit to a weighing of the same by means of either portable or
fixed scales and may require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest weigh
station or public scales, provided such a facility is within five miles. Upon
a request by the vehicle operator, the Officer shall weigh the vehicle at
fixed scales rather than by portable scales if such a facility is available
within five miles. Anyone who refuses to submit to such weighing obstructs an
Officer pursuant to F.S. § 843.02, and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083. Anyone
who knowingly and willfully resists, obstructs or opposes an Officer while
refusing to submit to such weighing by resisting the Officer with violence to
the Officer’s person pursuant to F.S. § 843.01, is guilty of a felony of
the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083 or
775.084.



   73.06(B)   Violations.



   73.06(B)(1)   Whenever an Officer, upon weighing a vehicle or
combination of vehicles with load, determines that the axle weight or gross
weight is unlawful, the Officer may require the driver to Stop the vehicle in
a suitable place and remain standing until a determination can be made as to
the amount of weight thereon and, if overloaded, the amount of penalty to be
assessed as provided herein. However, any gross weight over and beyond 6,000
pounds beyond the maximum herein set shall be unloaded and all material so
unloaded shall be cared for by the Owner or Operator of the vehicle at the
risk of such Owner or operator. Except as otherwise provided for in F.S.
Chapter 316, to facilitate compliance with and enforcement of the weight
limits established in § 73.05, weight tables published pursuant to F.S. §
316.535(7) shall include a 10% Scale Tolerance and shall reflect the maximum
scaled weights allowed any vehicle or combination of vehicles.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the weight Law , if a vehicle or
combination of vehicles does not exceed the gross, external bridge, or
internal bridge weight limits imposed in § 73.05 and the driver of such
vehicle or combination of vehicles can comply with the requirements of F.S.
Chapter 316 by shifting or equalizing the load on all wheels or axles, and
does so when requested by the proper authority, the driver shall not be held
to be operating in violation of the weight limits.



   73.06(B)(2)   The Officer shall inspect the license plate or
registration certificate of the Commercial Vehicle, as defined in F.S. §
316.003(66), to determine if its gross weight is in compliance with the
declared gross vehicle weight. If its gross weight exceeds the declared
weight, the penalty shall be $0.05 per pound on the difference between such
weights. In those cases when the Commercial Vehicle, as defined in F.S. §
316.003(66), is being operated over the Streets, Roadways or Highways of the
City with an expired registration or with no registration from this or any
other jurisdiction or is not registered under the applicable provisions of
F.S. Chapter 320, the penalty herein shall apply on the basis of $0.05 per
pound on that scaled weight which exceeds 35,000 pounds on laden truck
tractor-semi-trailer combinations or tandem trailer truck combinations,
10,000 pounds on laden straight trucks or straight truck-trailer
combinations, or 10,000 pounds on any unladen Commercial Motor Vehicle . If
the license plate or registration has not been expired for more than 90 days,
the penalty imposed under this Section may not exceed $1,000.00. In the case
of special mobile equipment as defined in F.S. § 316.003(48), which
qualifies for the license tax provided for in F.S. § 320.08(5) (b), being
operated on the Streets, Roadways or Highways of the City with an expired
registration or otherwise not properly registered under the applicable
provisions of F.S. Chapter 320, a penalty of $75.00 shall apply in addition
to any other penalty which may apply in accordance with F.S. Chapter 316. A
vehicle found in violation of this Section may be detained until the Owner or
operator produces evidence that the vehicle has been properly registered. Any
costs incurred by the retention of the vehicle shall be the sole
responsibility of the Owner . A Person who has been assessed a penalty
pursuant to this Section for failure to have a valid vehicle registration
certificate pursuant to the provisions of F.S. Chapter 320, is not subject to
the delinquent fee authorized in F.S. § 320.07, if such Person obtains a
valid registration certificate within ten working days after such penalty was
assessed.



   73.06(B)(3)   Weight limits established and posted for a road or
bridge pursuant to F.S. § 316.555 and weight limits specified in special
permits issued pursuant to F.S. § 316.550 shall be deemed to include all
allowable tolerances. In those cases when a vehicle or combination of
vehicles exceeds the weight limits established and posted for a road or
bridge pursuant to F.S. § 316.555, or exceeds the weight limits permitted in
a special permit issued pursuant to F.S. § 316.550, the penalty shall be
$0.05 per pound on the difference between the scale weight of the vehicle and
the weight limits for such posted road or bridge or permitted in such special
permit. However, if a special permit is declared invalid in accordance with
rules promulgated pursuant to F.S. § 316.550, the penalties imposed in
subsection 73.06(C) below shall apply to those weights that exceed the limits
established in § 73.05.



   73.06(C)   Penalties.  Any Person who violates the overloading
provisions of this Chapter shall be conclusively presumed to have damaged the
Streets, Roadways or Highways of this City by reason of such overloading,
which damage is hereby fixed as follows:



   73.06(C)(1)   When the excess weight is 200 pounds or less than the
maximum herein provided, the penalty shall be $10.00;



   73.06(C)(2)   Five cents per pound for each pound of weight in
excess of the maximum herein provided when the excess weight exceeds 200
pounds. However, whenever the gross weight of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles does not exceed the maximum allowable gross weight, the maximum fine
for the first 600 pounds of unlawful axle weight shall be $10.00;



   73.06(C)(3)   An apportioned Motor Vehicle , as defined in F.S. §
320.01, operating on the Streets, Roadways or Highways of this City without
being properly licensed and registered shall be subject to the penalties as
herein provided;



   73.06(C)(4)   Vehicles operating on the Streets, Roadways or
Highways of this City from nonmember International Registration Plan
jurisdictions that are not in compliance with the provisions of F.S. §
316.605, shall be subject to the penalties as herein provided;



   73.06(C)(5)   The defendant in an action hereunder may seek to rebut
the presumption of damage set forth in subsection 73.06(C).



   73.06(D)   Registration requirement.



   73.06(D)(1)   No Commercial Vehicle, as defined in F.S. §
316.003(66) shall be operated over the Streets, Roadways or Highways of this
City unless it has been properly registered under the provisions of F.S. §
207.004. Whenever any LawEnforcement Officer identified in F.S. §
207.023(1), upon inspecting the vehicle or combination of vehicles,
determines that the vehicle is in violation of F.S. § 207.004, a penalty in
the amount of $50.00 shall be assessed, and the vehicle may be detained until
payment is collected by the Officer.



   73.06(D)(2)   In addition to the penalty provided for in subsection
73.06(D)(1), the vehicle may be detained until the Owner or operator of the
vehicle furnishes evidence that the vehicle has been properly registered
pursuant to F.S. § 207.004. Any Officer or agent of the Department of
Transportation may issue a temporary fuel use permit and collect the
appropriate fee as provided for in F.S. § 207.004(4). Notwithstanding the
provisions of this Section, all permit fees collected pursuant to this
subsection 73.06(D)(2) shall be transferred to the Department of Highway
Safety and Motor Vehicles to be allocated pursuant to F.S. § 207.026.



   73.06(D)(3)   Any Person aggrieved by the imposition of penalties
pursuant to subsection 73.06(D) may apply to the City’s Special Magistrate
as provided for in subsection 73.06(H), for modification, cancellation, or
revocation of the penalty, and the Special Magistrate is authorized to
modify, cancel, revoke or sustain such penalty.



   73.06(E)   Lien.  In addition to the right to prosecute violations
in Broward County Court, whenever any Person violates the provisions of this
Chapter and becomes indebted to the City because of such violation in the
amounts aforesaid and refuses to pay said penalty, such penalty shall become
a lien upon the Motor Vehicle, and the same may be foreclosed by the City in
a court of equity. It shall be presumed that the Owner of the Motor Vehicle
is liable for the sum. Any Person claiming an interest in the seized Motor
Vehicle may, at any time after the lien of the City attaches to the Motor
Vehicle, obtain possession of the seized vehicle by filing a good and
sufficient forthcoming cash bond with the Officer having possession of the
vehicle, payable to the City in twice the amount of the City’s lien. It
shall be presumed that the Owner of the Motor Vehicle is liable for the
penalty imposed under this Section. Upon the posting of such bond with the
Officer making the seizure, the vehicle shall be released and the bond shall
be forwarded to the City for safekeeping. The lien of the City against the
Motor Vehicle aforesaid shall be foreclosed in equity, and the ordinary rules
of court relative to the proceedings in equity shall control. If it appears
that the seized vehicle has been released to the defendant upon defendant’s
forthcoming bond, the City shall take judgment of foreclosure against the
property itself, and judgment against the defendant for the amount of the
lien, including cost of proceedings. After the rendition of the decree, the
City may, at its option, proceed to sue the defendant for the amount
recovered as aforesaid or direct the sale of the vehicle under foreclosure.



   73.06(F)   Receipt requirement.  Any Officer or agent collecting
the penalties herein imposed shall give to the Owner or driver of the vehicle
a receipt for all penalties collected. Such Officers or agents shall
cooperate with the Owners or drivers of Motor Vehicles so as not to delay
unduly the vehicles.



   73.06(G)   Payment.  Pursuant to F.S. §§ 316.302 and 316.545,
penalties and fees are due and payable at the time of issuance. Payment shall
be made for the amount of the assessment in cash, money order, or cashier’s
check and shall be made payable to the City.



   73.06(H)   Special Magistrate.  Any Person aggrieved by the
imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to this Chapter or F.S. §§ 316.3025
and 316.550 may apply to the City’s Special Magistrate for a modification,
cancellation or revocation of the penalty; and the Special Magistrate is
authorized to modify, cancel, revoke or sustain such penalty.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.07  SPECIAL PERMITS.



   An oversize or overweight vehicle or load thereon may not enter onto or
be operated on a public road in the City unless the Owner or Operator of such
vehicle has first obtained the special permit pursuant to F.S. § 316.550.
Any Owner or Operator holding such special permit shall be exempt from the
limitations established in § 73.05, but must abide by the limitations as
described in the special permit.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.08  WEIGHT, LOAD, LIMITS LOWERED.



   The City may prescribe, by notice hereinafter provided for, loads and
weights lower than the limits prescribed in this Chapter and other Laws,
whenever in its judgment any road or part thereof or any bridge or culvert
shall, by reason of its design, deterioration, rain, or other climatic or
natural causes be liable to be damaged or destroyed by Motor Vehicles ,
Trailers , or semi-trailers, if the gross weight shall exceed the limits
prescribed in said notice. The City may, by like notice, regulate or
prohibit, in whole or in part, the operation of any specified class or size
of Motor Vehicles , Trailers , or semi- trailers on any Streets, Roadways or
Highways or specified Parts thereof under its jurisdiction, whenever in its
judgment, such regulation or prohibition is necessary to provide for the
public safety and convenience on the Streets, Roadways or Highways, or Parts
thereof, by reason of Traffic density, intensive use thereof by the traveling
public, or other reasons of public safety and convenience. The notice or
substance thereof shall be posted at conspicuous places at terminals of all
intermediate crossroads and road junctions with the section of Street ,
Roadway or Highway to which the notice shall apply. After any such notice has
been posted, the operation of any Motor Vehicle or combination contrary to
its provisions shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 73.09  DAMAGE TO STREETS, ROADWAYS, HIGHWAYS; LIABILITY OF DRIVER AND
OWNER.



   Any Person driving or moving any vehicle or combination of vehicles,
object, or contrivance upon any Street , Roadway or Highway or
HighwayStructure shall be liable for all damages that the Highway or
Structure may sustain as a result of any illegal operating, driving, or
moving of such vehicle or combination of vehicles, object, or contrivance,
whether or not such damage is a result of operating, driving, or moving any
vehicle or combination of vehicles, object, or contrivance weighing in excess
of the maximum weights or exceeding the maximum size as provided in this
Chapter but authorized by special permit issued pursuant to F.S. § 316.550.
Whenever the driver is not the Owner of the vehicle or combination of
vehicles, object, or contrivance but is so operating, driving, or moving the
same with the express or implied permission of the Owner , then the Owner and
driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any such damage. Such damage
may be recovered in any civil action brought by the authorities in control of
the Street , Roadway or Highway or HighwayStructure .



(Ord. 2010-14, passed 10-4-2010)



TITLE VIII:  BUSINESS-REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS



   Chapter



      80.   HOME OCCUPATIONS



      81.   VACATION RENTALS



      82.   EXTENDED OPERATING HOURS



      83.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      84.   OUTDOOR SEATING OR BAR AREAS



      85.   CONVENIENCE BUSINESSES



      86.   ADULT BUSINESSES



      87.   PAY TELEPHONES



      88.   PRIVATE DETECTIVES AND CRIMINAL INVESTIGATORS



      89.   MOBILE VENDING



      90.   NEWSPAPER RACKS



      91.   LETTERING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



      92.   COMMERCIAL MAIL RECEIVING AGENCIES



      93.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FRANCHISE



      94.   PROHIBITION OF SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES



CHAPTER 80:  HOME OCCUPATIONS



Section



   80.01   Home occupations



§ 80.01  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   80.01(A)   Location.  Home Occupations, subject to the provisions
contained herein, shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts.
Home Occupations must be secondary to the Use of the Dwelling for residential
purposes and shall not change the character of the Dwelling Unit thereof. In
any instance where a Dwelling Unit is used to conduct a Home Occupation
consistent herein, a Business Tax Receipt shall be required. This applies
even where a regular Business Tax Receipt has been issued for the same
Business and to the same Applicant at another location within or outside the
boundaries of the City.



   80.01(B)   General requirements.  When permitted, Home Occupations
shall be conducted in accordance with the following provisions and with any
other restrictions that are contained within the individual residential
zoning district regulations:



   80.01(B)(1)   No Person other than individuals residing in the
Dwelling Unit shall be engaged in the Home Occupation .



   80.01(B)(2)   There shall be no display of goods, machinery, or
equipment nor any performance of work visible or audible from any Street or
adjoining property, nor shall there be any Sign identifying or providing any
information of any nature regarding the Home Occupation . There shall be no
retail sales, repair, manufacturing, or the storage of merchandise on the
Premises. This includes hazardous materials.



   80.01(B)(3)   No equipment or process shall be used in any Home
Occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses off the Premises.



   80.01(B)(4)   No Home Occupation shall generate or attract unsafe,
excessive, or hazardous vehicular or pedestrian Traffic to the Dwelling Unit .



   80.01(B)(5)   No Home Occupation shall be conducted in any accessory
Building .



   80.01(B)(6)   No Home Occupation shall occupy more than 25% of the
total floor area of a Dwelling Unit exclusive of any open porch, attached
garage, or similar space not intended to be occupied as living quarters.



   80.01(B)(7)   The Applicant may use his or her home address only for
receiving mail and not for any advertising purposes.



   80.01(B)(8)   No employees or independent contractors of any type
shall be permitted at the Dwelling Unit at any time in connection with the
Home Occupation .



   80.01(B)(9)   Consultation with one individual at a time or the
giving of individual instruction to one Person at a time shall be deemed a
Home Occupation . Group consultation or the giving of group instruction of
any type shall be considered to be a business enterprise not eligible for
consideration as a Home Occupation .



   80.01(C)   Family day care homes.  “Family day care homes,” as
defined in F.S. § 402.302(7), may be permitted in the City provided the
Owner or operator provide evidence of compliance with all provisions set
forth in the governing statute, and compliance with any ordinance or
resolution adopted by Broward County pursuant to the provisions set forth in
the above-referenced statute.



   80.01(D)   Business Tax Receipt application.  A Person desiring to
conduct a Home Occupation shall submit a completed application, including a
signed affidavit, on forms provided by the City, and the applicable Business
Tax as provided in § 40.01, to the City.



   80.01(E)   Right of inspection.  The Applicant acknowledges that
upon issuance of a Business Tax Receipt the City shall have the right to
inspect, at reasonable times, the Premises upon which the Home Occupation is
conducted to insure compliance with the foregoing standards and conditions,
and to investigate complaints, if any.



   80.01(F)   Exclusions.  An individual who, in the normal course of
business, brings work materials into the residence for review, preparation,
dictation, or other routine process including, but not limited to, jobs which
are all “take home” work from another business location or employment
shall not, by itself, be deemed to be engaged in a Home Occupation.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 81:  VACATION RENTALS



Section



   81.01   Registration required



   81.02   Application for registration



   81.03   Vacation rental agent required



   81.04   Fees for registration



   81.05   Owner and vacation rental agent requirements



   81.06   Standards and requirements for vacation rentals



   81.07   Sale or transfer of dwelling unit used for vacation rentals



   81.08   Administration, penalties, and enforcement



   81.09   Vesting



§ 81.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any Person to allow another Person to occupy any
Residential Property as a Vacation Rental within the City, or offer such
rental services within the City, unless the Person has registered the
Vacation Rental property with the City and the Vacation Rental property has
been issued a Certificate of Use in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 81.02  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.



   The application for registration of a Vacation Rental shall be made to
the City Manager on a form provided by the City, which shall set forth at a
minimum:



   81.02(A)   The legal description of the property offered for rental,
including the complete address, subdivision, or community name.



   81.02(B)   Proof of ownership of the property, including the name,
address and phone number of each Person or entity with an ownership interest
in the property.



   81.02(C)   The gross square footage of the property and Dwelling
Unit, including the number of rooms, bedrooms, kitchens and on-site parking
spaces attributable to the Vacation Rental use.



   81.02(D)   A valid and current federal employer tax identification
number for the Owner(s) of the property, when owned by a corporate entity.



   81.02(E)   Proof of licensure with, or exemption from, the Florida
Department of Business and Professional Regulation for a transient public
lodging establishment.



   81.02(F)   The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the Person
who will act as the Vacation Rental Agent, operating the Vacation Rental
property. The Vacation Rental Agent phone number shall be answered at all
times, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.



   81.02(G)    The name and contact information for any listing
services on or through which the Vacation Rental is to be offered for rent.



   81.02(H)   The application shall bear the signatures of all Owners,
authorized agents, authorized property managers and the Vacation Rental Agent.



   81.02(I)   The Owner of the property and the Vacation Rental Agent
must individually acknowledge the affirmative duty to ensure compliance with
the requirements of this Chapter, including the Owner and Vacation Rental
Agent Requirements of this Chapter.



   81.02(J)   Acknowledgement that the application and any related
approvals are specific to the property identified in the application and
approval; other property is not jointly shared commodities and shall not be
considered available for use by Transient Occupants of the property which is
the subject of the application.



   81.02(K)   Submission of an incomplete registration application form
shall result in rejection of the application.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 81.03  VACATION RENTAL AGENT REQUIRED.



   Whenever any property is required to be registered under this Chapter,
the Owner shall act as, or retain at all times, an appointed natural Person
capable of meeting the duties provided in section 81.05.  The designated
Vacation Rental Agent must reside within 30 miles of the Vacation Rental
property to serve as the Vacation Rental Agent for service of notices as are
specified herein.  Notices given to the Vacation Rental Agent shall be
sufficient to satisfy any requirement for notice to the Owner.  An initial
Vacation Rental Agent shall be designated and shall participate in the
application for registration, and the City Manager shall thereafter be
notified of any change of Vacation Rental Agent within 15 days of such change.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018)



§ 81.04  FEES FOR REGISTRATION.



   The City may charge reasonable fees for registration to compensate for
administrative expenses.  The fees for registration shall be provided for,
from time to time, by resolution adopted by the City Commission.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018)



§ 81.05  OWNER AND VACATION RENTAL AGENT REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to general compliance with all Federal, State, County and
Local laws, it is the affirmative duty and responsibility of the Owner and
the Vacation Rental Agent, individually and collectively, to adhere to the
following:



   81.05(A)   Inform all guests, in writing, prior to occupancy of the
property, of all applicable City ordinances concerning noise, Vehicle
parking, garbage, and common area usage.



   81.05(B)   Maintain the property under their control in compliance
with the occupancy limits, as specified in this Chapter, the Certificate of
Use, the Minimum Housing Standards of Broward County, Fire Codes, specific
requirements of the Florida Building Code noted herein and the City Code, as
determined by the City Manager, building official or respective designee;



   81.05(C)   Ensure that, at all times:



   81.05(C)(1)   all vehicles associated with the Vacation Rental are
parked in compliance with the City Code; and



   81.05(C)(2)   the entire property, including the front, back, and
side yards, is maintained free of garbage and litter, provided however, that
this subsection shall not prohibit the storage of garbage and litter in
authorized receptacles for collection; and



   81.05(C)(3)   all Transient Occupants are aware that it shall be
unlawful to allow or make any noise or sound that exceeds the limits set
forth in the Chapter 52, Noise, Sections 52.50 - 52.52 of the City Code; and



   81.05(C)(4)   all Transient Occupants are aware that unauthorized
occupants of any Structure or conveyance of the property that have been
warned by the Vacation Rental Agent, Owner or lessee to leave and refuse to
do so commit the offense of trespass of a Structure or conveyance and will be
charged under the State of Florida and local law; and



   81.05(C)(5)   the provisions of this Chapter are complied with and
promptly address any violations of this Chapter or any violations of law
which may come to the attention of the Vacation Rental Agent; and



   81.05(C)(6)   he or she is available with authority to address and
coordinate solutions to problems with the rental of the property at all times
24 hours a day, seven days a week and be physically present at the property
to respond to emergency calls within one hour of notification; and



   81.05(C)(7)   he or she keeps available a register of all Transient
Occupants, which shall be open to inspection on the Vacation Rental property
by authorized personnel of the City at all times; and



   81.05(C)(8)   no rental is made, or occupancy allowed by, any Person
on the Florida Sexual Offenders and Predators (FDLE) database or any other
state sex offender database consistent with the requirements of section 52.45
"Sexual Violator Residency Prohibition" of the City Code.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 81.06  STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR VACATION RENTALS.



   81.06(A)   Certificate of Use.  The City Manager or designee may
issue a Certificate of Use to an applicant upon proof that the Owner or
Vacation Rental Agent has:



   81.06(A)(1)   Submitted a complete Vacation Rental registration
application form including appropriate documentation of compliance with
applicable Florida Department of Revenue and Florida Department of Business
and Professional Regulation requirements; and



   81.06(A)(2)   Submitted any applicable registration fee; and



   81.06(A)(3)   Provided an affidavit, demonstrating initial and
on-going compliance with Vacation Rental Standards contained herein, plus any
other applicable local, state and federal laws, regulations and standards to
include, but not be limited to Chapter 509, Florida Statutes, and Rules,
Chapter 61C and 69A, Florida Administrative Code; and



   81.06(A)(4)   Provided a copy of the rental/lease agreement form to
be used when contracting with Transient Occupants and guests which includes
the minimum Vacation Rental lessee information required by Section
81.06(B)(5) below; and



   81.06(A)(5)   Requested and passed a Certificate of Use Inspection,
that shall include inspection for compliance with this Chapter; and



   81.06(A)(6)   Provided evidence of liability insurance covering the
use of the property as a rental property.



   81.06(A)(7)   Obtained an approved inspection report from the City
Fire Rescue Department verifying compliance with all applicable rules and
regulations for a residential dwelling transient lodging use.



   81.06(A)(8)   Subsequent to the issuance of a Certificate of Use, a
Business Tax Receipt from the City pursuant to Chapter 40 of the City Code
shall be obtained.



   81.06(B)   Vacation Rental Standards.  The following standards
shall govern the use of any Vacation Rental as a permitted use:



   81.06(B)(1)   Minimum life/safety requirements:



   81.06(B)(1)(a)   Swimming pool, spa and hot tub safety.  A swimming
pool, spa or hot tub shall comply with the current standards of Residential
Swimming Pool Safety Act, F.S. Chapter 515.



   81.06(B)(1)(b)   Smoke and carbon monoxide (CO) detection and
notification system.  If an interconnected and hard-wired smoke and carbon
monoxide (CO) detection and notification system is not in place within the
Vacation Rental unit, then an interconnected, hard-wired smoke alarm and
carbon monoxide (CO) alarm system shall be required to be installed and
maintained on a continuing basis consistent with the requirements of Section
R314, Smoke Alarms, and Section R315, Carbon Monoxide Alarms, of the Florida
Building Code – Residential.



   81.06(B)(1)(c)   Fire extinguisher.  A portable, multi-purpose dry
chemical fire extinguisher approved by the City Fire Rescue Department shall
be installed, inspected and maintained in accordance with NFPA 10 on each
floor/level of the unit.  The extinguisher(s) shall be installed on the wall
in an open common area or in an enclosed space with appropriate markings
visibly showing the locations.



   81.06(B)(1)(d)   Evacuation map.  There shall be posted, next to
the interior door of each bedroom or sleeping room a legible copy of the
building evacuation map that is a minimum of 8 and ½ inches by 11 inches in
size. 



   81.06(B)(2)   Maximum Occupancy.  The Maximum Occupancy of the
Vacation Rental shall not exceed any of the following standards:   



   81.06(B)(2)(a)    two Persons per bedroom; and



   81.06(B)(2)(b)    three Transient Occupants per one off-street
parking space legally available to the property, the exact number of which is
determined by the requirement of Section 124.54 of the City Land Development
Regulations of the City Code; and



   81.06(B)(2)(c)    no more than one Family as defined in Section 1.01
of the Code may occupy any Vacation RentalDwelling Unit.



   81.06(B)(3)   Guest hours.  Any Person present on the property
after 10:00 p.m. on a Sunday - Thursday night or after 11:00 p.m. Friday or
Saturday night shall be considered an overnight Vacation Rental occupant for
purposes of calculating Maximum Occupancy.



   81.06(B)(4)   Solid waste handling and containment.  City solid
waste containers shall be provided for the Maximum Occupancy permitted by
this Chapter, as required by the City Code.  Required screening and storage
requirements for solid waste containers shall apply and shall be incorporated
into the Certificate of Use. For purposes of this section, a solid waste
container shall not be placed for curbside pickup more than 24 hours before
pickup and all receptacles must be removed from the curbside within 24 hours
after pickup. 



   81.06(B)(5)   Minimum Vacation Rental lessee information.  The
following information shall be posted conspicuously within the establishment
and shall be provided to each Vacation Rental lessee as part of their lease:



   81.06(B)(5)(a)   The Maximum Occupancy permitted under the
Certificate of Use ;



   81.06(B)(5)(b)   A statement advising the Occupants that it is
unlawful to allow or make any Loud And Raucous Noise as regulated in Section
52.50 or any Prohibited Noise as regulated in Section 52.52 of the City Code
and such violation is subject to City code enforcement, including but not
limited to fines up to $500 per violation;



   81.06(B)(5)(c)   A sketch of the location of the off-street parking
spaces available to the property;



   81.06(B)(5)(d)   The days and times of trash pickup and the solid
waste handling and containment requirements of the City Code and this Chapter;



   81.06(B)(5)(e)   A delineation of those portions of the property
where the Owner will be residing, if remaining on the property;



   81.06(B)(5)(f)   A list of uses prohibited on the property which
shall include use of the property as a party, event or entertainment venue;



   81.06(B)(5)(g)   The location of the nearest hospital; and



   81.06(B)(5)(h)   The local non-emergency police phone number.



   81.06(B)(6)   Use.  The following limitations apply to the use of
the property:



   81.06(B)(6)(a)   No sound amplification system and no televisions
shall be used outside of any roofed portion of the primary structure on the
property;



   81.06(B)(6)(b)   Noise from any amplified sound system or
televisions shall not be audible after 10:00 p.m. on a Sunday-Thursday night
or after 11:00 p.m. on a Friday or Saturday night when measured at any
property line of the Vacation Rental;



   81.06(B)(6)(c)   No more than 3 unregistered guests may be present
on the property at any given time and no unregistered guests may remain on
the property after 10:00 p.m. Sunday-Thursday night or after 11:00 p.m. on
Friday or Saturday night.



   81.06(B)(6)(d)   The Vacation Rental may not be used or advertised
for any commercial or non-residential use, including use of the property as a
party, event or entertainment venue.



   81.06(B)(7)   Advertising.  Any advertising of the Vacation Rental
by the Owner or any service shall conform to information included in the
Vacation Rental Certificate of Use and the property's approval, and shall
include at a minimum, identification of the Maximum Occupancy permitted on
the property.  The Owner or Vacation Rental Agent shall ensure that the name
and contact information for any listing services on or through which the
Vacation Rental is to be offered for rent which was provided in the
application is updated with the City to reflect any changes and maintain with
the City at all times a list of current listing services.



   81.06(B)(8)   Posting of Certificate of Use.  The Certificate of
Use shall be posted on the back of or next to the main entrance door and
shall include at a minimum the name, address and phone number of the Vacation
Rental Agent and the Maximum Occupancy of the Vacation Rental.



   81.06(B)(9)   Other standards.  The Occupants shall be advised that
all standards contained within the City Code (including, but not limited to,
noise, parking, and property maintenance) are applicable to the Vacation
Rental and may be enforced against the Occupant, Vacation Rental Agent and
Owner.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 81.07  SALE OR TRANSFER OF DWELLING UNIT USED FOR VACATION RENTALS.



   Whenever a Dwelling used for Vacation Rentals is sold or otherwise
changes ownership and the new Owner desires to use the Dwelling for Vacation
Rentals, the new Owner must, prior to allowing any Vacation Rental use:



   81.07(A)   Submit a new Vacation Rental registration application and
obtain all required inspections;



   81.07(B)   Schedule and obtain all required inspections of the
Dwelling as required by this Chapter and a Certificate of Use; and



   81.07(C)   Apply for and obtain a Certificate of Use for the
Vacation Rental use.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018)



§ 81.08  ADMINISTRATION, PENALTIES, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   81.08(A)   Initial and Annual Certificate of Use Inspections of
Vacation Rentals.  An inspection of the Dwelling Unit for compliance with
this Chapter, and for compliance with the requirements of the Minimum Housing
Standards of Broward County and the specific requirements of the Fire Codes
and Florida Building Code as noted herein is required prior to issuance or
renewal of a Vacation Rental registration and Certificate of Use . If
violations are found, all violations must be corrected and the Dwelling Unit
must be re-inspected prior to issuance or renewal of a Vacation Rental
registration and Certificate of Use as provided herein.  All violations must
be corrected and re-inspected within 30 calendar days. Failure to correct
such inspection deficiencies in the timeframes provided shall result in the
denial of an initial application or suspension of the Vacation Rental
registration and Certificate of Use until such time as the violations are
corrected and re-inspected.



   81.08(A)(1)   Inspections will be conducted by the City Manager or
designee.



   81.08(A)(2)   The suspension of a Vacation Rentalregistration and
Certificate of Use shall be posted at the establishment.



   81.08(B)   Registration not transferable.  No registration or
Certificate of Use issued under this Chapter shall be transferred or assigned
or used by any Person other than the Person to whom it is issued, or at any
location other than the location for which it is issued.



   81.08(C)   Expiration of registration/Certificate of Use.  All
registrations/Certificates of Use issued under the provisions of this Chapter
shall be valid for no more than one year, and all registrations/Certificates
of Use shall expire on September 30th of each year. Fees for renewal shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission. In the event of a failure
to renew the Vacation Rentalregistration and Certificate of Useprior to the
expiration date, a new application for registration of a Vacation Rentaland
Certificate of Useshall be required.



   81.08(D)   Revocation.  In addition to, or as an alternative to,
the penalties of subsection 81.08(E) below, any Vacation Rental registration
and Certificate of Use issued pursuant to this Chapter may be denied,
revoked, or suspended by the City Manager upon the adjudication of a
violation of this Chapter, any City Ordinance, or state law by the Vacation
Rental Agent, Owner, Transient Occupant or guest attributable to the property
for which the Vacation Rental registration and Certificate of Use is issued.
Such denial, revocation or suspension is in addition to any other penalty or
remedy available at law.



   81.08(E)   Offenses/violations.



   81.08(E)(1)   Fine.  The City's Special Magistrate, pursuant to
Chapter 31, shall have jurisdiction to hear and rule upon violations of this
Chapter. A violation of the provisions of this Chapter is punishable as
provided in § 2.99 and § 81.08(E)(2)-(4) of the Code.



   81.08(E)(2)   Suspension of Vacation Rental Registration/Certificate
of Use.  In addition to any fines and any other remedies described herein or
provided for by law, the Special Magistrate shall suspend a Vacation Rental
registration and Certificate of Use for multiple violations of the maximum
occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, failure to advertise the
maximum occupancy, or any other requirements of this Chapter, in any
continuous 48 month period, in accordance with the following suspension
timeframes:



   81.08(E)(2)(a)   Upon finding of a second violation of the Maximum
Occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, failure to advertise the
maximum occupancy, failure of the Vacation Rental Agent to perform the duties
required by this Chapter, or any other requirements of this Chapter, the
Vacation Rental Certificate of Use shall be suspended for a period of 30
calendar days.



   81.08(E)(2)(b)   Upon finding of a third violation of the Maximum
Occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, failure to advertise the
maximum occupancy, failure of the Vacation Rental Agent to perform the duties
required by this Chapter, or any other requirements of this Chapter, the
Vacation Rental Certificate of Use shall be suspended for a period of 12
calendar months.



   81.08(E)(2)(c)   For each additional violation of the Maximum
Occupancy, parking requirements, noise ordinance, failure to advertise the
maximum occupancy, failure of the Vacation Rental Agent to perform the duties
required by this Chapter, or any other requirements of this Chapter, the
Vacation Rental Certificate of Use shall be suspended for an additional 12
calendar months.



   81.08(E)(3)   Suspension restrictions.  A Vacation Rental may not
provide Transient Occupancy during any period of suspension of a Vacation
Rental Certificate of Use . The suspension shall begin immediately following
notice, commencing the earlier of:



   81.08(E)(3)(a)   the end of the current Vacation Rental lease
period; or



   81.08(E)(3)(b)   thirty calendar days.



   81.08(E)(4)   Operation during any period of suspension shall be
deemed a violation pursuant to this Chapter and shall be subject to a daily
fine, up to the maximum amount as otherwise provided in Florida Statutes for
repeat violations, for each day that the Vacation Rental operates during a
period of violation.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 81.09  VESTING.



   81.09(A)   Vacation Rentals existing as of June 4, 2018, shall be
considered vested Vacation Rentals only as related to contracts entered prior
to June 4, 2018.  Rental/lease agreements that were entered into prior to
June 4, 2018, as evidenced by a written and validly executed rental/lease
agreement or contract provided to the City Manager no later than June 4, 2018
PLUS 3 MONTHS shall be considered vested.



   81.09(B)   Vesting shall:



   81.09(B)(1)   Apply only to date specific rental agreements; and



   81.09(B)(2)   Not apply to renewals of existing rental agreements or
contracts which are at the option of either of the parties.



   81.09(C)   All rental agreements entered into after June 4, 2018,
shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter.  No Vacation Rental shall
be occupied pursuant to a contract/lease entered into after June 4, 2018,
until the Owner has registered the property as a Vacation Rental and obtained
a Certificate of Use.



   81.09(D)   A vested contract/lease transferred to a subsequent Owner
shall continue to be vested, but shall not be transferred to a different
Vacation Rental property, provided the new Owner complies with the inspection
and licensing requirements of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-17, passed 12-3-2018)



CHAPTER 82: EXTENDED OPERATING HOURS



Section



   82.01   Extended operating hours



§ 82.01  EXTENDED OPERATING HOURS.



   82.01(A)   Permit required.  No business shall be allowed to engage
in the retail sale of consumer goods or services between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless it obtains an extended operating hours permit from
the City Manager under this Section.



   82.01(B)   Criteria.  The City Manager shall consider the following
criteria in evaluating the application, revocation, and renewal of an
extended operating hours permit:



   82.01(B)(1)   The amount of available parking in relation to the
demands created by the extra hours of operation, especially with regard to
the adverse impact on adjacent Residential Areas of any illegal or hazardous
parking.



   82.01(B)(2)   The amount and degree of law enforcement activities
generated by the operation of the business.



   82.01(B)(3)   The adverse effects, if any, that the extended hours
of operation will have on neighboring properties, including but not limited
to, noise, odor, Litter , light and additional Traffic.



   82.01(B)(4)   The potential affect of the extended hours of
operation on the general welfare and safety of the public.



   82.01(C)   Compliance with conditions.  The City Manager may
require, as a condition of the privilege of extended hours of operation,
compliance with any reasonable conditions necessary to mitigate or eliminate
the adverse effects of such extended hours. These conditions may include,
without being limited to, provision by the Owner or operator of, at his or
her expense, additional parking, security personnel, and screening and
buffering from nearby properties. The City Manager may also require that the
permitted establishments be wholly enclosed, soundproofed, and
air-conditioned, with any windows, doors or other openings be kept closed,
except from normal and emergency ingress and egress, in order that noise
emanating therefrom will not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
The Owner shall record in the Public Records of Broward County, Florida, a
covenant running with the land that expressly sets forth any and all
conditions required.



   82.01(D)   Permit term.  Once issued, the permit shall be valid
until September 30th in the year in which the permit is granted. Thereafter,
the permit must be renewed annually.



   82.01(E)   Permit is a privilege.  The extended operating hours
permit is a privilege not a right. Nothing contained in this Section shall be
construed to create any right to the issuance or renewal of an extended
operating hours permit.



   82.01(F)   Alcoholic Beverage sales.  Nothing contained in this
Section shall be construed to extend the hours in which Alcoholic Beverages
may be sold on the permitted Premises.



   82.01(G)   Permit fee.  The annual permit fee for issuance of the
said permit shall be established and amended by resolution of the City
Commission.



   82.01(H)   Revocation by City Manager.  If, prior to renewal time,
the City Manager determines that any permittee has either violated a
condition or is operating in a manner inconsistent with the criteria
specified in subsection 82.01(B) or 82.01(C), he or she may revoke the
extended operating hours permit. In accordance with § 2.15(B) of this Code,
the permittee may appeal the revocation to the City Commission.



   82.01(I)   Cost recovery.  The costs incurred by the City in
investigating any of the matters included within the criteria of subsections
82.01(B) or 82.01(C) in either an application, revocation, or renewal
proceedings of an establishment’s permit shall be paid by the permittee to
the City. These costs shall be in addition to the initial application fee and
annual permit fee required by this Section.



   82.01(J)   License display.  The permit shall be conspicuously
displayed within ten feet of the main entrance to the establishment.



   82.01(K)   Permit transfer.  A permit may be transferred to a new
Owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a
transfer fee as set forth by resolution of the City Commission. The
transferred permit shall be subject to the conditions of the original
approval.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 83: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   83.01   Exemptions



   83.02   Location of licensed premises



   83.03   Prohibited acts



   83.04   Hours of sale



   83.05   Bottle clubs



   83.06   Extended operating hours with alcoholic beverage license



   83.07   Country club, restaurant and hotel bars



§ 83.01  EXEMPTIONS.



   This Chapter shall not prohibit the sale of Alcoholic Beverages at a
house of worship if such sale of Alcoholic Beverages is part of an authorized
event sanctioned by the institution.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 83.02  LOCATION OF LICENSED PREMISES.



   83.02(A)   Proximity of similar type of establishment.  No license
under StateLaw pertaining to the sale and dispensing of Liquor shall be
issued to sell such Liquor for Consumption Off The Premises in any place of
business located within 1,000 feet, by airline measurement, from main
entrance to main entrance of the place of business of any similar type
licensed purveyor of Liquor for Off-Site consumption, and must be separated
from similar type licensed establishment by the 1,000-foot distance. No such
license shall be issued during the period in which the existing license is
renewable at such location; provided, however, that the Owner, by vested
right of a license to do business within the prohibited area, may transfer
his or her Liquor license to a new Owner doing business at the same location
within the prohibited area. There shall be no distance requirement or
restriction for:



   83.02(A)(1)   Restaurants selling Alcoholic Beverages ;



   83.02(A)(2)   Establishments selling Alcoholic Beverages for on
premises consumption; or



   83.02(A)(3)   Establishments selling Alcoholic Beverages (beer and
wine) as an ancillary part of the main business of such establishment (e.g.,
grocery stores, drugstores, Restaurants , etc.).



   83.02(B)   Proximity of establishments to Child Care Facilities,
houses of worship, and schools.  No license under State Laws pertaining to
the sale and dispensing of Alcoholic Beverages, including beer and wine,
shall be issued to any Person or officers, employees, servants, or agents of
any Person, firm, association, or corporation licensed by the State for the
sale of Alcoholic Beverages at any location located within 1,000 feet by
airline measurement from any established Child Care Facility, house of
worship, or school, measured from the nearest public entrance. Whenever a
license has been lawfully procured and thereafter a house of worship or
school be established within a distance otherwise prohibited by Law, the
establishment of a Child Care Facility, house of worship, or school shall not
be cause for the revocation of the license or prevent the subsequent renewal
of same. There shall be no distance requirement or restriction for
Restaurants selling Alcoholic Beverages where the sale of said Alcoholic
Beverages is incidental to its principal business as a Restaurant and where
the sale of prepared food is the primary business of the Restaurant.



   83.02(C)   Proximity of Child Care Facilities, houses of worship,
and schools to existing establishments.  It shall be unlawful for any Child
Care Facility, house of worship, or school to operate at a location or in a
Building within 1,000 feet by airline measurement from any established Child
Care Facility, house of worship, or school, measured from the nearest public
entrance, provided that this Section shall not apply to such Child Care
Facilities, houses of worship, or schools legally in existence and in
operation upon passage of this Chapter.



   83.02(D)   Number of establishments limited in certain districts. 
One, but not more than one, Package Store shall be permitted within a
“planned employment center district” (PECD) or in a C-1 district. This
limitation shall be without regard to its location in relation to other Uses
as described in subsections 83.02(A) through 83.02(C) above.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 83.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   83.03(A)   On Premises consumption.  No vendor licensed under the
State Laws pertaining to the sale and dispensing of Alcoholic Beverages,
including beer and wine, who is not licensed to sell Liquor to be consumed
upon the Premises, shall knowingly furnish or provide any setups, glasses, or
other service to any Person for the purpose of consuming Liquor in, at, or
upon the licensed Premises.



   83.03(B)   Commission of an unlawful act.  No vendor or distributor
shall knowingly, directly or indirectly, commit or assist in the commission
of any unlawful act upon any Premises licensed under the State Laws
pertaining to the sale of Alcoholic Beverages, including beer and wine.
Unless the City has issued a Special Event Permit expressly allowing the
consumption of Alcoholic Beverages during the event, it shall be unlawful for
any Person to consume any Alcoholic Beverage upon any area available for use
by the public for Motor Vehicle parking purposes, or any public Street,
Highway, or sidewalk, where such area adjoins or is adjacent or appurtenant
to any establishment within the City where Alcoholic Beverages are sold or
dispensed.



   83.03(C)   Motor Vehicle parking areas.  Unless the City has issued
a Special Event Permit expressly allowing the consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages during the event, it shall be unlawful for any Person or for the
officers, employees, servants, or agents of any Person, firm, association, or
corporation licensed by the State for the sale of Alcoholic Beverages for
consumption either on or off the Premises to Sell, serve, or dispense any
Alcoholic Beverage to any Person, or knowingly permit the consumption of any
Alcoholic Beverage by any Person, upon any Motor Vehicle parking area which
is adjacent to or adjoining or appurtenant to any establishment within the
City licensed for the sale of Alcoholic Beverages.



   83.03(D)   License required.  Unless the City has issued a Special
Event Permit expressly allowing the consumption of Alcoholic Beverages during
the event, it shall be unlawful for any Person to drink or consume Alcoholic
Beverages, including Liquor, beer, or wines, on any public Streets, in any
Public Parks, or in any other government owned or operated Public Place,
unless such place is licensed by the City for the sale of Alcoholic Beverages.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 83.04  HOURS OF SALE.



   83.04(A)   Consumption Off The Premises.  Any Person, or any
Employee thereof, who sells or offers for sale in bottles, cans, or
containers of any type any Liquor, beer, or wine, regardless of alcoholic
content, for Consumption Off The Premises, is hereby prohibited from selling
or offering for sale, for Consumption Off The Premises, said Liquor, beer, or
wine, regardless of alcoholic content, on any day of the week between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.  For such establishments open at anytime
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., a Sign shall be displayed at
all cashier locations and at alcohol display areas that shall read as
follows: "No Alcoholic Beverage shall be sold between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m., pursuant to Section 83.04 of the City Code."  At the cashier
locations the lettering on the Sign shall be one inch in height and at the
display areas the lettering on the Sign shall be one-half inch in height.



   83.04(B)   Consumption On The Premises.  No vendor licenses under
the provisions of the State Laws pertaining to the sale and dispensing of
Alcoholic Beverages, including beer and wine, or any employee thereof, shall
sell or offer for sale or deliver or serve or permit to be consumed on or
upon the Premises of such vendor, any Liquors, beers, or wines, regardless of
alcoholic content, on any day of the week between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m unless the vendor obtains an Extended Operating Hours with Alcoholic
Beverages License under § 83.06 of this Code.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-08, passed 7-5-2011)



§ 83.05  BOTTLE CLUBS.



   83.05(A)   License required.  It is a violation of this Section,
and a public nuisance, for any Person to operate a Bottle Club, or for such
Person’s agents, servants, or employees to be employed therein, unless an
appropriate license has first been obtained from the City by the operator of
said Bottle Club, said Bottle Club is an ancillary Use of an otherwise
licensed business, and unless said license is displayed conspicuously at the
place of business in such a manner as to be open to the view of the public
and subject to the inspection of all duly authorized Officers of the City.



   83.05(B)   Permitted hours.  Bottle Clubs shall be open only during
the hours permitted by Law or ordinance for establishments selling Alcoholic
Beverages in the jurisdiction by which the Bottle Club is located. It is a
violation of this Section, and a public nuisance, for any Person, his or her
agents, servants, or employees, to open a Bottle Club at any other time or to
permit a Bottle Club to remain open at any other time.



   83.05(C)   Injunctions.  The City may restrain violations of this
Section and resulting public nuisances by temporary or permanent injunction,
including a mandatory injunction, and such suit or action may be instituted
and maintained in the name of the City without bond. Injunctive relief shall
not preclude proceeding in a criminal action under this Section. A criminal
action shall not preclude proceeding for injunctive relief.



   83.05(D)   Inspections and searches.  Licensees, by the acceptance
of a Bottle Club license, agree and consent that their licensed business
shall always be subject to inspection and search, without search warrant, by
officers of the Broward County Sheriff’s Department, during all hours that
such Premises engage in business and at any other time such Premises are
occupied by the licensee or other Persons.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 83.06  EXTENDED OPERATING HOURS WITH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE.



   83.06(A)   Application.  Any Person or vendor or any place of
business operating in the City, and duly and regularly licensed by this State
to sell and dispense Alcoholic Beverages, wine or beer for consumption on
Premises therein, may apply for an Extended Operating Hours with Alcoholic
Beverage License, provided that a site plan has been approved for the
Premises. Such license application shall be processed using the same
procedures as for a variance (including cost recovery deposit), but using the
criteria listed in subsection 83.06(B) below. The fee for the issuance or
renewal of said license shall be set and amended by resolution of the City
Commission. Such Extended Operating Hours with Alcoholic Beverage License
shall permit and extend the hours in which such licensee may stay open and
sell Alcoholic Beverages for Consumption On The Premises until not later than
3:00 a.m. (or such earlier time as specifically authorized by resolution of
the City Commission). Every such license shall expire on September 30 of each
and every Year. The fee for the issuance or renewal of said license shall be
paid within 30 days of the initial approval or any renewal date. Failure to
timely pay the fee shall result in the immediate and automatic revocation of
the approval or license.



   83.06(B)   Criteria.  The specific criteria for the City
Commission’s consideration are as follows:



   83.06(B)(1)   The amount of off-street parking in relation to the
demands created by the extra hours of operation, especially with regard to
the adverse impact on adjacent Residential Areas of any illegal or hazardous
parking.



   83.06(B)(2)   The amount and degree of law enforcement activities
generated by the operation of the establishment, both outside and inside the
particular location, with particular emphasis on the vandalism, noise,
vehicular use by patrons and illegal activity of any kind by employees,
patrons or others associated with the establishment.



   83.06(B)(3)   The adverse effects if any, that the extended hours of
operation will have on neighboring properties, especially with respect to the
effects of noise, parking and glare from headlights or Exterior Lighting on
nearby residential properties.



   83.06(C)   Conditions.  The City Commission may require, as a
condition of the privilege of extending hours of operation, compliance with
any reasonable conditions deemed by it to be necessary to mitigate or
eliminate the adverse effects of such extended hours. These conditions may
include, without being limited to, provision by the Owner or operator, at his
or her expense, additional off-street parking, security personnel and
screening and buffering from nearby properties.



   83.06(D)   Renewal.  The granting of an Extended Operating Hours
with Alcoholic Beverage License to a particular licensee is a privilege
subject to revocation at any time by the City Commission, and no Person may
reasonably rely on a continuation of that privilege. In the absence of
ongoing revocation proceedings, an Extended Operating Hours with Alcoholic
Beverage License may be renewed annually upon payment of the aforementioned
fee prior to October 1 of each Year.



   83.06(E)   Revocation.  If, at any time, the City Manager
determines that any licensee has either violated a condition of granting of
the license or is operating in a manner harmful to the public health, safety
or welfare based upon the criteria specified in subsection 83.06(B), he or
she may place on the City Commission agenda the matter of revoking the
Extended Operating Hours with Alcoholic Beverage License. Such hearing shall
be publicly advertised in a newspaper of local circulation; and further,
written notice of the charges against the licensee shall be sent to him or
her at least 14 days in advance and shall also contain the date, time and
place of such hearing. After consideration of the matter and allowing the
licensee to be heard, the City Commission may revoke, modify or condition the
Extended Operating Hours with Alcoholic Beverage License. The criteria to be
used by the City Commission in such matters shall be the criteria specified
in subsections 83.06(B) and 83.06(C) above. Should the license or privilege
be revoked, conditioned or modified, the licensee may seek review of such
action before the City Commission after six months. The City Commission may
then modify or refuse to modify its action. Only one such review shall be
given within a 12-month period.



   83.06(F)   Conspicuously displayed.  The license shall be
conspicuously displayed within ten feet of the main entrance to the
establishment.



   83.06(G)   License transfer.  A license may be transferred to a new
Owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a
transfer fee as set forth by resolution of the City Commission. The
transferred license shall be subject to the conditions of the original
approval.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 2-3-2014)



§ 83.07  COUNTRY CLUB, RESTAURANT AND HOTEL BARS.



   The sale of beers, wines, and Liquors shall be prohibited except during
the time that the country club, Restaurant or Hotel is actually engaged in
and open to the public for operation. No Sign denoting that Alcoholic
Beverages are obtainable within the country club, Restaurant or Hotel shall
be exhibited on the exterior of the Premises.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 84: OUTDOOR SEATING OR BAR AREAS



Section



   84.01   Outdoor seating or bar areas



§ 84.01  OUTDOOR SEATING OR BAR AREAS.



   84.01(A)   Intent.  It is the intent of this Section to require any
business with Outdoor seating or Bar Areas to obtain a separate license in
order to maintain the privilege of such Outdoor seating or Bar Areas and to
establish minimum criteria for any Outdoor seating or Bar Areas within the
City.



   84.01(B)   Generally.  No Outdoor seating or Bar Areas shall be
allowed in the City except in compliance with this Section.



   84.01(C)   License requirement.



   84.01(C)(1)   Any business having an Outdoor seating or Bar Areas
must receive and prominently post an Outdoor seating/Bar license to be issued
by the City.



   84.01(C)(2)   The license issued hereunder shall designate the
number and type(s) of tables and seats permitted and the total square footage
in the Outdoor seating or Bar Areas .



   84.01(C)(3)   The license may be granted with conditions or
restrictions found necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding
properties, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public,
including without limitation a restriction as to the time of day of any use
of the Outdoor seating or Bar Area .



   84.01(C)(4)   Once issued, the license shall be valid until
September 30. Thereafter, the license must be renewed annually.



   84.01(C)(5)   Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed
to create any right to the issuance or renewal of an Outdoor seating/Bar
license. The City may rescind the license if the requirements of this Section
are violated.



   84.01(C)(6)   The fees for Outdoor seating or Bar applications and
licenses shall be established and amended by resolution of the City
Commission.



   84.01(C)(7)   The license shall be conspicuously displayed in the
window area nearest to the Outdoor seating area.



   84.01(D)   Site plan applicability.  Any Outdoor seating or Bar
Area that is not shown on a previously approved site plan, or is relocated or
modified in any way, requires an amendment to the site plan. Modifications
requiring new site plan approval include, but are not limited to, any
increase in the number of tables, seats or area occupied in an Outdoor
seating or Bar Area. The Applicant for the amendment to the site plan shall
be the Owner of the property.



   84.01(E)   Standards.  All Outdoor seating or Bar Areas shall be
subject to the following requirements:



   84.01(E)(1)   Outdoor seating or Bar Areas shall be located on
Private Property ; and



   84.01(E)(2)   Outdoor seating or Bar Areas shall be for the service
of food and beverages only; and



   84.01(E)(3)   Outdoor seating or Bar Areas shall not impede
pedestrian or vehicle movement, nor impede pedestrian ingress and egress from
any adjacent structure; and



   84.01(E)(4)   Outdoor seating or Bar Areas must be supported by
adequate parking and shall be used and constructed in compliance with all
other applicable regulations within this Code of Ordinances; and



   84.01(E)(5)   OutdoorBar Area without seating shall not exceed an
occupancy of one patron per seven square feet of area not occupied by tables
and chairs. Outdoor Bars with seats shall have no more than one seat per 24
lineal inches of Bar, excluding any service area; and



   84.01(E)(6)   The maximum occupancy of Outdoor seating areas shall
not exceed:



   84.01(E)(6)(a)   Bistro Tables: one patron per nine square feet of
area occupied by tables and chairs, and one table per 36 square feet of area
occupied by tables and chairs.



   84.01(E)(6)(b)   Dining Tables: one patron per 12.5 square feet of
area occupied by tables and chairs, and one table per 50 square feet of area
occupied by tables and chairs.



   84.01(E)(7)   Outdoor seating or Bar areas shall be limited to the
space(s) that are:



   84.01(E)(7)(a)   Directly in front, and/or directly on the side
and/or directly in the rear of the business holding the Outdoor Seating/Bar
license;



   84.01(E)(7)(b)   On a designated space as shown on an approved Site
Plan of the business holding the Outdoor Seating/Bar license.



   84.01(E)(8)   No seats, tables, umbrellas or other appurtenances
contained in an Outdoor Seating/Bar area shall obstruct any Traffic Control
Device.



   84.01(E)(9)   Seats and tables contained in an Outdoor Seating/Bar
area shall be placed and maintained in such a manner in order to maintain a
clear aisle in compliance with NFPA-101, Chapter 12A.12.2.5.8.3 and Chapter
13A.13.2.5.8.3.



NFPA - 101, 2010 edition



Chapter 12 New Assembly Occupancies, Annex A



Seating and Tables Abutting an Aisle



A.12.2.5.8.3



Figure A.12.2.5.8.3 shows typical measurements involving seating and tables
abutting an aisle.  Note that, for purposes of the means of egress
requirements of this Code, seating at counters or other furnishings is
considered to be the same as seating at tables.







FIGURE A.12.2.5.8.3 Seating at Tables Abutting an Aisle.



Chapter 13 Existing Assembly Occupancies, Annex A



Seating and Tables Abutting an Aisle



A.13.2.5.8.3



Figure A.13.2.5.8.3 shows typical measurements involving seating and tables
abutting an aisle.  Note that, for purposes of the means of egress
requirements of this Code, seating at counters or other furnishings is
considered to be the same as seating at tables.







FIGURE A.13.2.5.8.3 Seating at Tables Abutting an Aisle.



   84.01(F)   Previously approved Outdoor seating or Bar Areas.  Any
business that has a site plan showing an Outdoor seating or Bar Area,
approved prior to June 1, 2001, shall be entitled to a license for the
Outdoor area shown on the approved site plan. The number of chairs and tables
allowed shall be as follows:



   84.01(F)(1)   Bistro Tables: one chair per nine square feet of area
occupied by tables and chairs, and one table per 36 square feet of area
occupied by tables and chairs.



   84.01(F)(2)   Dining Tables: one chair per 12.5 square feet of area
occupied by tables and chairs, and one table per 50 square feet of area
occupied by tables and chairs.



   84.01(G)   Fee.  No application fee shall be required for such
licenses.



   84.01(H)   Transferability.  A license may be transferred to a new
Owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a
transfer fee as set forth by resolution of the City Commission. The
transferred license shall be subject to the conditions of the original
approval.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-05, passed 2-3-2014)



CHAPTER 85: CONVENIENCE BUSINESSES



Section



   85.01   Convenience businesses



§ 85.01  CONVENIENCE BUSINESSES.



   85.01(A)   Every Convenience Business shall be equipped with the
following security devices and standards:



   85.01(A)(1)   A security camera system capable of recording and
retrieving an image to assist in offender identification and apprehension.



   85.01(A)(2)   A drop safe or cash management device for restricted
access to cash receipts.



   85.01(A)(3)   A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of
at least two Footcandles per square foot at 18 inches above the surface.



   85.01(A)(4)   A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that
the cash register contains $50.00 or less.



   85.01(A)(5)   Window Signage that allows a clear and unobstructed
view from outside the Building and in a normal line of sight of the cash
register and sales transaction area.



   85.01(A)(6)   Height markers at the entrance of the Convenience
Business which display height measures.



   85.01(A)(7)   A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at
all times after 11:00 p.m.



   85.01(B)   A Convenience Business shall not have window tinting that
reduces exterior or interior view in a normal line of sight.



   85.01(C)   Every Convenience Business shall be equipped with a
silent alarm to law enforcement or a private security agency, unless
application for an exemption is made to and granted by the Attorney General.
An application for exemption must be in writing and must be accompanied by an
administrative fee of $25.00 for each store for which an exemption would
apply.



   85.01(D)   If a murder, robbery, sexual battery, aggravated assault,
aggravated battery, or kidnaping or false imprisonment, as those crimes are
identified and defined by Florida Statutes, occurs or has occurred at a
Convenience Business since July 1, 1989, and arises out of the operation of
the Convenience Business , that Convenience Business shall implement at least
one of the following security measures:



   85.01(D)(1)   Provide at least two employees on the Premises at all
times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.



   85.01(D)(2)   Install for use by employees at all times after 11:00
p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. a secured safety enclosure of transparent
polycarbonate or other material that meets at least one of the following
minimum standards:



   85.01(D)(2)(a)   American Society for Testing and Materials Standard
D3 93 5 (classification PC 110 B 3 0800700) and that has a thickness of at
least 0.375 inches and has an impact strength of at least 200 foot pounds; or



   85.01(D)(2)(b)   Underwriters Laboratory Standard UL 752 for medium
power small arms (level one), Bullet Resisting Equipment.



   85.01(D)(3)   Provide a security guard on the Premises at all times
after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.



   85.01(D)(4)   Lock the business Premises throughout the hours of
11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. and only transact business through an indirect
pass-through trough, trap door, or window.



   85.01(D)(5)   Close the business at all times after 11:00 p.m. and
before 5:00 a.m.



   85.01(E)   For purposes of this Section, any Convenience Business
that by Law implemented any of the security measures set forth in subsection
85.01(D) and has maintained said measures as required by the Department of
Legal Affairs without any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by
subsection 85.01(D) for a period of no less than 24 months immediately
preceding the filing of a notice of exemption, may file with the Department a
notice of exemption from these enhanced security measures. In no event shall
this exemption be interpreted to preclude full compliance with the security
measures set forth in subsection 85.01(D) should any occurrence or incidence
of the crimes identified by subsection 85.01(D) cause subsection 85.01(D) to
be applicable.



   85.01(F)   All materials and methods of construction used shall
conform to the requirements of the Building Code and be reviewed by the
Building Department prior to issuance of the Building Permit .



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 86: ADULT BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



   86.01   Location of adult businesses



   86.02 through 86.09  Reserved



   86.10   Findings



   86.11   Purpose



   86.12   Massage establishments



Licensing



   86.30   Zoning approval required



   86.31   License generally



   86.32   License application; fee



   86.33   License application procedure



   86.34   Application review and issuance of license



   86.35   License form, term, and renewal



   86.36   License transferability



   86.37   License suspension and revocation



   86.38   Name changes



   86.39   Records and reports



Regulations



   86.50   General requirements



   86.51   Alcoholic beverages



   86.52   Supplementary requirements



Additional Prohibitions



   86.60   Operating without a license



   86.61   Operating in violation of requirements



   86.62   Allowing employee to engage in prohibited acts



   86.63   Advertising prohibited activity



   86.64   Specified criminal offense



   86.65   Minors prohibited



   86.66   Working at unlicensed establishment



   86.67   Engaging in prohibited activity



   86.68   Touching of employee by nonemployee



   86.69   Adult mini motion picture theaters, adult booths, and
outdoor adult theaters prohibited



   86.70   Use of rest rooms or dressing rooms



   86.71   Hours of operation



   86.72 through 86.79  Reserved



   86.80   Notices



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 86.01  LOCATION OF ADULT BUSINESSES.



   86.01(A)   Adult Entertainment Establishments; findings and
purpose.  In the development, enforcement, and amendment of this Section, it
is recognized that there are uses and Accessory Uses which because of their
very nature are recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics
particularly when several of them are concentrated in any given location,
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent business and
Residential Areas. Further, it is recognized that the location of even one
such use near a Residential Area or other incompatible use causes such
deleterious effects on the neighborhood and on the businesses that serve the
neighborhood. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that
these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting and downgrading of
the surrounding neighborhood.



   86.01(B)   Distance limitations between Adult Entertainment
Establishments.



   86.01(B)(1)   None of the Adult Entertainment Establishments set
forth in this Section, or added from time to time to this Section by
amendment, shall be located or operated nearer to the same or any other Adult
Entertainment Establishment nor nearer to any such church or public, private,
or parochial kindergarten, nursery, elementary, middle, or high school, day
care center, hospital, Building owned and/or partly or wholly occupied by a
government agency, library, or post office than 1,000 feet. Measurement of
the 1,000 feet shall be made in accordance with subsection 86.01(B)(3) below.
Where an Adult Entertainment Establishment is located in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter, the subsequent locating of one of the Uses
provide above within 1,000 feet of an existing Adult Entertainment
Establishment shall not cause a violation of this Section.



   86.01(B)(2)   None of the Adult Entertainment Establishments set
forth in this Section, or added from time to time to this Section by
amendment, shall be located or operated nearer than 500 feet to a
residentially zoned district. Measurement of the 500 feet shall be made in
accordance with subsection 86.01(B)(3) below. Where an Adult Entertainment
Establishment is located in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter,
the subsequent locating of a residentially zoned district within 500 feet of
an existing Adult Entertainment Establishment shall not cause a violation of
this Section.



   86.01(B)(3)   For the purposes of this Section, all measurements of
distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on
the property line of any property or Use that is an Adult Entertainment
Establishment under this Chapter. If the property is one of multiple,
separate but attached bays designed for separate businesses, the property
line of the parcel that contains the multiple-bay structure shall be
considered the property line for purposes of this measurement. Therefore, no
more than one Adult Entertainment Establishment may be located in any one
Structure , even if that Structure contains multiple, separate but attached
bays designed for separate businesses. To determine the distances regulated
by this Section, the Person seeking to establish or operate an Adult
Entertainment Establishment shall furnish to the City a survey sealed by a
Professional Surveyor and Mapper who is licensed by the State of Florida. The
survey shall indicate the distance between the proposed Adult Entertainment
Establishment and any other Adult Entertainment Establishment, church,
school, hospital, Building owned and/or partly or wholly occupied by
government agency, library, or post office as described in subsections
86.01(B)(1) and 86.01(B)(2) above.



   86.01(B)(4)   Variances to the location standards of this Section
shall not be permitted.



   86.01(C)   Adult Entertainment EstablishmentUses.  The following
uses are declared to be “Adult Entertainment Establishments:”



   86.01(C)(1)   Adult Bookstore/Adult Novelty Store/Adult Video Store;



   86.01(C)(2)   Adult Dancing Establishment;



   86.01(C)(3)   Adult Domination and Submission Parlor;



   86.01(C)(4)   Adult Motel;



   86.01(C)(5)   Adult Motion Picture Theater;



   86.01(C)(6)   Encounter Studio/modeling studio;



   86.01(C)(7)   Massage establishment; and



   86.01(C)(8)   Any bookstore, video store, motion picture theater,
Motel/Hotel, dancing establishment, massage establishment, or photo or
modeling studio: (a) that includes the word “adult” in its name; or (b)
where an Employee, Operator, or Owner exposes his or her Specified Anatomical
Area for viewing by patrons; or (c) which exposes material to minors that may
not be exposed to minors under F.S. Chapter 847 shall be considered an Adult
Entertainment Establishment.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§§ 86.02 THROUGH 86.09 RESERVED.



§ 86.10  FINDINGS.



   Based on the evidence and testimony presented before the City
Commission and on the findings incorporated in the “Secondary Effects of
Sexually-Oriented Business on Market Values ”, Texas City Attorneys
Association (June 2008); “Crime-Related Secondary Effects: Secondary
Effects of ‘Off-Site Sexually-Oriented Businesses ’” Texas City
Attorneys Association (June 2008); “A Report on the Secondary Impacts of
Adult UseBusinesses in the City of Denver,” by the Zoning Administration,
Office of Planning and Development, Department of Public Safety, Department
of Excise and Licenses, Assessor’s Office, and in consultation with the
City’s Attorney’s Office, Denver, Colorado (January 1998); “Sexually
Oriented Business Ordinance Revision Committee Legislative Report,”
Houston, Texas (January 7, 1997); “Crime Related Secondary Effects of
“Adult Use Study,”“ by the Newport News Department of Planning and
Development, Newport News, Virginia (March 1996); “Report to American
Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented
Businesses ,” by Peter R. Hecht, Ph.D. of the Environmental Research Group
(March 31, 1996); The “Adams County Nude Entertainment Study” by the
Adams County Sheriff’s Department (1991) (Colorado); “Effects of Adult
Entertainment Businesses on Residential Neighborhoods,” by the Department
of Planning, Research, and Development, City of El Paso, TX (Sept. 26, 1986);
“Adult Entertainment Business Study for Manatee County, Florida,” by
Manatee County Planning and Development Department (June 1987); “Adult
Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City: A Survey of Real Estate
Appraisers,” by the Community Development Department of the City of
Oklahoma City, OK (March 3, 1986); and Transcript of Workshop Meeting of City
Council, City of Tampa, Florida, regarding “Draft Proposal of Establishing
a Locational Criteria for Adult Bookstores, Adult Theatres and Special
Cabarets” (July 1, 1982), the City Commission hereby finds as follows:



   86.10(A)   Establishments exist or may exist within the City where
books, magazines, motion pictures, videos, prints, photographs, periodicals,
records, novelties, and devices that depict, illustrate, describe, or relate
to Specified Sexual Activities are possessed, displayed, exhibited,
distributed, and/or sold.



   86.10(B)   Establishments exist or may exist within the City where:



   86.10(B)(1)   The superficial tissues of one Person are manipulated,
rubbed, stroked, kneaded, or tapped by a second Person, accompanied by the
display or exposure of Specified Anatomical Areas ;



   86.10(B)(2)   Dancers, entertainers, performers, or other
individuals, who, for forms of Commercial Gain, perform or are presented
while displaying or exposing Specified Anatomical Areas ; or



   86.10(B)(3)   Lap Dancing occurs.



   86.10(C)   The activities described in subsections 86.10(A) and
86.10(B) occur at Establishments for the purpose of making a profit, and, as
such, are subject to regulation by the City in the interest of the health,
safety, and general welfare of its residents.



   86.10(D)   The competitive commercial exploitation of such nudity
and semi-nudity is adverse to the public’s interest, quality of life, tone
of commerce, and total community Environment .



   86.10(E)   The commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity
consists of the use of nude and semi-nude entertainment in connection with or
for the promotion of the sale of goods or services, and the receipt of money
by the Person engaging in nude or semi-nude entertainment in exchange for or
as consideration for nude or semi-nude performance by such individuals.



   86.10(F)   The commercial exploitation of nude and semi-nude acts,
exhibitions, and nude entertainment occurs frequently at Commercial
Establishments either selling or allowing consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
on the Premises.



   86.10(G)   There is a direct relationship between the consumption of
Alcoholic Beverages and the nude and semi-nude activities mentioned above,
and an increase in criminal activities, disturbances of the peace and good
order of the community. The occurrence of these activities is hazardous to
the health and the safety of those Persons in attendance and tends to
depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of
the community as a whole.



   86.10(H)   The combination of the sale and consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages with the performance of nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and
entertainment is adverse to the public’s interest and the quality of life,
tone of commerce, and total community Environment in the City.



   86.10(I)   To promote and preserve the public peace and good order
and to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the community and the
citizens thereof, it is necessary and advisable for the City to prohibit
certain forms of nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions, entertainment, and
Commercial Establishments at which Alcoholic Beverages are, or are available
to be, sold or consumed.



   86.10(J)   To preserve the public peace and good order, and to
safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the community and residents
thereof, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct
of Owners , Operators, agents, Employees , entertainers, performers, patrons,
spectators, and Persons on the Premises of the Commercial Establishment
subject hereto.



   86.10(K)   There is a direct relationship between the display or
depiction of Specified Anatomical Areas as defined in this Code and an
increase in criminal activities, and disturbances of the peace and good order
of the community, and the occurrence of these activities is hazardous to the
health and safety of those Persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the
value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as
a whole. These secondary effects are adverse to the public’s interest and
quality of life, tone of commerce, and total community Environment in the
City.



   86.10(L)   When the activities described in subsections 86.10(A) and
86.10(B) take place in Establishments within the City, other activities that
are illegal or unhealthy tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and
be aggravated by them. Such other activities include but are not limited to
prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior,
possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or
possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against Persons and
property.



   86.10(M)   When the activities described in subsections 86.10(A) and
86.10(B) are present in Establishments within the City, they tend to blight
neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring Businesses , lower property
values, foster an atmosphere that promotes crime, and ultimately lead
residents and businesses to move to other locations.



   86.10(N)   Physical contact within Establishments at which the
activities described in subsection 86.10(A) and 86.10(B) occur between
Employees exhibiting Specified Anatomical Areas and Customers poses a threat
to the health of both and may lead to the spread of communicable, infectious,
and social diseases.



   86.10(O)   To preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the City, it is necessary and advisable for the City
to regulate the conduct of Owners , managers, Operators, agents, Employees ,
entertainers, performers, and customers at Establishments where the
activities described in subsections 86.10(A) and 86.10(B) occur.



   86.10(P)   The potential dangers to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the City from the activities described in
subsections 86.10(A) and 86.10(B) occurring at Establishments without first
obtaining a license under this subchapter are so great as to require the
licensure of such Establishments before they are permitted to operate.



   86.10(Q)   “Lap Dancing” does not contain an element of
communication, and is therefore conduct rather than expression.



   86.10(R)   “Lap Dancing” in Establishments poses a threat to the
health of the participants and promotes the spread of communicable,
infectious, and social diseases.



   86.10(S)   Sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for
unlawful and unhealthy sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual
liaison of a casual nature.



   86.10(T)   The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a
legitimate health concern of the City that demands reasonable regulation of
sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of
the citizens.



   86.10(U)   The prevention of sexual contact between patrons and
Employees at Adult Dancing Establishments is unrelated to the suppression of
free expression but serves to address the concerns raised in the findings
contained herein. Although the dancer’s erotic message may be slightly less
effective from four feet away, the ability to engage in the protected
expression is not significantly impaired.



   86.10(V)   Separating dancers from patrons and prohibiting dancers
and patrons from engaging in sexual fondling and caressing in Adult Dancing
Establishments would reduce the opportunity for prostitution transactions and
thus should deter prostitution.



   86.10(W)   To preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the City, it is necessary and advisable for the City
to obtain sufficient information regarding the Owners of Establishments where
the activities described in subsections 86.10(A) and 86.10(B) occur in order
to preclude the involvement of organized crime.



   86.10(X)   Requiring sufficient lighting in Adult Theaters advances
the substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary
sexual activity occurring at Adult Theaters.



   86.10(Y)   Requiring that the facilities of Adult Theaters be
constructed of materials that are easily cleanable, that the facilities be
cleaned on a regular basis, and that the Employees cleaning the facilities
take reasonable precautions to avoid contact with possible disease
transmitting media is reasonably related to the protection of both Employees
and patrons from sexually transmitted diseases.



   86.10(Z)   Licensing is a legitimate, reasonable means of
accountability to ensure that Operators of sexually oriented businesses
comply with the reasonable regulations within this subchapter and the
location requirements of the zoning code, and to ensure that Operators do not
knowingly allow their Establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual
activity or solicitation.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.11  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of the City Commission in enacting this subchapter to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce the adverse
secondary effects Adult Entertainment Establishments have upon the residents
of the City and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
people. A mother’s breast feeding of her baby does not under any
circumstances violate any provision of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.12  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.



   It is not the intent of the commission to legislate, limit, or conflict
with respect to matters of massage establishments that are regulated by State
agency, the Department of Professional Regulation, Board of Massage, and by
general Law, F.S. Chapter 480.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



LICENSING



§ 86.30  ZONING APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   No application for a license as provided in this part shall be approved
until the appropriate provisions of the Zoning Chapter have been complied
with, the required zoning approval obtained, and the respective zoning
official notifies the City of compliance.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.31  LICENSE GENERALLY.



   86.31(A)   No Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be allowed to
operate without first having been issued an Adult Entertainment license by
the City pursuant to this subchapter.



   86.31(B)   Adult Entertainment licenses referred to in this
subchapter shall be licenses limited to the following classifications:



   86.31(B)(1)   Adult Bookstore/Adult Novelty Store/Adult Video Store;



   86.31(B)(2)   Adult Dancing Establishment;



   86.31(B)(3)   Adult Domination and Submission Parlor;



   86.31(B)(4)   Adult Motion Picture Theater/Adult Motel;



   86.31(B)(5)   Encounter Studio/modeling studio;



   86.31(B)(6)   Massage establishment; and



   86.31(B)(7)   Any other Adult Entertainment Establishment as defined
in this Code and not otherwise prohibited.



   86.31(C)   An Adult Entertainment license for a particular Adult
Entertainment Establishment shall be limited to one classification of license.



   86.31(D)   An Adult Entertainment Establishment may hold more than
one classification of Adult Entertainment license.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.32  LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.



   86.32(A)   Filing.  A Person desiring to operate an Adult
Entertainment Establishment shall file with the City a sworn license
application on a standard application form supplied by the City.



   86.32(B)   Contents.  The application shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:



   86.32(B)(1)   If the Applicant is:



   86.32(B)(1)(a)   An individual, his or her legal name, aliases, and
date of birth, driver’s license number or a state or federally issued
identification card number;



   86.32(B)(1)(b)   A partnership, the full and complete name of the
partners, dates of birth, driver’s license numbers or state or federally
issued identification card numbers of all partners, and all aliases used by
all of the partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and, if
in existence, a copy of the partnership agreement; or



   86.32(B)(1)(c)   A corporation, the exact and complete corporate
name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing, the legal names and dates of birth, driver’s license numbers or
state or federally issued identification card numbers of all officers,
directors and Principal Stockholders, and all aliases used, the capacity of
all officers, directors, and Principal Stockholders, and, if applicable, the
name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered
office for service of process.



   86.32(B)(2)   The application shall list the current local and legal
domiciliary residential addresses of the Principal Stockholders of the
corporation; for purposes of this subsection, Principal Stockholders are
natural Persons and not corporate or other legal entities; when the Principal
Stockholders is a corporate or other legal entity, the application must trace
back the ownership through layers of corporate organization to the eventual
Principal Stockholder who is a natural Person.



   86.32(B)(3)   If the Applicant intends to conduct business under a
name other than that of the Applicant , the Applicant shall state the
Establishment ’s fictitious name and the county of registration under F.S.
§ 865.09, all legal names, dates of birth, addresses and all aliases used by
all Interested Persons.



   86.32(B)(4)   Whether the Applicant , or other individuals listed
pursuant to subsection 86.32(B)(1) above, has within the five-year period
immediately preceding the date of the application, ever been convicted of a
Specified Criminal Act and, if so, the Specified Criminal Act involved, the
date of conviction, and the place of conviction.



   86.32(B)(5)(a)   Whether the Applicant , or other individuals listed
pursuant to subsection 86.32(B)(1) above, has had a previous license issued
under this Code suspended or revoked, or by court order, been required to
cease operation, including the name and location of the Establishment for
which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the
suspension or revocation; and



   86.32(B)(5)(b)   Whether the Applicant , or any other individuals
listed pursuant to subsection 86.32(B) above, has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or Principal Stockholders of a
corporation whose license issued under this Code has previously been
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the Establishment
for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the
suspension or revocation.



   86.32(B)(6)   Whether the Applicant , or other individuals listed
pursuant to subsection 86.32(B)(1) above, holds other licenses under this
Code and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
Establishments.



   86.32(B)(7)   The single classification of license for which the
Applicant is filing and the general nature of adult Use for which the
Applicant is seeking a license, including a statement concerning the degree
to which the anticipated activities at the Adult Entertainment Establishment
meet the enumerated adult use classifications set forth within this Chapter;
such a characterization shall serve as an initial basis for the permitted
activities allowed under the license issued as well as a basis for the fee
charged.



   86.32(B)(8)   The location of the proposed Establishment , including
a legal description of the property site, and a legal Street address.



   86.32(B)(9)   The names of all Employees , dates of birth, and
aliases used for the proposed Establishment , if known, or, if currently
unknown, a statement to that effect.



   86.32(B)(10)   The Applicant ’s mailing address, residential
address and residential telephone number (if any).



   86.32(B)(11)   A sealed survey drawn to appropriate scale of the
proposed Establishment showing all property lines, Rights-Of-Way , and the
location of Buildings , parking areas and spaces, curb cuts, driveways, and
compliance with the distance and location requirements of the Code .



   86.32(B)(12)   A floor plan drawn to appropriate scale of the
proposed Establishment indicating, but not limited to:



   86.32(B)(12)(a)   All windows, all doors, all entrances and exits.



   86.32(B)(12)(b)   Proposed seating arrangement.



   86.32(B)(12)(c)   All fixed structural interior features, including
but not limited to doors, aisles, walls, stages, partitions, stands,
counters, platforms, and similar Structures.



   86.32(B)(12)(d)   All proposed improvements or enlargements to be
made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of
increase in floor size.



   86.32(B)(13)   A copy of the application for the zoning certificate
of use.



   86.32(B)(14)   The name, address and phone number of the Person whom
the Building and permitting division should contact to schedule the
inspection.



   86.32(B)(15)   The phone number and address of the existing or
proposed Establishment .



   86.32(B)(16)   The name, phone number and address of the manager.



   86.32(B)(17)   A notarized, signed, and sworn statement that the
information within the application is truthful, independently verifiable, and
complete and that the photocopies of the attached driver’s licenses or
state or federally issued identification cards are true and correct copies of
the originals.



   86.32(C)   Copies.



   86.32(C)(1)   In addition to the requirement of (B) above, the
Applicant shall supply a minimum of five copies of the application, or more
as may be required, to the City.



   86.32(C)(2)   An application shall not be considered complete until
the application satisfies the requirements of (B) and (C)(1) above.



   86.32(D)   Application fee.  Each application shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee to be set by resolution of the City Commission to
defray the costs of processing and investigation of the application. If the
application for a license is approved and a license is granted, half of the
application fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual license fee
required for the first year pursuant to § 86.35(F).



   86.32(E)   Rejection of application.  In the event the City
determines that the Applicant has not satisfied the application requirements
for a proposed Establishment, the Applicant shall be notified of such fact
within the time frame specified herein with a detailed list of reasons; and
the application shall be denied.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.33  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   Upon receipt of an application filed properly with the City and upon
payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the City shall promptly conduct
an investigation of the Applicant and the proposed Establishment . At the
conclusion of the investigation, the City Commission shall either approve or
deny the application. The City Commission shall deny an application if it
finds that the proposed Establishment will be in violation of a provision of
this Chapter or of any Building , fire, or zoning code, statute, ordinance,
or regulation. If the application fails to satisfy this Code or any Building
, fire or zoning code, statute, ordinance, or regulation, the City Commission
shall state specifically its reasons within its resolution of denial.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.34  APPLICATION REVIEW AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   86.34(A)   The City Manager shall conduct and complete an
investigation of the application and present the findings to the City
Commission within 30 days after the City deems the application to be
complete. The City Commission shall either approve or deny the application.
If the Applicant has satisfied the requirements of this Code, the City shall
notify the Applicant and issue the license to the Applicant upon payment of
the appropriate annual license fee provided in § 86.35(F), with credit as
provided in § 86.32(D).



   86.34(B)   The City shall deny the application if:



   86.34(B)(1)   The application violates or fails to meet the
provisions of this Code, any Building , fire or zoning code, statute,
ordinance, or regulation;



   86.34(B)(2)   The application contains material false information,
or information material to the decision was omitted; failure to list an
individual required to be listed, and whose listing would result in a denial,
is presumed to be material false information for purposes of denial of the
application; the certification that the licensee owns, possesses, operates
and exercises control over the proposed or existing Adult UseEstablishment is
a material representation for purposes of this Section;



   86.34(B)(3)   The Applicant , or other individuals listed pursuant
to § 86.37, has a license under this Code, or has had a license under this
Code which has been suspended or revoked;



   86.34(B)(4)   The granting of the application would violate a
statute or ordinance, or an order from a court of law that prohibits
effectively the Applicant from obtaining an Adult Entertainment license; or



   86.34(B)(5)   An Applicant , or any other individual required to be
listed, has been convicted of a Specified Criminal Act:



   86.34(B)(5)(a)   For which:



   86.34(B)(5)(a)1.   Less than two Years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense; or



   86.34(B)(5)(a)2.   Less than five Years has elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or



   86.34(B)(5)(a)3.   Less than five Years has elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or
more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.



   86.34(B)(5)(b)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the disqualification of the Applicant .



   86.34(B)(5)(c)   An Applicant who has been convicted of a Specified
Criminal Act may qualify for an Adult Entertainment Establishment license
only when the time period set forth above has elapsed or if his or her civil
rights have been restored.



   86.34(C)   If a Person applies for a license at a particular
location within a period of one Year from the date of denial of a previous
application for a license at the location, and there has not been an
intervening change in the circumstances material to the decision regarding
the former reason(s) for denial, the application shall not be accepted for
consideration.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.35  LICENSE FORM, TERM, AND RENEWAL.



   86.35(A)   Contents.  An Adult Entertainment license shall state on
its face the name of the licensee, the business name, local residential and
legal domiciliary residential address of the licensee, the name of the
Establishment, the Street address of the Establishment, the classification of
the license, a 24-hour working phone number, the date of issuance, and the
date of expiration.



   86.35(B)   Term.  All licenses issued under this subchapter shall
be annual licenses that shall commence running on October 1, on which date
they shall have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the
following year. If a license is issued after October 1, but prior to March 31
of the following year, the Applicant shall pay the prorated license fee. If a
license is issued after March 31, but prior to October 1 of the same year,
the Applicant shall pay one-half the appropriate license fee.



   86.35(C)   Renewal.  Licenses shall be entitled to renewal annually
subject to the provisions of this subchapter. Before the October 1 expiration
date, the annual license may be renewed by presenting the license for the
previous year, by paying the appropriate license fee, and by updating the
information supplied with the latest application or certifying that the
information supplied previously remains unchanged.



   86.35(D)   Expiration.  A license shall expire for failure to
obtain a renewal pursuant to this subchapter by September 30. An expired
license may be renewed no later than November 30 of the same year upon:



   86.35(D)(1)   The submission of an affidavit stating that the
Establishment has not been operated as an Adult Entertainment Establishment
from the date of expiration of the license;



   86.35(D)(2)   The payment of the appropriate license fee; and



   86.35(D)(3)   Payment of a penalty of 10% of the appropriate license
fee for the month of October and if renewed after October 31, an additional
penalty of 5% of the appropriate license fee for the month of November.



   86.35(E)   Cancellation.  All licenses not renewed by November 30
shall be deemed expired and unavailable for renewal by the City unless such
license is involved in litigation. The Applicant may reapply for an Adult
Entertainment license. Upon the payment of the application fee, satisfaction
of the application requirements, and payment of the license fee, operation of
the Adult Entertainment Establishment may continue.



   86.35(F)   Annual license fees.  The annual license fees under this
subchapter for an Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be set by
resolution of the Commission.



   86.35(G)   Collection of fees.  The City shall be responsible for
the collection of the application and annual license fees pursuant to this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.36  LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.



   86.36(A)   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to
another Person, or thereby surrender possession, control, or operation of the
licensed Establishment to such other Person.



   86.36(B)   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to
another location.



   86.36(C)   An attempted transfer of a license either directly or
indirectly in violation of this Section is hereby declared void, and in that
event the license shall be deemed abandoned, and the license shall be
forfeited.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.37  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   86.37(A)   Suspension.



   86.37(A)(1)   Violation of regulations.  In the event a licensed
Adult Entertainment Establishment is operating in violation of a Building,
fire, or zoning code, statute, ordinance, or regulation, whether federal,
State, or local, or the respective requirements of §§ 86.50 et seq., the
City shall notify the licensee of the violation. The licensee shall have ten
business days in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to
correct the violation within ten business days, the City shall schedule a
hearing before the Special Magistrate. If the Special Magistrate determines
that a licensed Establishment is in violation of a Building, fire, or zoning
statute, code, ordinance, or regulation, whether federal, State, or local, or
the respective general requirements of § 86.50, the City shall suspend the
license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall
remain in effect until the Code violation in question has been corrected.
Nothing in this Section shall take away other enforcement powers of the
Special Magistrate or any other agency provided by the Code or statute.



   86.37(A)(2)   Illegal transfer.  If a license is transferred
contrary to § 86.36, the City shall suspend the license and notify the
licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until all
of the requirements of this Section have been satisfied and a new license has
been issued by the City.



   86.37(A)(3)   Violations of §§ 86.50 et seq. and §§ 86.60 et seq.



   86.37(A)(3)(a)   In the event two or more convictions for violations
of the rules and regulations within §§ 86.50 et seq. and §§ 86.60 et seq.
or of any health code, statute, or regulation occur within a two-Year period,
the City shall, upon notification of the date of the second conviction,
suspend the license and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension
shall remain in effect for a period of 60 days.



   86.37(A)(3)(b)   In the event one or more convictions for violations
of the rules and regulations of §§ 86.50 et seq. and §§ 86.60 et seq. or
of any health code, statute, or regulation occur within a period of two Years
from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which
the license was suspended for 60 days under subsection 86.37(A)(3)(a) above,
the City shall, upon notification of the date of the first conviction,
suspend the license again and notify the licensee of the suspension. The time
during which the license was suspended for 60 days shall not be included
within the two-Year period. The suspension shall remain in effect for a
period of 90 days.



   86.37(A)(3)(c)   In the event one or more convictions for violations
of a rule or regulation of §§ 86.50 et seq. and §§ 86.60 et seq. or of
any health code, statute, or regulation occur within a period of two Years
from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which
the license was suspended for 90 days under (b), the City shall, upon
notification of the date of the first conviction, suspend the license again
and notify the licensee of the suspension. The time during which the license
was suspended for 90 days shall not be included within the two-Year period.
The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of 180 days.



   86.37(A)(3)(d)   The renewal of, or new application for, a license
pursuant to this subchapter shall not defeat the terms of this Section.



   86.37(A)(4)   Effect of suspension.  If a license is suspended, all
operations within the Adult Entertainment Establishment shall cease for the
period of the suspension, and the license shall be suspended for the
suspension period. The Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco shall be
notified of the suspension, and no other Person shall be allowed to operate
an Adult Entertainment Establishment at that location for a period of six
months.



   86.37(A)(5)   Effective date of suspension.  All periods of
suspension shall begin 15 days, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays,
after the date the City mails the notice of suspension to the licensee or on
the date the licensee surrenders his or her license to the City, whichever
occurs first.



   86.37(B)   Revocation.



   86.37(B)(1)   False information.  In the event it is learned or
found, or upon sufficient cause that a license was granted based upon false
information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact by the licensee or
his or her agent, the City shall notify the licensee in writing of the
City’s intent to revoke the license. The licensee shall have ten days from
the date of receipt of the notification to request a hearing. The hearing
shall be scheduled before the Special Magistrate. If the licensee does not
request a hearing, the license shall be considered revoked ten days after the
receipt of the notification. If the licensee does request a hearing, the
license shall remain in effect during the pendency of the action before the
Special Magistrate.



   86.37(B)(2)   Convictions for violations of §§ 86.50 et seq. and
§§ 86.60 et seq.  In the event one or more convictions for violations of
§§ 86.50 et seq. and §§ 86.60 et seq. or of any health code, statute, or
regulation occur within a period of two Years from the date of the violation
from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for a
period of 180 days pursuant to subsection 86.37(A)(4), the City shall
forthwith revoke the license and notify the licensee of the revocation. The
time during which the license was suspended for 180 days shall not be
included within the two-Year period.



   86.37(B)(3)   Effect of revocation.  If a license is revoked, the
licensee shall not be allowed to obtain another Adult Entertainment license
for a period of two Years, and no license shall be issued during that time
period to another Person for the location and Premises upon which the Adult
Entertainment Establishment was situated.



   86.37(B)(4)   Effective date.  The revocation shall take effect 15
days, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, after the date the City
mails the notice of revocation to the licensee or on the date the licensee
surrenders his or her license to the City, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.38  NAME CHANGES.



   No licensee may change the name of an Adult Entertainment Establishment
unless and until he or she satisfies all of the following requirements:



   86.38(A)   Provides City with 30 days’ notice in writing of the
proposed name change;



   86.38(B)   Pays to the City a change-name fee to be set by
resolution of the Commission; and



   86.38(C)   Complies with F.S. § 865.09, the Florida Fictitious Name
Statute.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.39  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   86.39(A)   Each licensee shall keep such records and make such
reports as may be required by the City and the agencies to implement this
Code and to carry out its purpose.



   86.39(B)   By holding a license under this subchapter, the licensee
shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this subchapter and to
the exercise by the applicable agencies of their respective responsibilities
under this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



REGULATIONS



§ 86.50  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Each Adult Entertainment Establishment shall, regardless of whether it
is licensed, observe the following general requirements:



   86.50(A)   Conform to all applicable Building statutes, codes,
ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, State, or local;



   86.50(B)   Conform to all applicable fire statutes, codes,
ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, State, or local;



   86.50(C)   Confirm to all applicable health statutes, codes,
ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, State, or local;



   86.50(D)   Conform to all applicable zoning regulations and land Use
Laws, whether State or local, including but not limited to the City Zoning
Chapter (location restrictions);



   86.50(E)   Keep the original of the Adult Entertainment license
posted in a conspicuous place at the Establishment at all times, which
license shall be available for inspection upon request at all times by the
public;



   86.50(F)   Opaquely cover each nonopaque area through which a Person
outside the Establishment may otherwise see inside the Establishment ;



   86.50(G)   Maintain a continuously updated compilation of the
required records.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.51  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   86.51(A)   No Person or Employee shall expose to public view his or
her Specified Anatomical Areas , or simulation thereof, in an Establishment
selling, serving, or allowing the consumption of Alcoholic Beverages .



   86.51(B)   No Person maintaining, owning or operating an
Establishment selling, serving, or allowing the consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages shall allow a Person or Employee to expose to public view his or
her Specified Anatomical Areas , or simulation thereof, within the
Establishment .



   86.51(C)   No Person maintaining, owning, or operating an
Establishment selling, serving, or allowing the consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages shall allow the exposure to public view of Specified Anatomical
Areas , or the simulation thereof, within the Establishment .



   86.51(D)   No Person shall cause and no Person maintaining, owning,
or operating an Establishment selling, serving, or allowing the consumption
of Alcoholic Beverages shall allow the exposition of graphic representation,
including pictures or projection of film, which depicts Specified Anatomical
Areas engaged in Specified Sexual Activities , or other sexual acts
prohibited by Law, or simulation thereof, within the Establishment .



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.52  SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS.



   86.52(A)   Adult Theaters.  In addition to the general requirements
for an Adult Entertainment Establishment contained in § 86.50 and §
86.51(A), an Adult Theater shall, regardless of whether it is licensed,
observe the following special requirements:



   86.52(A)(1)   Halls or auditoriums.  If the Adult Theater contains
a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following
provisions:



   86.52(A)(1)(a)   It shall have individual or separate seats, not
couches, benches, beds, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of
Persons who may occupy the area.



   86.52(A)(1)(b)   It shall have a continuous main aisle alongside of
the seating areas in order that each Person seated in the areas shall be
visible from the aisle at all times.



   86.52(A)(1)(c)   It shall have a Sign posted in a conspicuous place
at or near each entrance way to the hall or auditorium area listing the
maximum number of Persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which
number shall not exceed the number of seats within the auditorium area.



   86.52(A)(1)(d)   Premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one Footcandle as
measured at floor level.



   86.52(A)(1)(e)   It shall be the duty of the licensee, the Owners ,
and Operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and Employees
present on the Premises to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times that any patron is present on the Premises.



   86.52(A)(1)(f)   It shall have posted an AIDS crisis Sign visible to
all patrons on the side of the door that opens and allows patrons to enter
the theater.



   86.52(A)(2)   Refurbishing of Adult Theaters.



   86.52(A)(2)(a)   Each Adult Theater subject to this subchapter shall
cover the floor of areas accessible to patrons with smooth and nonpermeable
flooring material which can withstand frequent effective cleaning in
accordance with subsection 86.52(A)(3)(c). Carpeting of any type is
prohibited.



   86.52(A)(2)(b)   Each Adult Theater subject to this subchapter shall
use smooth and non-permeable upholstery material which can withstand frequent
cleaning in accordance with subsection 86.52(A)(3)(c) below to cover
furniture permitted by this subchapter for use of patrons.



   86.52(A)(2)(c)   Each Adult Theater subject to this subchapter shall
have, in areas accessible to patrons, interior wall surfaces which can
withstand frequent cleaning in accordance with subsection 86.52(A)(3)(c)
below.



   86.52(A)(2)(d)   Each Adult Theater subject to this subchapter shall
use only those shades, blinds, and vertical blinds which can withstand
frequent cleaning in accordance with subsection 86.52(A)(3)(c) below.
Draperies are prohibited.



   86.52(A)(3)   Sanitation.



   86.52(A)(3)(a)   All areas of each Adult Theater subject to this
subchapter which are accessible to patrons shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition. The surfaces of all floors, furniture, counter tops,
shades, blinds, vertical blinds, doors and walls of areas accessible to
patrons shall be cleaned in accordance with subsection 86.52(A)(3)(c) below.



   86.52(A)(3)(b)   All floors, furniture, counter tops, shades,
blinds, vertical blinds, doors and walls of areas accessible to patrons of
Adult Theaters subject to this subchapter shall be renovated or be replaced
as needed. All furniture must be kept free from holes and rips.



   86.52(A)(3)(c)   Any individual cleaning or sanitizing of the areas
accessible to patrons shall be accomplished a minimum of one time each 24
hours with a 1:10 bleach solution (one part bleach to ten parts water), mixed
daily, as recommended by the U.S. Center for Disease Control as a precaution
for the prevention of transmission of the HIV virus and other diseases. A
copy of the approved procedure shall be kept on file at the Adult Theater and
a copy shall be provided to each Person cleaning or sanitizing the areas
accessible to the patrons. Each such individual shall certify that he or she
has read and understood the procedure. The signed copy shall be kept as a
part of the records of the Adult Theater, and open for inspection by the
applicable agencies.



   86.52(B)   Adult Dancing Establishment.  In addition to the general
requirements for an Adult Entertainment Establishment contained in § 86.50
and in (A) above, an Adult Dancing Establishment shall, regardless of whether
it is licensed, observe the following special requirements:



   86.52(B)(1)   It shall have a stage provided for the display or
exposure of Specified Anatomical Areas by an Employee to a Person other than
another Employee consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar
permanent structure) raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding
floor and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet; and



   86.52(B)(2)   The exposure by an Employee of Specified Anatomical
Areas , or simulation thereof, to public view shall be restricted to the
stage required in (1) above; and nonemployees or patrons shall not be allowed
closer than four feet to the stage edge when an Employee exposes those
anatomical areas;



   86.52(B)(3)   The Adult Entertainment Establishment shall provide
two security Officers consisting of sworn LawEnforcement Officers or
identified security personnel if the occupant capacity is less than or equal
to 150 Persons, and an additional sworn LawEnforcement Officer or identified
security personnel for each additional increase of occupant capacity of 100
Persons. The security Officers or personnel shall be granted unfettered
access to all parts of the Adult Entertainment Establishment in order to
monitor the interior and exterior of the Adult Entertainment Establishment ;
and



   86.52(B)(4)   The Adult Entertainment Establishment shall check
identification at the door to ensure that minors do not enter; and



   86.52(B)(5)   An area in which a Private Performance occurs shall:



   86.52(B)(5)(a)   Have a permanently open entrance way not less than
seven feet wide and not less than seven feet high, which entrance way will
never be closed or partially closed by a curtain, door, or other partition
which would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring a Person situated in
the area; and



   86.52(B)(5)(b)   Have a wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling partition of
solid Construction without holes or openings, which partition may be
completely or partially transparent and which partition separates the
Employee from the Person viewing the display;



   86.52(B)(5)(c)   Have, except for the entrance way, walls or
partitions of solid construction without holes or openings in such walls or
partitions; and



   86.52(B)(5)(d)   The Private Performance area shall be at least 100
square feet in size.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS



§ 86.60  OPERATING WITHOUT A LICENSE.



   It shall be unlawful for a Person to operate or participate in the
operation of an Adult Entertainment Establishment when the Person knows or
should know:



   86.60(A)   That the Establishment does not have an Adult
Entertainment license for the applicable classification;



   86.60(B)   That the Establishment has a license that is under
suspension;



   86.60(C)   That the Establishment has a license that has been
revoked or canceled; or



   86.60(D)   That the Establishment has a license that has expired.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.61  OPERATING IN VIOLATION OF REQUIREMENTS.



   86.61(A)   It shall be unlawful for a Person to be an Operator of an
Adult Entertainment Establishment that does not satisfy all of the general
requirements of §§ 86.50 et seq.



   86.61(B)   It shall be unlawful for a Person to be an Operator of an
Adult Theater that does not satisfy all of the special requirements of §
86.52(A).



   86.61(C)   It shall be unlawful for a Person to be an Operator of an
Adult Dancing Establishment that does not satisfy all of the special
requirements of § 86.52(B).



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.62  ALLOWING EMPLOYEE TO ENGAGE IN PROHIBITED ACTS.



   It shall be unlawful for an Operator of an Adult Entertainment
Establishment , regardless of whether it is licensed under this subchapter,
to knowingly, or with reason to know, allow an Employee:



   86.62(A)   To engage in a Lap Dance with a Person at the
Establishment ;



   86.62(B)   To contract or otherwise agree with a Person to engage in
a Lap Dance with a Person at the Establishment ;



   86.62(C)   To contract or otherwise agree with a Person to engage in
specified sexual activity at the Establishment ;



   86.62(D)   To display or expose Specified Anatomical Area unless
while simulating specified sexual activity with another Person at the
Establishment , including with another Employee;



   86.62(E)   To allow a Person, excluding another Employee, to touch a
portion of the clothed or unclothed body of the Employee below the neck and
above the knee, excluding that part of the Employee’s arm below the wrist,
referred to as the hand;



   86.62(F)   To engage in a Private Performance unless such Employee
is in an area that complies with the special requirements of §§ 86.50 et
seq.; or



   86.62(G)   To intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of a
Person at the Adult Entertainment Establishment , excluding another Employee,
at a point below the neck and above the knee of the Person, excluding that
part of the Person’s arm below the wrist, referred to as the hand.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.63  ADVERTISING PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.



   It shall be unlawful for an Operator of an Adult Entertainment
Establishment , regardless of whether it is licensed under this Code, to
advertise the presentation of an activity prohibited by an applicable State
statute or local ordinance.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.64  SPECIFIED CRIMINAL OFFENSE.



   It shall be a violation of this subchapter if the licensee is convicted
or is adjudged guilty of a Specified Criminal Offense for activities that
occurred at the Establishment , or if it has been determined that Specified
Criminal Offenses have occurred at the licensed Premises.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.65  MINORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for an Operator of an Adult Entertainment
Establishment , regardless of whether it is licensed under this subchapter,
to knowingly, or with reason to know, allow:



   86.65(A)   Admittance to the Establishment of a Person under 18
years of age;



   86.65(B)   A Person under 18 years of age to remain at the
Establishment ;



   86.65(C)   A Person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or
services at the Establishment ; or



   86.65(D)   A Person to work at the Establishment as an Employee who
is under 18 years of age.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.66  WORKING AT UNLICENSED ESTABLISHMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for a Person to work in an Adult Entertainment
Establishment which he or she knows or should know is not licensed under this
Code, or that has a license which is suspended, revoked, canceled, or expired.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.67  ENGAGING IN PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.



   It shall be unlawful for an Employee of an Adult Entertainment
Establishment , regardless of whether it is licensed under this subchapter:



   86.67(A)   To engage in a Lap Dance with a Person at the
Establishment ;



   86.67(B)   To contract or otherwise agree with a Person to engage in
a Lap Dance with a Person at the Establishment ;



   86.67(C)   To engage in Specified Sexual Activity at the
Establishment ;



   86.67(D)   To display or expose at the Establishment less than
completely and opaquely covered a Specified Anatomical Area unless such
Employee is continuously positioned away from a Person other than another
Employee, and unless such Employee is in an area as described in § 86.52(B);



   86.67(E)   To engage in the display or exposure of a Specified
Anatomical Area unless while simulating a specified sexual activity with
another Person at the Establishment , including with another Employee;



   86.67(F)   To engage in a Private Performance unless such Employee
is in an area which complies with the special requirements set forth in §
86.52(B);



   86.67(G)   To intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of a
Person at the Adult Entertainment Establishment , excluding another Employee,
at a point below the neck and above the knee of the Person, excluding that
part of the Person’s arm below the wrist, referred to as the hand; or



   86.67(H)   To allow a Person, excluding another Employee, to touch a
portion of the clothed or unclothed body of the Employee below the neck and
above the knee, excluding that part of the Employee’s arm below the wrist,
referred to as the hand.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.68  TOUCHING OF EMPLOYEE BY NONEMPLOYEE.



   It shall be unlawful for a Person in an Adult Entertainment
Establishment , other than another Employee, to intentionally touch the
unclothed or clothed body of an Employee at a point below the neck and above
the knee of the Employee, excluding that part of the Employee’s arm below
the wrist, referred to as the hand.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.69  ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATERS, ADULT BOOTHS, AND OUTDOOR
ADULT THEATERS PROHIBITED.



   Adult Mini Motion Picture Theaters, Adult Booths, and Outdoor Adult
Theaters are hereby prohibited within the City.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.70  USE OF REST ROOMS OR DRESSING ROOMS.



   86.70(A)   Notwithstanding a provision to the contrary, it shall not
be unlawful for an Employee of an Adult Entertainment Establishment ,
regardless of whether it is licensed under this subchapter, to expose a
Specified Anatomical Area unless during the Employee’s bona fide Use of a
rest room, or during the Employee’s bona fide Use of a dressing room, which
is accessible only and restricted to Employees .



   86.70(B)   The restrictions of §§ 86.50 et seq. and §§ 86.60 et
seq., including but not limited to §§ 86.62, 86.67, 86.68 and 86.34, also
apply to all rest rooms and dressing rooms.



   86.70(C)   Notwithstanding a provision to the contrary, it shall not
be deemed unlawful for a Person to expose a Specified Anatomical Area unless
during that Person’s bona fide Use of a rest room.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 86.71  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   86.71(A)   It shall be unlawful for an Operator of an Adult
Entertainment Establishment to allow such Establishment to remain open for
business, or to allow an Employee to engage in a performance, solicit a
performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a
service, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on all days.



   86.71(B)   It shall be unlawful for an Employee of an Adult
Entertainment Establishment to engage in a performance, solicit a
performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a
service, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on all days.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§§ 86.72 THROUGH 86.79  RESERVED.



§ 86.80  NOTICES.



   A notice required under this subchapter shall be accomplished by
sending a written notification by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the mailing address set forth on the application for the license. This
mailing address shall be considered the correct mailing address unless the
Business Tax Receipt Coordinator has been otherwise notified in writing by
certified mail, return receipt requested, by the licensee of the new address.
The licensee shall have the burden of proving the Business Tax Receipt
Coordinator received the new address.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 87: PAY TELEPHONES



Section



   87.01   Pay telephones



§ 87.01  PAY TELEPHONES.



   No Pay Telephones shall be placed, installed or maintained on any
Public Rights-Of-Way within the City. The only Pay Telephones that may be
placed, installed or maintained within the City shall be located on Private
Property within two feet of a Building or structure or inside such Building
or Structure , unless a variance is obtained pursuant to §§ 124.80 et seq.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may permit Pay Telephones to be
placed, installed or maintained at any locations at municipally owned
facilities.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 88: PRIVATE DETECTIVES AND CRIMINAL INVESTIGATORS



Section



   88.01   Private detectives and criminal investigators



§ 88.01  PRIVATE DETECTIVES AND CRIMINAL INVESTIGATORS.



   88.01(A)   All private detectives or criminal investigators
maintaining a physical office in the City are required to obtain a Business
Tax Receipt .



   88.01(B)   In addition to the above requirements, the following
prohibitions shall apply to any Person licensed by the Florida Secretary of
State pursuant to F.S. Chapter 493 to operate under a Class “B” or Class
“D” license:



   88.01(B)(1)   A receipt holder shall not use any designation or
trade name which implies or gives an impression that such Person is
associated with any Police Department, including but not limited to using the
word “police” or “Weston police” or “BSO” or “Broward
Sheriff’s Office” or any official seal or facsimile thereof of the City,
Broward County or State on badges, cap shields, patches, automobiles, decals,
or advertisements within the City.



   88.01(B)(2)   Receipt holders shall not utilize uniforms or badges
capable of being associated or confused with or of the same color and with
similar insignia to the official uniforms of any Police Department.



   88.01(C)   Provisions of this Section shall not apply to any police
Officer of the City when performing duties approved by his or her superiors.



   88.01(D)   Any violations of this Section may be punished up to the
maximum penalty provided in this Code.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 89: MOBILE VENDING



Section



   89.01   Mobile vendors permitted



   89.02   Mobile vendor regulations for cooking operations



   89.03   Prohibitions on mobile vendors



   89.04   Refueling from tank vehicles



§ 89.01  MOBILE VENDORS PERMITTED.



   Mobile Vendors shall only be permitted as follows:



   89.01(A)   Construction site.  Upon invitation from the property
Owner, a Mobile Vendor may visit any duly permitted Construction site during
working hours. The time of stay of said Mobile Vendor shall not exceed more
than one hour per visit to the property and may not exceed two visits to the
site per day.



   89.01(B)   Commercial Establishment.  Any Commercial Establishment
with a valid Business Tax Receipt may allow a Mobile Vendor to enter upon the
Private Property of said establishment for the purpose of supplying the needs
of the employees of said establishment with food, beverages, or other items
(e.g. office supplies, tools, etc.). Each visit by the Mobile Vendor shall
not exceed one hour per visit and may not exceed one visit to the property
per day.



   89.01(C)   Not-for-profit enterprises.  Not-for-profit enterprises,
such as blood banks or mobile charitable donation centers, may locate on
nonresidentially zoned property for a period not to exceed four hours. Such
uses shall be limited to a total of six visits to said property per Year.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-04, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 89.02  MOBILE VENDOR REGULATIONS FOR COOKING OPERATIONS.



   89.02(A)   Extinguisher Requirements.  All Mobile Vendors are
required to have at least one class ABC extinguisher with a minimum of a
4A40BC rating, located within 30 feet of commercial type cooking equipment. 
The extinguisher shall be fully charged (gauge indicates full) and properly
inspected and tagged by a certifying agency licensed within the State of
Florida.



   89.02(A)(1)   For cooking operations utilizing open flame grill: 
All Mobile Vendors shall have a pressurized water extinguisher, located
within 30 feet of commercial type cooking equipment, in addition to at least
one ABC extinguisher, as described above.  The pressurized water
extinguisher shall be fully charged (gauge indicates full) and properly
inspected and tagged by a certifying agency licensed within the State of
Florida.



   89.02(A)(2)   For cooking operations that produce grease-laden
vapors (fryers).  All Mobile Vendors shall have a K Class extinguisher
required for deep fat frying, located within 30 feet of commercial type
cooking equipment, in addition to at least one ABC extinguisher, as described
above. The K Class extinguisher shall be fully charged (gauge indicates full)
and properly inspected and tagged by a certifying agency licensed within the
State of Florida.  In addition to the portable extinguishers listed above
these Mobile Vendors shall have a commercial kitchen exhaust hood and duct
system with an automatic fire extinguishing system, which shall be in
compliance with the following:



      89.02(A)(2)(a)  Proof of a compliant annual hood fire
suppression system inspection report by a certifying agency licensed within
the State of Florida.



      89.02(A)(2)(b)  Fire suppression systems properly tagged.



      89.02(A)(2)(c)  Proof of a six month recent hood cleaning report.



      89.02(A)(2)(d)  Properly tagged indicating hood system has been
cleaned.



      89.02(A)(2)(e)  Automatic Fire Suppression System and components
are in compliant working order.



   89.02(B)   Compressed Gas.  LP/Propane cylinders, hose connections,
and couplings used for appliances shall be in place on the day of the event
for a visual inspection by a fire inspector.  LP/Propane cylinders shall be
properly secured and shall be located at a minimum of 10 feet from open flame
cooking devices, trash, or combustible material.



   89.02(C)   Emergency Access.  The placement of the concession
operation shall not interfere with fire department access, and shall not
obstruct or interfere with fire lanes, fire hydrants, fire department
connections and exit access.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 89.03  PROHIBITIONS ON MOBILE VENDORS.



   Mobile Vendors shall not:



   89.03(A)   Schools.  Vend within 500 feet of the grounds of any
kindergarten, nursery, elementary, middle, or high school between one hour
prior to the start of the school day and one hour after dismissal at the end
of the school day.



   89.03 (B)   Public Parks.  Vend within or on the Right-Of-Way
immediately adjacent to a Public Park, except as authorized by the City
Manager.



   89.03 (C)   Creation of hazard.  Vend in such a way as would
restrict or interfere with the ingress of the abutting property Owner or
Tenant, or create or become a public nuisance, increase Traffic congestion or
delay, or constitute a hazard to Traffic , life or property or an obstruction
to adequate access to fire, police, or sanitation services.



   89.03 (D)   Distract motorists.  Wave, flag, or motion to vehicles
on the Street.



   89.03 (E)   Attract pedestrians or vehicles.  Use bells, whistles,
music, or other sound or other audio devices while parked or stopped in order
to attract pedestrians or vehicles.



   89.03 (F)   Litter receptacle.  Vend food or beverages for
immediate consumption unless the Mobile Vendor has available for public use
its own Litter receptacle that is available for the use of its patrons.



   89.03 (G)   Prohibited items.  Vend Alcoholic Beverages, tobacco
products, pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter medications, adult products,
cigarettes, Nicotine Vaporizers, adult uses or material of a religious or
political nature.



   89.03 (H)   Litter.  Leave any location without first picking up,
removing and disposing of all Trash, materials, or Refuse remaining from
sales made by the Mobile Vendor or from the conduct of its operation.



   89.03 (I)   Placement of related items.  Allow any items relating
to the operation of the vending business to be placed anywhere other than in
or on the Mobile Vending Vehicle.



   89.03 (J)   Displays.  Set up, maintain or permit the use of any
table, crate, carton, rack or any other device to increase the selling or
display capacity of the Mobile Vending Vehicle, unless otherwise shown on an
approved site plan.



   89.03 (K)   Hazardous materials.  Allow any hazardous materials, as
defined in Florida Statutes, to be Discharged from a Mobile Vending Vehicle.



   89.03 (L)   Required licenses and permits.  Vend without holding
all required licenses and permits or without having all required safety
equipment on the Mobile Vending Vehicle, including the written approval from
the Broward County Health Department for the operation of said business.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-04, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord.
2015-19, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 89.04  REFUELING FROM TANK VEHICLES.



   89.04(A)   Permitted on Construction sites.  Refueling From Tank
Vehicles shall only be permitted to operate in the City on Construction
sites, but solely for the purpose of servicing Construction vehicles related
to the specific Construction site.



   89.04(B)   Regulations.  The following regulations shall be
applicable to Refueling From Tank Vehicle Operators:



   89.04(B)(1)   An operating telephone shall be located not less than
20 Feet nor more than 100 Feet from the fueling operation; and



   89.04(B)(2)   An operating fire extinguisher (80 B:C) shall be
located not less than 20 Feet nor more than 100 Feet from the fueling
operation; and



   89.04(B)(3)   The fueling area shall have an illumination of not
less than 3.0 Foot-Candles, when operating between the hours of dusk and dawn.



   89.04(C)   Exemption. This Section shall not apply to the Federal
government.



(Ord. 2013-04, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-11-2015)



CHAPTER 90: NEWSPAPER RACKS



Section



   90.01   Newspaper racks



§ 90.01  NEWSPAPER RACKS.



   90.01(A)   Purpose and criteria.  The purpose of the following is
to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of
placement, type, appearance, servicing, and insuring of Modular Newsracks on
Public and Private Rights-Of-Way so as to:



   90.01(A)(1)   Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and
convenience.



   90.01(A)(2)   Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular Traffic including ingress into or egress from any
residence or place of business, or from the Street to the Sidewalk by Persons
exiting or entering parked or Standing vehicles.



   90.01(A)(3)   Provide for public and property safety during
hurricane or severe windstorm conditions.



   90.01(A)(4)   Provide reasonable access for the Use and maintenance
of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, and mailboxes and access
to locations used for public transportation purposes.



   90.01(A)(5)   Maintain and protect the values of surrounding
properties.



   90.01(A)(6)   Reduce unnecessary exposure of the public to personal
injury or property damage.



   90.01(A)(7)   Treat all newspapers equally regardless of their size,
content, circulation, or frequency of publication.



   90.01(A)(8)   Maintain and preserve freedom of the press.



   90.01(A)(9)   Cooperate to the maximum extent possible with
newspaper distributors.



   90.01(A)(10)   Relocate and/or replace Newsracks and/or Modular
Newsracks that obstruct drivers’ sight lines, create a visual blight,
occupy excessive space on the Public Rights-Of-Way , or which unreasonably
detract from the aesthetics of store window displays and adjacent Landscaping
.



   90.01(B)   Certificate of compliance required.  No Person shall
place, affix, erect, construct, or maintain a Modular Newsrack without first
obtaining a certificate of compliance for each Modular Newsrack in accordance
with the provisions of this Section.



   90.01(C)   Application and issuance of certificate of compliance.



   90.01(C)(1)   Issuing authority.  The issuing authority and
coordinator shall be the City Manager. The City Manager is responsible for
coordinating and administering the physical placement of Modular Newsracks
herein specified.



   90.01(C)(2)   Approving authority.  The approving authority shall
be the City Manager



   90.01(C)(3)   Applications.  The Applicant shall file with the City
Manager a written application for a certificate of compliance that shall
contain the following information:



   90.01(C)(3)(a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
Applicant who is the Owner and/or principal in charge of the Modular Newsrack
.



   90.01(C)(3)(b)   The name, address, and telephone number of a
responsible Person whom the City may notify or contact at any time concerning
the Applicant ’s Modular Newsracks .



   90.01(C)(3)(c)   The number of Modular Newsracks and the proposed
location of each shown on a drawing.



   90.01(C)(3)(d)   Names of newspapers or periodicals to be contained
in each Modular Newsrack .



   90.01(C)(3)(e)   A certification that the Modular Newsracks shall be
installed in conformance with the provisions of this Section in their
entirety. More than one Modular Newsrack location may be included on a
certificate of compliance.



   90.01(C)(4)   Denial of certificate of compliance.  If a
certificate of compliance for a Modular Newsrack location is denied, the
Applicant shall be notified within five working days of the City’s receipt
of the completed application. The City Manager will suggest alternative
locations and shall advise the Applicant of the specific cause of such
denial. The Applicant may reapply for a substitute alternative location but
will not be assessed an additional Publisher’s fee, described in subsection
90.01(D) below.



   90.01(C)(5)   Additional certificate(s) of compliance.  If, at any
time after the initial application for an installation certificate of
compliance, a publisher wishes to install additional Modular Newsracks, then
subsection 90.01(C)(3) above is to be repeated in accordance with the
provisions of this Section. Additional certificate of compliance fees shall
be in accordance with subsection 90.01(D) except that the one-time
Publisher’s fee is waived if previously paid.



   90.01(D)   Fees.  The City shall charge a one-time only
Publisher’s fee for each Applicant making its first application to the City
for an installation certificate of compliance. The City shall also charge a
separate, additional one-time only certificate of compliance fee for each
Modular Newsrack location selected by that Applicant. Both the Publisher’s
fee amount and the certificate of compliance fee amount(s) shall be set by
Resolution of the City Commission. Failed inspections at the time of
installation are subject to a re-inspection fee in an amount also to be set
by Resolution of the City Commission.



   90.01(E)   Placement generally.



   90.01(E)(1)   Subject to the prohibitions set forth in subsection
90.01 (H), in areas where Sidewalks abut a curb, Modular Newsracks shall be
placed parallel to and not less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches from
the edge of the traveled Roadway or paved parking lane.



   90.01(E)(2)   Modular Newsracks placed near the wall of a Building
must be placed parallel to and not more than six inches from the wall.



   90.01(E)(3)   No Modular Newsrack shall be chained, bolted or
otherwise attached to any fixture or Tree located in the Public Right-Of-Way.



   90.01(E)(4)   Modular Newsracks may be placed next to each other,
provided that no group of Modular Newsracks shall extend for a distance of
more than 12 feet along a curb. A group of Modular Newsracks may consist of
no more than 12 pockets or compartments.



   90.01(E)(5)   Subject to the prohibitions set forth in subsection
90.01 (H), in locations where the City Manager determines there is a
potential for vehicular Traffic to become obstructed due to individuals
Stopping their vehicles to obtain Newsrack publications, an Applicant may
seek approval from the City Manager to incorporate “pull off” areas at
those locations in order to be allowed to install Modular Newsracks at such
locations. “Pull off” area means a Roadway improvement consisting of an
additional portion of paved Roadway on the side of Roadway travel lanes where
vehicles could safely pull off the adjacent travel lanes in order to Stop at
the Modular Newsracks . The City will construct and maintain each pull-off
area. The cost of initial Construction and subsequent maintenance for each
pull-off area will be borne by the City and defrayed by an annual fee to be
set by resolution of the City Commission that will apply to each such area.
The fee shall be payable annually on October 1 of each Year. Such fee for
each area shall be shared proportionally by all Applicants for that area,
based upon the number of pockets or compartments of a Newsrack that are used
by each Applicant at that pull-off area during that Year. For any pull-off
constructed and completed between October 1 and April 1 of a subsequent Year,
the full fee shall be imposed and collected by the City; for each pull-off
constructed and completed between April 1 and September 30, one-half of the
fee shall be imposed and collected by the City.



   90.01(F)   Installation and maintenance.



   90.01(F)(1)   All Modular Newsracks shall be placed on a pedestal or
platform and may not exceed 60 inches in height. The height of the handles
and coin slots shall not exceed 48 inches from the base of any Modular
Newsracks .



   90.01(F)(2)   Modular Newsracks shall carry no card holders or
advertising, but may display the name, with lettering and background of any
colors, of the newspaper being dispensed, in spaces in the locations and
sizes set forth below:



   90.01(F)(2)(a)   On the front of the Modular Newsrack , the
lettering size shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches in height. The
lettering shall be placed within a colored-band space not exceeding two and
one-half inches in height above the door hinge.



   90.01(F)(2)(b)   On the sides and back of the Modular Newsrack , the
lettering size shall not exceed two and one-half inches in height. The
lettering shall be placed within a colored-band space not exceeding four and
one-half inches in height and beginning one inch from the top of the Newsrack.



   90.01(F)(3)   Modular Newsracks for free newspapers may omit the
coin box and may have the pull bar welded to the door to produce an “honor
rack.”



   90.01(F)(4)   Modular Newsracks shall be maintained in good working
order at all times. They shall be maintained in a neat, clean condition and
must not be rusted; their paint must not be chipped, faded, peeling or
cracked. Their clear plastic or glass display windows shall be unbroken and
shall be reasonably free of cracks, dents and discoloration. The color of all
Modular Newsracks shall be forest green.



   90.01(F)(5)   Mounts shall be bolted in place through four standard
holes in the base place in accordance with standards provided in subsection
90.01 (G). Modular Newsracks cabinet tops shall be installed and checked for
level. A water-soluble, paintable, ten-year caulk of gloss brown color shall
be applied and wiped to seal around the base plate and the mounting surface.



   90.01(G)   Modular Newsrack mounting standards.  The following
standards shall be applicable to the mounting of Modular Newsracks in this
City:



   90.01(G)(1)   Foundation minimum: four-inch concrete, 2500 psi (- 28
day strength), Class 1, unless such minimum foundation already exists where a
Modular Newsrack is to be installed.



   90.01(G)(2)   Six-inch minimum concrete edge distance for bolts.



   90.01(G)(3)   Three-eighths-inch minimum diameter hot-dipped
galvanized hex bolt mounts, three-inch minimum embedment, threads down,
through four corners of the pedestal base.



   90.01(H)   Prohibitions.  No stand-alone Newsrack(s) shall be
placed, installed or maintained on any Public or Private Rights-Of-Way in the
City. The only Newsracks that may be placed, installed or maintained on any
Public or Private Rights-Of-Way in the City shall be Modular Newsracks. In
addition, the prohibitions common to all businesses within the City, as set
forth in this Code, shall apply to Modular Newsracks. No Modular Newsracks
shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained:



   90.01(H)(1)   Within 30 feet of any crosswalk.



   90.01(H)(2)   Within 30 feet of the intersection of public or
private Streets, Roadways , driveways and entryways.



   90.01(H)(3)   On the Median of a divided Street or on a similar type
landscaped or paved island in the center of a Public or Private Right-Of-Way .



   90.01(H)(4)   Within 30 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box,
police call box, or other emergency facility.



   90.01(H)(5)   Within 15 feet of any Sign marking a designated bus
stop.



   90.01(H)(6)   Within 15 feet of any bus bench, plaza bench or bus
shelter.



   90.01(H)(7)   Where any portion of a Newsrack/ Modular Newsrack is
on or within 12 inches of any area improved with Lawn or Hedges , other than
a Swale , or within three feet of flowers or Trees .



   90.01(H)(8)   Within three feet of any display window of any
Building abutting the Sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or
interfere with the reasonable Use of such window display purpose, or within
five feet of a Building entrance.



   90.01(H)(9)   On or within five feet of Street and traffic Signs ,
parking meters, Street lights, or UtilityPoles .



   90.01(H)(10)   At any location that does not provide clear width of
continuous passage of at least 36 inches in accordance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act.



   90.01(H)(11)   At any location where the City Manager determines
that placement of a Modular Newsrack is likely to cause drivers to Stop or
Park in an unsafe, obstructive position blocking either a driver’s sight
line or a Roadway .



   90.01(H)(12)   Within 1,000 feet of any other Modular Newsrack or
group of Modular Newsracks located on a Public or Private Right-Of-Way ,
except as allowed under subsection 90.01 (E)(5) above.



   90.01(I)   Enforcement.



   90.01(I)(1)   Nonconforming Newsracks.  Any Newsrack or Modular
Newsrack in violation of any provision of this Section shall be subject to
the procedures, remedies and due process under the provisions of this code
pertaining to code enforcement, as well as the following rules:



   90.01(I)(1)(a)   Upon determination by the code enforcement division
that a Newsrack or Modular Newsrack violates this Section, a notice to
correct the violation shall be issued to the responsible entity.



   90.01(I)(1)(b)   The notice to correct a violation shall
specifically describe the violation and may suggest actions necessary to cure
the violation. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail with return
receipt requested to the publishing entity or other responsible party.



   90.01(I)(1)(c)   The time period within which a violation must be
corrected shall be written on the notice to correct the violation, and that
time period may vary based on the nature of the violation.



   90.01(I)(1)(d)   Failure to correct the violation within the time
period specified on the notice to correct the violation shall result in the
removal of the nonconforming Newsrack or Modular Newsrack by the City. Upon
removal, the City shall store the Newsrack or Modular Newsrack for 90 days
and, if the fixture is not claimed during that time period and the
appropriate removal, administrative and storage fees paid, the City may
dispose of the Newsrack or Modular Newsrack in any manner deemed appropriate.



   90.01(I)(2)   Abandoned Modular Newsracks.



   90.01(I)(2)(a)   If any Modular Newsrack installed pursuant to this
Section does not contain the publication specified therefor within a period
of 48 hours after release of the current issue, Code Enforcement may deem the
Modular Newsrack abandoned and take appropriate action under this Code. In
addition, a Modular Newsrack shall be deemed abandoned when no publication is
in the Modular Newsrack for a period of more than seven consecutive days.



   90.01(I)(2)(b)   In the event a newspaper publishing company or its
distributor desires to voluntarily abandon a Modular Newsrack location, the
distributor shall notify the City Manager, completely remove the Modular
Newsrack and mount, and restore the Public Right-Of-Way to a safe condition,
leaving no holes or projections in the mounting surface.



   90.01(J)   Appeal of notice to correct violation.  In the event the
responsible entity chooses to appeal the notice to correct violation, it must
do so within the time period specified for compliance in the notice given by
the City. The appeal must be requested in writing and sent to the City
Manager in order to appear before the Special Magistrate for review of the
notice to correct violation. The appeal shall be heard by the Special
Magistrate within 30 working days of the filing of the appeal, unless the
parties mutually agree to an extension of this time period. The decision of
the Special Magistrate on appeal is subject to judicial review as provided by
the Florida Statutes. The removal of the Newsrack or Modular Newsrack alleged
to be in violation shall be stayed pending final disposition of the appeal.



   90.01(K)   Insurance and Indemnification.



   90.01(K)(1)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance
by the City, the Applicant shall submit to the City Manager a certificate of
insurance naming the City as an additional insured. The certificate of
insurance must be kept current and renewed as long as the Applicant maintains
a Modular Newsrack on Public Property within the City. Such insurance shall
be comprehensive general liability or commercial general liability coverage
on a form no more restrictive than the latest edition of the comprehensive
General Liability Policy or Commercial General liability filed by the
Insurance Service Office. Minimum limits of total coverage shall be
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence and/or aggregate combined single limit, personal
injury liability, bodily injury liability and property damage liability.
Coverage shall include the following extensions:



   90.01(K)(1)(a)   Contractual liability;



   90.01(K)(1)(b)   Products and completed operations;



   90.01(K)(1)(c)   Independent contractor’s coverage; and



   90.01(K)(1)(d)   Broad form general liability extensions or
equivalent.



   90.01(K)(2)   Comprehensive General Liability insurance, as
described in subsections 90.01(K)(1)(a) through 90.01(K)(1)(d) above, shall
include an endorsement stating the following: “Sixty (60) days advance
written notice of cancellation or non-renewal shall be sent to the City
Clerk’s Office.”



   90.01(K)(3)   Reasonable evidence of equivalent self-insurance
coverage may be substituted by the Applicant for the above certificate of
insurance, subject to the approval of the City Manager. Insurance under this
Section shall run continuously with the presence of the Applicant ’s
Newsrack in CityRights-Of-Way and any termination of lapse of such insurance
shall be a violation of this Section, subject to appropriate remedy by the
City as authorized by this Code.



   90.01(K)(4)   Every Applicant who places or maintains a Modular
Newsrack on a Public Right-Of-Way, public Sidewalk , Street or Swale in the
City, shall execute a written agreement, prepared by the City, under which it
agrees to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City, its officers, agents
and employees from any loss, liability or damage, including expenses and
costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by
any Person as a result of the installation, use and/or maintenance of a
Modular Newsrack within the City (the “Indemnification Agreement”). The
Indemnification Agreement shall read as follows:



      (name of applicant)        covenants and agrees unconditionally,
absolutely and irrevocably, that it will indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the City and its officials, officers, partners, employees, affiliates,
successors and assigns from any and all claims, liabilities, losses, orders,
judgements, decrees, damages, response costs, remediation costs, fines,
penalties, fees, and expenses of every and any kind whatsoever including
attorneys’ fees and costs (at both the trial and appellate levels) arising
out of or in any way relating to the installation, use and/or maintenance of
Modular Newsracks within the City.



   90.01(L)   Sovereign immunity.  This Section shall not be construed
to affect in any way the City’s rights, privileges, and immunities as set
forth in F.S. § 768.28.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 91: LETTERING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



Section



   91.01   Lettering on commercial vehicles



§ 91.01  LETTERING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   91.01(A)   Descriptive lettering required.



   91.01(A)(1)   Every Motor Vehicle used to transport people or
materials, to provide home or business Construction, repair, maintenance,
Landscaping , delivery or moving services of any kind shall have prominently
displayed on each side thereof the following information:



   91.01(A)(1)(a)   The trade name, symbol, or “ Logo ” of the
corporation, partnership, proprietorship, Person or individual, or other
business entity utilizing the vehicle for a commercial purpose.



   91.01(A)(1)(b)   The general nature or character of the business, if
the trade name or symbol does not describe the general nature of the business.



   91.01(A)(1)(c)   The Street address of the business, or if there is
none, then the resident Street address of the Person owning or operating the
business or the telephone number of the business, or if none, the telephone
number of the Person owning or operating the business.



   91.01(A)(2)   The information required to be placed upon the vehicle
by subsection 91.01(A)(1) above shall be in letters and numerals at least one
and one-half inches high, distinctly contrasting in color with the
background, and shall, at all times that the vehicle is utilized for
commercial purposes within the City, be affixed, attached or displayed on the
vehicle in such a manner so as to be readily distinguishable from a distance
of not less than ten meters (32.8 feet).



   91.01(B)   Enforcement.  All law Enforcement Officers and Code
Enforcement Officers shall have the power and authority to enforce the
provisions of this Section.



   91.01(C)   Applicability of provisions.  The provisions of this
Section shall be cumulative to all State, Broward County, and municipal Laws
or ordinances now or hereafter enacted.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 92: COMMERCIAL MAIL RECEIVING AGENCIES



Section



   92.01   Commercial mail receiving agencies



§ 92.01  COMMERCIAL MAIL RECEIVING AGENCIES.



   92.01(A)   Commercial mail receiving agencies obtaining personal
information on all renters of mailboxes.  All Owners/operators/employees of
Commercial Mail Receiving Agencies (CMRAs) shall obtain personal information
on all Persons who rent mailboxes in their CMRA from two forms of acceptable
identification (driver’s license; military or other government ID;
passport; national credit cards; alien registration card; and birth
certificate, and at least one containing a photo of the renter), including,
but not limited to: name; address; date of birth; telephone number; and
driver’s license number and state issued. That information shall be placed
on United States Postal Service Form 1583 or other application form
equivalent to Form 1583, and a copy of the form shall be retained on the
CMRAPremises during normal business hours. A photocopy of the photo
identification presented by the renter shall be taken and retained with the
Form 1583 on the Premises.



   92.01(B)   Commercial mail receiving agencies releasing personal
information on renters to law Enforcement Officers.  A
CMRAOwner/operator/employee shall release a copy of the Form 1583 or other
application form and its contents (personal information), including the
photocopy of the identification used, to any law Enforcement Officer (with
proper agency identification) requesting information pursuant to a criminal
investigation.



   92.01(C)   Commercial mail receiving agencies disclosure of release
of information to law Enforcement Officers.  The CMRAOwner/operator/employee
shall not disclose the existence of the law enforcement request for
information to the mailbox renter or any associate of the mailbox renter, as
any such disclosure may obstruct and impede the criminal investigation being
conducted and thereby interfere with the enforcement of the Law.



   92.01(D)   Penalties for violation of this Section.  Whoever
violates this Section shall be punished as provided in § 2.99, except that
violators of § 92.01(B), failure to obtain and retain renter personal
information, shall be fined not more than $500.00.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 93: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FRANCHISE



Section



   93.01   Franchise required



   93.02   Franchise fee



§ 93.01  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to commence or engage in the business of
collecting and disposing of solid waste originating in the City without a
franchise issued by the franchising authority in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 93.02  FRANCHISE FEE.



   The City has granted an exclusive solid waste franchise to Republic
Services of Florida, L.P. d/b/a All Service Refuse (“All Service”), and
has entered into a Solid Waste, Bulk Waste and Recycling Collection; Solid
Waste and Bulk Waste Disposal; and Sale and/or Disposal of Recyclable
Materials Services Agreement with All Service (the “Agreement”), for
which a franchise fee based on a percentage of gross revenues, as that term
is defined in the Agreement, shall be paid. The franchise fee percentage for
all services performed pursuant to the Agreement shall be established by
resolution of the City Commission.



   All Service shall pay the franchise fee to the City in monthly
installments on or before the fifteenth day of each month for all services it
performs within the City pursuant to the Agreement, except for residential
curbside service. For residential curbside service, the franchise fee shall
be collected through the property Owner’s tax bill on an annual basis.



(Ord. 2010-15, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-13, passed 9-26-2011; Am. Ord.
2013-08, passed 9- 12-2013)



CHAPTER 94:  PROHIBITION OF SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES



Section



   94.01   Prohibition of simulated gambling devices



   94.02   Exemptions



   94.03   Conflict with State law



   94.04   Enforcement



§ 94.01  PROHIBITION OF SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES.



   It is unlawful for any Person to provide or possess one or multiple
Simulated Gambling Devices. Each individual act to provide or possess a
Simulated Gambling Device constitutes a separate violation of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2012-19, passed 9-24-2012)



§ 94.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   94.02(A)   Non-commercial. This Chapter does not prohibit an
individual’s personal, recreational, and non-commercial ownership,
possession, play, operation or use of a Simulated Gambling Device.



   94.02(B)   Device permitted by Florida Statutes.  This Chapter does
not prohibit the ownership, possession, play, operation or use of any Device
expressly permitted by the Florida Statutes and not otherwise prohibited by
the Florida Constitution.



   94.02(C)   Religious or Charitable Institution Fundraising
Activity.  This Chapter does not prohibit a Religious or Charitable
Institution from conducting a fund raising activity involving gaming,
provided the Religious or Charitable Institution does not conduct the
activity more than twice in one calendar year, the organization provides
advance written notice to the City Manager of the date, time, place, and
nature of such activity and who will be conducting it, and the activity is
not otherwise unlawful.



(Ord. 2012-19, passed 9-24-2012)



§ 94.03  CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW.



   Nothing in this Chapter is intended to conflict with the provisions of
the Florida Constitution or F.S. Chapter 849, concerning gambling. In the
event of a direct and express conflict between this Chapter and either the
Florida Constitution or F.S. Chapter 849, then the provisions of the Florida
Constitution or F.S. Chapter 849, as applicable, control.



(Ord. 2012-19, passed 9-24-2012)



§ 94.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any Person who violates this Chapter is subject to the provisions of
Chapter 31 “Code Enforcement” of this Code.



(Ord. 2012-19, passed 9-24-2012)



TITLE IX:  PROPERTY - REAL AND PERSONAL



   Chapter



      95.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



      96.   LOST, UNCLAIMED OR ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY



CHAPTER 95: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section



   95.01   Residential property



   95.02   Commercial and industrial/office developments; undeveloped
land



   95.03   Sidewalk repair and replacement



   95.04   Enclosures



   95.05   Temporary outdoor storage containers



§ 95.01  RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   95.01(A)   Single-Family residential.  The Owner and/or operator of
Single-Family residential property and of Association Property within a
Single-Family residential Development, within the corporate limits of the
City shall comply with the following minimum maintenance standards:



   95.01(A)(1)   General maintenance.  The exterior of all fences,
garden walls, and similar enclosures, where exposed to the public view, shall
be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of deterioration,
ripping, tearing, or other holes or breaks. Painted or stained surfaces shall
be free of peeling paint, mold, or mildew and maintained with uniform colors,
void of any evidence of deterioration. All fences or walls in a continuous
line shall be uniform in color. All surfaces, including Roofs, requiring
painting or which are otherwise protected from the elements shall be kept
painted or protected. All surfaces, including Roofs, shall be maintained free
of mold, mildew, rust stains, loose tiles or other surfacing material,
crumbling stone, brick, or stucco, or other conditions reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance. All Roofs shall be kept free from
equipment or materials that are not permanently affixed to a Roof, unless the
equipment or materials are actively being used.  No tarps shall be allowed
on Roofs unless they are temporarily affixed to prevent water intrusion and
the Owner and/or Tenant is exercising due diligence to repair or replace the
Roof. Upon the issuance of a warning by code enforcement, the Owner and/or
Tenant may establish a presumption of the exercise of due diligence by
providing the Code Enforcement Officer with an active Building Permit, copy
of an insurance claim or contract to perform the repair or replacement of the
Roof. The property shall be kept free of Litter.



   95.01(A)(2)   Temporary Structures, Trailers, and outbuildings.  No
Structure of a temporary character, including but not limited to, Trailer,
shack, garage, barn, or other outbuilding shall be permitted on any property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, tents are permitted for no more than 72 hours.



   95.01(A)(3)   Obstructions of visibility.  No obstruction to
visibility at Street intersections or access easement intersections, or
obstruction of Traffic Control Devices, either in the form of Landscaping or
shrubbery or fence or other Structure, shall be permitted at any time.



   95.01(A)(4)   Clotheslines and drying yards.  No clotheslines or
drying yards or any other piece of equipment or thing upon which clothes or
other articles can be hung or draped for drying purposes shall be erected,
used, or permitted to remain anywhere visible from any adjacent Street.



   95.01(A)(5)   Landscaping.  All Landscaping, including without
limitation Trees, Shrubs, Lawns, flower beds, walkways, and ground
elevations, shall be maintained in a safe, neat, orderly, and attractive
manner, including necessary Irrigation, consistent with the general
appearance of the developed portions of the City. Trees and Shrubs shall be
regularly Pruned to prevent obstruction of required sight distance triangles,
Traffic Control Devices, and pedestrian clearance, and not be allowed to
become overgrown. Lawns shall be mowed on a regular basis as necessary by the
conditions. Bermuda grass shall be over seeded for the winter season to
prevent dormancy. No weeds, underbrush, or other unsightly growths shall be
permitted to grow or remain upon any part of the property and no Refuse pile
or unsightly objects shall be allowed to be placed or to remain on any
property. All Landscaping shall be maintained free from disease, pests,
weeds, and Litter. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, weeding,
watering, fertilizing, Pruning, mowing, edging, mulching, or any other
maintenance, as needed. Dead and/or diseased plant material shall be removed
and replaced with a suitable planting in a prompt manner. No vegetation shall
be permitted to extend into the vehicle, pedestrian, or bicycle travel lanes,
except for Tree canopies, which canopies must maintain height clearance for
vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle Traffic. The property Owner shall
regularly maintain, repair, and replace, where necessary, all Landscaping
features and Irrigation systems. By January 1, 2014, commercial fertilizer
applicators must be certified by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Affairs pursuant to F.S. § 482.1562. All commercial fertilizer applicators
shall successfully complete the Florida Department of Environmental
Protection’s required training program. All commercial fertilizer
applicators shall apply fertilizers in accordance with the Florida Department
of Environmental Protection through the University of Florida/Institute of
Food and Agricultural Sciences Extension’s “Florida-Friendly Best
Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green
Industries.”



   95.01(A)(6)   Garage doors.  All garage doors shall be closed at
all times when not being used for ingress/egress or cleaning.



   95.01(A)(7)   Swimming pools.  It shall be the duty and
responsibility of every Person owning, leasing, or having any legal or
equitable interest in any property in the City with a swimming pool to
maintain the swimming pool at all times in a sanitary and safe condition,
including the disinfection of all pool water pursuant to applicable health
standards under StateLaw and Broward County ordinance, the removal of dirt,
scum or floating matter, and the prevention of nesting and breeding of pests
and vermin. Any safety features associated with the swimming pool that were
required to be installed at the time of the construction of the pool pursuant
to Florida Statutes and the Florida Building Code shall remain in good
working order. The bottom of the pool shall be clearly visible to a Person
standing on the pool deck. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a manner
that prevents adverse affects on the economic welfare of adjacent properties.



   95.01(A)(8)   Vacant or abandoned Structures.  It shall be the duty
and responsibility of every Person owning, leasing, or having any legal or
equitable interest in any vacant or abandoned Structures in the City to
maintain such property in a safe and secure manner that does not endanger the
public health, safety and welfare of adjoining property Owners and residents.
All windows, doors, garage doors and other access points of the vacant or
abandoned Structures shall be secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized
access to the property.



   95.01(A)(9)   Rights-Of-Way.  For those Rights-Of-Way within the
City that are 80 feet or less in width, it shall be the duty of each Owner of
property abutting such Rights-Of-Way to maintain the unpaved Swale portion of
the Right-Of-Way in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code.
Regardless of the width of the Right-Of-Way, all property Owners must
maintain any portion of their driveway that is within the Right-Of-Way.



   95.01(A)(10)   Swale Areas.  No Person shall make any alteration or
addition to Swale areas that would impede in any way the Swale’s drainage
function.



   95.01(A)(11)   Bars on doors and windows.  No bars, grates,
lattices, or other similar objects shall be permitted on any portion of the
exterior of any window or door.



   95.01(A)(12)   Lighting.  The Homeowner's Association responsible
for a Single-Family residential Development shall be responsible for the
maintenance of lighting systems on all Roadways, parking lots and common
areas where such lighting systems exist within such Development.



   95.01(A)(13)   Construction Waste and Construction materials. 



   95.01(A)(13)(a)   It shall be the joint responsibility of any Owner
of real property upon which Construction is occurring, and any Person
responsible for the Construction, to ensure that the real property, all
adjacent  Rights-Of-Way, and all properties in the area remain free at all
times of  Construction Waste and Trash resulting from such Construction.



   95.01(A)(13)(b)   It shall be the joint responsibility of any Owner
of real property upon which Construction is occurring, and any Person
responsible for the Construction, to ensure that the real property remain
free at all times of stored Construction materials, except for those
Construction materials awaiting incorporation into the Construction which may
be stored on the real property for no more than ten days.



   95.01(B)   Multi-family residential Developments and Association
Properties.



   95.01(B)(1)   Intent.  The intent of this subsection 95.01(B) is to
insure that existing and future multi-family residential Developments meet
minimum standards for maintenance. This subsection 95.01(B) shall not be
construed so as to delete or decrease existing Code requirements regulating
maintenance of multi-family residential Developments. The intent of this
subsection 95.01(B) is to impose additional minimum maintenance standards
upon those multi-family residential Developments which were constructed prior
to the adoption by the City of other Code provisions requiring maintenance of
multi-family residential Developments as well as upon those multi-family
residential Developments to be constructed in the future. The provisions of
this subsection 95.01(B) shall apply only to Association Property within
multi-family residential Developments.



   95.01(B)(2)   Landscaping.  The Homeowners’ Association
responsible for a multi-family residential Development must maintain all
Landscaping, reflected on the most recent Landscaping plan approved by the
City Commission for the Association Property, in a healthy, living condition.
All plant material shall be kept Pruned in a safe, neat, tidy, and attractive
manner to prevent obstruction of required sight distance triangles, Traffic
Control Devices, and pedestrian clearance, and all turf areas shall be
regularly mowed as necessary by weather conditions. All Landscaping shall be
maintained free from disease, pests, weeds, and Litter. Maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, weeding, watering, fertilizing, Pruning,
mowing, edging, mulching, or any other maintenance, as needed. Dead and/or
diseased plant material shall be removed and replaced with a suitable
planting in a prompt manner. Bermuda grass shall be over seeded for the
winter season to prevent dormancy. The Homeowners’ Association shall
regularly maintain, repair, and replace, where necessary, all Landscaping
features and Irrigation systems. By January 1, 2014, commercial fertilizer
applicators must be certified by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Affairs pursuant to F.S. § 482.1562. All commercial fertilizer applicators
shall successfully complete the Florida Department of Environmental
Protection’s required training program. All commercial fertilizer
applicators shall apply fertilizers in accordance with the Florida Department
of Environmental Protection through University of Florida/Institute of Food
and Agricultural Sciences Extension’s “Florida-Friendly Best Management
Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries.”



   95.01(B)(3)   Obstructions to visibility.  No obstruction to
visibility at Street intersections or access easement intersections, or
obstruction of Traffic Control Devices, either in the form of Landscaping or
shrubbery or fence or other Structure, shall be permitted at any time.



   95.01(B)(4)   Parking areas and drives; drainage.



   95.01(B)(4)(a)   Paved areas.  The Homeowners’ Association must
maintain all paved areas reserved for parking and driving of Motor Vehicles,
including driveway aprons, in a smooth condition, free from ruts, potholes,
loose aggregate, and deterioration.



   95.01(B)(4)(b)   Curbing and wheel stops.  All curbing must be
maintained free from cracks and deterioration by the Homeowners’
Association. In those multi-family residential Developments in which wheel
stops are required by other provisions of the City Code, said wheel stops
must be maintained by the Owner free from cracks and deterioration. All wheel
stops must remain affixed in those locations where such wheel stops were to
be placed in accordance with approved site plans for the Development’s
parking area.



   95.01(B)(4)(c)   Striping.  The Homeowners’ Association must
stripe all paved areas reserved for vehicular parking and fire zones. Such
striping shall be maintained in a manner free from peeling and shall be of
sufficient contrast with the surface upon which such striping is placed so as
to readily delineate to a Person of normal visual ability the location of a
parking space or fire zone.



   95.01(B)(5)   Traffic Control Devices.  All Traffic Control Devices
on properties owned by Homeowners’ Associations shall comply with the
United States Department of Transportation’s Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD). The Homeowners’ Association shall also be
responsible for the immediate repair and/or replacement of any Traffic
Control Device that is damaged.



   95.01(B)(5)(a)   Pavement markings. Pavement markings on Roadways
must be maintained and shall conform in all respects to the principles and
standards set forth in the MUTCD standards. For repair and replacement of
pavement markings on existing Roadway pavements, pavement marking materials
shall exhibit retroreflectivity and shall comply with at least one of the
following sections of the Florida Department of Transportation Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition):



   95.01(B)(5)(a)1.   Section 710, Painted Pavement Markings; or



   95.01(B)(5)(a)2.   Section 711, Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and
Markings; or



   95.01(B)(5)(a)3.   Section 713, Permanent Tape Stripes and Markings.



For new and resurfaced roadway pavements, pavement markings shall be
thermoplastic and comply with § 95.01(B)(5)(a)2.



   95.01(B)(6)   Drainage and Swale areas.  The Homeowners’
Association must maintain all Drainage Facilities in a manner allowing for
the storm flow for which said facilities were designed, free from
obstructions. All catch basin grates must be maintained in their original
condition and must be replaced immediately, if damaged. No Person shall make
any alteration or addition to Swale areas that would impede in any way with
the Swale’s drainage function.



   95.01(B)(7)   General maintenance.  The Homeowners’ Association,
on all Association Property within a multi-family residential Development ,
shall maintain all windows, Roofs, fences, Sidewalks, and masonry walls in a
clean condition free from cracks greater than 1/16 of an inch in width,
graffiti, peeling paint, mold, mildew, rust stains and missing materials, and
shall keep all Association property free of Litter. All surfaces, including
Roofs, requiring painting or which are otherwise protected from the elements
shall be kept painted or protected. Painted or stained surfaces shall be
maintained with uniform colors, void of any evidence of deterioration. All
fences or walls in a continuous line shall be uniform in color. All Roofs
shall be kept free from equipment or materials that are not permanently
affixed to a Roof, unless the equipment or materials are actively being
used.  No tarps shall be allowed on Roofs unless they are temporarily
affixed to prevent water intrusion and the Owner and/or Tenant is exercising
due diligence to repair or replace the Roof. Upon the issuance of a warning
by code enforcement, the Owner and/or Tenant may establish a presumption of
the exercise of due diligence by providing the Code Enforcement Officer with
an active Building Permit, copy of an insurance claim or contract to perform
the repair or replacement of the Roof.



   95.01(B)(8)   Temporary Structures, Trailers, and outbuildings.  No
Structure of a temporary character, including but not limited to a Trailer,
shack, garage, barn, or other outbuilding, shall be permitted on any
property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, tents are permitted for no more than
72 hours.



   95.01(B)(9)   Clotheslines and drying yards.  No clotheslines or
drying yards or any other piece of equipment or thing upon which clothes or
other articles can be hung or draped for drying purposes shall be erected,
used, or permitted to remain anywhere visible from any adjacent Street.



   95.01(B)(10)   Registration.  Any and every Homeowners’
Association created pursuant to Law within the corporate limits of the City
shall register annually, on the first workday in April of each year, with the
City Clerk. The following information shall be provided:



   95.01(B)(10)(a)   The name, address, email address and telephone
number of the president of the Homeowners’ Association .



   95.01(B)(10)(b)   The name, address, email address and telephone
number of the registered agent of said Homeowners’ Association .



   95.01(B)(10)(c)   The name, address, email address telephone number,
and appropriate representative of the management company, if any, with which
the Association has contracted to perform their maintenance responsibilities.



   95.01(B)(11)   Swimming pools.  It shall be the duty and
responsibility of every Person owning, leasing, or having any legal or
equitable interest in any property in the City with a swimming pool to
maintain the swimming pool at all times in a sanitary and safe condition,
including the disinfection of all pool water pursuant to applicable health
standards under StateLaw and Broward County ordinance, the removal of dirt,
scum or floating matter, and the prevention of nesting and breeding of pests
and vermin. Any safety features associated with the swimming pool that were
required to be installed at the time of the construction of the pool pursuant
to Florida Statutes and the Florida Building Code shall remain in good
working order. The bottom of the pool shall be clearly visible to a Person
standing on the pool deck. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a manner
that prevents adverse affects on the economic welfare of adjacent properties.



   95.01(B)(12)   Vacant or abandoned Structures.  It shall be the
duty and responsibility of every Person owning, leasing, or having any legal
or equitable interest in any vacant or abandoned Structures in the City to
maintain such property in a safe and secure manner that does not endanger the
public health, safety and welfare of adjoining property Owners and residents.
All windows, doors, garage doors and other access points of the vacant or
abandoned Structures shall be Secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized
access to the property.



   95.01(B)(13)   Rights-Of-Way.  For those Rights-Of-Way within the
City that are 80 feet or less in width, it shall be the duty of each Owner of
property abutting such Rights-Of-Way to maintain the unpaved Swale portion of
the Right-Of-Way in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code.
Regardless of the width of the Right-Of-Way, all property Owners must
maintain any portion of their driveway that is within the Right-Of-Way.



   95.01(B)(14)   Maintenance of privately owned fire hydrants, pump
houses, backflow preventers, valves and lines.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)   Indian Trace Development District.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)1.   Annual Fire Hydrant Test.  In October of each
calendar year the owner of the property on which a fire hydrant(s) is located
that is connected to private water and/or fire lines shall have each fire
hydrant flushed and tested by a Florida licensed general contractor. The
Annual Fire Hydrant Test shall confirm that all components of each fire
hydrant are fully operational and that each fire hydrant has a minimum flow
rate of 1,250 gallons per minute. The property owner shall furnish to the
City the written Annual Fire Hydrant Test report signed by both the property
owner and the inspecting general contractor not later than October 31st of
each calendar year. If a fire hydrant fails the Annual Fire Hydrant Test the
property owner shall immediately notify the City, make the necessary repairs
within 48 hours of failing the Annual Fire Hydrant Test, and re-test the fire
hydrant upon completion of the repairs.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)2.   Out-of-service fire hydrants.  If at any time a
fire hydrant is inoperable, the property owner shall immediately notify the
City and immediately place a sign on the fire hydrant between the steamer
valve and the valve cap stating “OUT OF SERVICE” in minimum of two and
one-half inch high blue reflective lettering on a white background.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)3.   Maintenance.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)3.a.   Clearance.  The property owner shall maintain
a minimum clear area of three feet on all sides of each fire hydrant free of
landscaping (except grass) and any other obstructions.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)3.b.   Pump House.  The property owner is
responsible for the maintenance of the pump house, lines and fire hydrant
from where the isolation valve connects to the public water supply.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)3.c.   Backflow Preventers.  The property owner is
responsible for the maintenance of the backflow preventer, lines and fire
hydrant from the water meter or last valve connecting to the public water
supply before the backflow preventer.



   95.01(B)(14)(a)3.d.   Paint.  The property owner shall be
responsible that all fire hydrants are painted “chrome yellow” color with
high gloss finish, and such paint shall be maintained free of fading and
peeling.



   95.01(B)(14)(b)   Bonaventure Development District.  All fire
hydrants located in the Bonaventure Development District are owned and
operated by the City of Sunrise and shall be maintained as set forth in the
“Water Distribution Flushing Procedure” of the Administrative Policy from
the Utilities Department for the City of Sunrise.



   95.01(B)(15)   Bars on doors and windows. No bars, grates, lattices,
or other similar objects shall be permitted on any portion of the exterior of
any window or door.



   95.01(B)(16)   Dumpsters and Dumpster Enclosures.



   95.01(B)(16)(a)   Dumpsters shall be maintained free of jagged or
sharp edges or inside parts which could prevent the free discharge of their
contents.



   95.01(B)(16)(b)   All Recycling containers shall be located within
the dumpster enclosure.



   95.01(B)(16)(c)   Dumpsters shall remain closed at all times except
when refuse is being placed within the dumpster.  The dumpster enclosure
shall be completely closed at all times except when it is necessary for
ingress or egress to or from the dumpster.



   95.01(B)(16)(d)   The dumpster, dumpster enclosure, and all
surrounding areas shall be maintained by the property Owner in accordance
with this Section, and shall be free of overflowing refuse, and shall be
clean at all times.  If a continuous problem of insufficient dumpster
capacity is proven to exist, in the sole discretion of the City, additional
or larger capacity dumpsters and enclosures or increased frequency of pickup
shall be required in order to eliminate the overflow problem.



   95.01(B)(16)(e)   Dumpsters shall be emptied by a franchised
collector at intervals that will preclude overflow.  Dumpsters, dumpster
enclosures, and the area around the dumpster shall not be used for disposal
of furniture and major appliances, except during a scheduled bulk pickup by a
franchised collector, and shall not be used for storage of any other items
other than described in this Section.



   95.01(B)(17)   Lighting.  The Homeowner's Association responsible
for a multi-family residential Development shall be responsible for the
maintenance of lighting systems on all Roadways, parking lots and common
areas where such lighting systems exist within such Development.



   95.01(B)(18)   Construction Waste and Construction materials.



   95.01(B)(18)(a)   It shall be the joint responsibility of any Owner
of real property upon which Construction is occurring, and any Person
responsible for the Construction, to ensure that the real property, all
adjacent Rights-Of-Way, and all properties in the area remain free at all
times of Construction Waste and Trash resulting from such Construction.



   95.01(B)(18)(b)   It shall be the joint responsibility of any Owner
of real property upon which Construction is occurring, and any Person
responsible for the Construction, to ensure that the real property remain
free at all times of stored Construction materials, except for those
Construction materials awaiting incorporation into the Construction which may
be stored on the real property for no more than ten days.



   95.01(C)   Additional standards for properties not subject to a
Homeowners Association.



   95.01(C)(1)   Fences that abut Public Rights-Of-Way shall be shadow
box style, six feet in Height , and shall be natural wood or white PVC.
Fences existing on August 20, 2001, which do not comply with this provision,
may remain until they are replaced.



   95.01(C)(2)   The Right-Of-Way side of fences that abut arterial
Rights-Of-Way shall be maintained with a ficus Hedge that is kept in a neat
and orderly condition.



   95.01(C)(3)   If a Structure is damaged by fire or other casualty,
its Owner shall properly and promptly restore it to at least as good a
condition as it was before the casualty occurred.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 6-20-2011; Am. Ord.
2013-03, passed 6-3-2013; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-23-2013; Am. Ord.
2014-08, passed 3-3-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-10, passed 4-7-2014; Am. Ord.
2014-13, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-10, passed 4-20-2015; Am. Ord.
2018-02, passed 4-2-2018; Am. Ord. 2019-08, passed 7-1-2019)



§ 95.02  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL/OFFICE DEVELOPMENTS; UNDEVELOPED LAND.



   95.02(A)   Intent.  The intent of this Section is to insure that
existing and future commercial Developments meet minimum standards for
commercial maintenance. This Section shall not be construed so as to delete
or decrease existing Code requirements regulating maintenance of commercial
Developments. Rather, the intent of this Section is to impose minimum
commercial maintenance requirements upon those commercial Developments which
existed prior to the adoption of City Code provisions requiring maintenance
of commercial Developments. Additionally, the intent of this Section is to
impose additional minimum maintenance standards upon those commercial
Developments that were constructed following the adoption by the City of
other Code provisions requiring maintenance of commercial Developments as
well as upon those commercial Developments to be constructed in the future.



   95.02(B)   Landscaping.  The Owner of a commercial Development
shall maintain all Landscaping, reflected on the most recent Landscaping plan
approved by the City Commission for the Owner’s commercial Development, in
a healthy, living condition. All plant material shall be kept Pruned in a
safe, neat, tidy, and attractive manner to prevent obstruction of required
sight distance triangles, Traffic Control Devices, and pedestrian clearance,
and all turf areas shall be regularly mowed as necessary by weather
conditions. All Landscaping shall be maintained free from disease, pests,
weeds, and Litter. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, weeding,
watering, fertilizing, Pruning, mowing, edging, mulching, or any other
maintenance, as needed. Dead and/or diseased plant material shall be removed
and replaced with a suitable planting in a prompt manner. Bermuda grass shall
be over seeded for the winter season to prevent dormancy. The Owner shall
regularly maintain, repair, and replace, where necessary, all Landscaping
features and Irrigation systems. By January 1, 2014, commercial fertilizer
applicators must be certified by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Affairs pursuant to F.S. § 482.1562. All commercial fertilizer applicators
shall successfully complete the Florida Department of Environmental
Protection’s required training program. All commercial fertilizer
applicators shall apply fertilizers in accordance with the Florida Department
of Environmental Protection through University of Florida/Institute of Food
and Agricultural Sciences Extension’s “Florida-Friendly Best Management
Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries.”



   95.02(C)   Obstructions to visibility.  No obstruction to
visibility at Street intersections or access easement intersections, or
obstruction of Traffic Control Devices, either in the form of Landscaping or
shrubbery or fence or other Structure, shall be permitted at any time.



   95.02(D)   Signs.



   95.02(D)(1)   Removal upon ceasing of operations.  The Owner of any
commercial property within which a business has been operating and upon which
Signs have been placed must, within 30 days of said business’s ceasing of
operations, remove all Signs indicating what commercial activities had been
occurring at said business.



   95.02(D)(2)   Missing letters.  The Owner of a commercial
Development and/or a Tenant shall keep all Signs in good order with no
missing, crooked, misplaced, faded, or damaged letters or other symbols or
materials.



   95.02(E)   Maintenance of undeveloped parcels.  Owners of all
undeveloped, unpaved parcels of real property within existing and future
residential and commercial Developments shall ensure that vehicles of any
kind be prohibited from parking upon said parcel. Vegetation on cleared lots
shall not exceed six inches in height. Natural Lots shall be cleared a
minimum of 25 feet from abutting Roadways and adjacent developed parcels.
Vacant outparcels of partially developed sites, within 60 days of having
received site plan approval, shall be seeded, all Construction Debris shall
be removed, and vehicles of any kind shall be prohibited from parking upon
said parcel.  The property shall be kept free of Litter.



   95.02(F)   Potentially toxic materials.  In addition to, and to the
extent that this Section does not conflict with, Federal, State, or Broward
County regulations, Owners of a commercial Development and/or Tenants of
Buildings or Structures within commercial Developments in which potentially
toxic materials are stored or utilized and are unattended must keep such
potentially toxic materials and the attendant facilities for dispensing same,
when not in use, in a secured area so as to prohibit public access.



   95.02(G)   Parking areas and drives.



   95.02(G)(1)   Paved areas.  The Owner of a commercial and/or
industrial/office Development must maintain all paved areas reserved for
parking and driving of Motor Vehicles in a smooth condition, free from ruts,
potholes, loose aggregate, and deterioration.



   95.02(G)(2)   Curbing and wheel stops.  All curbing must be
maintained free from cracks and deterioration by the Owner of a commercial
and/or industrial/office Development. In those commercial and/or
industrial/office Developments in which wheel stops are required by other
provisions of the City Code, said wheel stops must be maintained by the Owner
free from cracks and deterioration. All wheel stops must remain affixed in
those locations where such wheel stops were to be placed in accordance with
approved site plans for the commercial and/or industrial/office
Development’s parking area.



   95.02(G)(3)   Striping.  The Owner of any commercial and/or
industrial/office Development must stripe all paved areas reserved for
vehicular parking and fire zones. Such striping shall be maintained in a
manner free from peeling and shall be of sufficient contrast with the surface
upon which such striping is placed so as to readily delineate to a person of
normal visual ability the location of a parking space or fire zone.



   95.02(H)   Traffic Control Devices.  All Traffic Control Devices on
commercial and/or industrial/office Development shall comply with the United
States Department of Transportation’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD). The Owner of the commercial and/or industrial/office
Development shall also be responsible for the immediate repair and/or
replacement of any Traffic Control Device that is damaged.



   95.02(H)(1)   Pavement markings. Pavement markings on Roadways must
be maintained and shall conform in all respects to the principles and
standards set forth in the MUTCD standards. For repair and replacement of
pavement markings on existing Roadway pavements, pavement marking materials
shall exhibit retroreflectivity and shall comply with at least one of the
following sections of the Florida Department of Transportation Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition):



   95.02(H)(1)(a)   Section 710, Painted Pavement Markings; or



   95.02(H)(1)(b)   Section 711, Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and
Markings; or



   95.02(H)(1)(c)   Section 713, Permanent Tape Stripes and Markings.



For new and resurfaced roadway pavements, pavement markings shall be
thermoplastic and comply with § 95.02(H)(1)(b).



   95.02(I)   Drainage.  The Owner of a commercial and/or
industrial/office Development must maintain all Drainage Facilities in a
manner allowing for the storm flow for which said facilities were designed,
free from obstructions. All catch basin grates must be maintained in their
original condition and must be replaced immediately, if damaged. No Person
shall make any alteration or addition to Swale areas that would impede in any
way with the Swale’s drainage function.



   95.02(J)   Paint color.  For all commercial and industrial/office
Developments, a minor site plan amendment shall be required prior to painting
any portion of an exterior surface any color that is not shown on an approved
site plan. If the previously approved site plan shows a paint color other
than the proposed paint color, the site plan shall be amended to show the new
color. If the site plan does not show any paint colors, the site plan shall
be amended to show the proposed new color. The fee for a minor site plan
amendment for a change in paint color, and the fee for the appeal of such
decision to the City Commission, shall be set by resolution of the City
Commission.



   95.02(K)   General maintenance.  The Owner, within Common Areas of
a commercial and/or industrial/office Development and within areas of a
commercial and/or industrial/office Development not occupied by a Tenant,
shall maintain all windows, Roofs, fences, Sidewalks, and masonry walls in a
clean condition free from cracks greater than 1/16 of an inch in width,
graffiti, peeling paint, mold, mildew, rust stains, and missing materials,
and shall keep all Association property free of Litter. All surfaces,
including Roofs, requiring painting or which are otherwise protected from the
elements shall be kept painted or protected. Painted or stained surfaces
shall be maintained with uniform colors, void of any evidence of
deterioration. All fences or walls in a continuous line shall be uniform in
color. Further, the Owner and/or Tenant shall maintain all windows, Roofs,
fences, and masonry walls free from cracks greater than 1/16 of an inch in
width, graffiti, peeling paint, mold, mildew, rust stains, and missing
materials within those Buildings or Structures occupied by a particular
Tenant. All Roofs shall be kept free from equipment or materials that are not
permanently affixed to a Roof, unless the equipment or materials are actively
being used. No tarps shall be allowed on Roofs unless they are temporarily
affixed to prevent water intrusion and the Owner and/or Tenant is exercising
due diligence to repair or replace the Roof. Upon the issuance of a warning
by code enforcement, the Owner and/or Tenant may establish a presumption of
the exercise of due diligence by providing the Code Enforcement Officer with
an active Building Permit, copy of an insurance claim or contract to perform
the repair or replacement of the Roof.



   95.02(L)   Swimming pools.  It shall be the duty and responsibility
of every Person owning, leasing, or having any legal or equitable interest in
any property in the City with a swimming pool to maintain the swimming pool
at all times in a sanitary and safe condition, including the disinfection of
all pool water pursuant to applicable health standards under StateLaw and
Broward County ordinance, the removal of dirt, scum or floating matter, and
the prevention of nesting and breeding of pests and vermin. Any safety
features associated with the swimming pool that were required to be installed
at the time of the construction of the pool pursuant to Florida Statutes and
the Florida Building Code shall remain in good working order. The bottom of
the pool shall be clearly visible to a person standing on the pool deck.
Swimming pools shall be maintained in a manner that prevents adverse affects
on the economic welfare of adjacent properties.



   95.02(M)   Vacant or abandoned Structures.  It shall be the duty
and responsibility of every Person owning, leasing, or having any legal or
equitable interest in any vacant or abandoned Structures in the City to
maintain such property in a safe and secure manner that does not endanger the
public health, safety and welfare of adjoining property Owners and residents.
All windows, doors, garage doors and other access points of the vacant or
abandoned Structures shall be secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized
access to the property.



   95.02(N)   Bridges.



   95.02(N)(1)   Inspection required.  It shall be the duty and
responsibility of every Person owning, leasing, or having any legal or
equitable interest in any property in the City with a bridge to ensure that
the bridge is suitable for its actual use, has a sufficient load rating and
has and maintains structural integrity. Within six months of March 15, 2010
each bridge shall be inspected in accordance with AASHTO LRFD design
procedures, by a Professional Engineer with an active registration in the
State of Florida (with an area of expertise in structural design and
evaluation), and each bridge shall be inspected every January of each even
Year thereafter.



   95.02(N)(2)   Inspection Report.



   95.02(N)(2)(a)   The initial report shall be sealed and submitted by
a Professional Engineer and shall attest to the bridge’s suitability for
its actual use, to whether it has a sufficient load rating and to whether it
has and maintains structural integrity. The initial report shall include
deficiencies, if any, and recommendations to correct the deficiencies. If the
Professional Engineer deems a bridge to be deficient and unsafe, the bridge
shall be immediately closed, and signage shall be erected at the bridge site
indicating that it is unsafe. The bridge shall remain closed until it is
properly repaired and reinspected and deemed safe by the Professional
Engineer in a final report, as described below. If the Professional Engineer
deems a bridge to be safe but deficient, any deficiencies must be corrected
within 90 days of submission of the initial report. At the time of receipt of
an initial report, a copy of the report shall be provided to the City.



   95.02(N)(2)(b)   A final report shall be sealed and submitted by a
Professional Engineer in situations wherein the initial report includes
deficiencies and/or deems a bridge to be unsafe. At the time of receipt of a
final report, a copy of the report shall be provided to the City.



   95.02(N)(3)   Safety Standards.  All bridges located within golf
courses within the City must at a minimum have an eight-inch by eight-inch
curb at exterior edges sufficiently secured to the bridge to resist the
impact of Golf Carts or light maintenance vehicles without failing and be
rated for a five- ton loading. Alternative curbing or vehicle containment
methods may be used if signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer and if
approved by the City.



   95.02(O)   Maintenance of privately owned fire hydrants, pump
houses, backflow preventers, valves and lines.



   95.02(O)(1)   Indian Trace Development District.



   95.02(O)(1)(a)   Annual Fire Hydrant Test.  In October of each
calendar year the owner of the property on which a fire hydrant(s) is located
that is connected to private water and/or fire lines shall have each fire
hydrant flushed and tested by a Florida licensed general contractor. The
Annual Fire Hydrant Test shall confirm that all components of each fire
hydrant are fully operational and that each fire hydrant has a minimum flow
rate of 1,250 gallons per minute. The property owner shall furnish to the
City the written Annual Fire Hydrant Test report signed by both the property
owner and the inspecting general contractor not later than October 31st of
each calendar year. If a fire hydrant fails the Annual Fire Hydrant Test the
property owner shall immediately notify the City, make the necessary repairs
within 48 hours of failing the Annual Fire Hydrant Test, and re-test the fire
hydrant upon completion of the repairs.



   95.02(O)(1)(b)   Out-of-service fire hydrants.  If at any time a
fire hydrant is inoperable, the property owner shall immediately notify the
City and immediately place a sign on the fire hydrant between the steamer
valve and the valve cap stating “OUT OF SERVICE” in minimum of two and
one-half inch high blue reflective lettering on a white background.



   95.02(O)(1)(c)   Maintenance.



   95.02(O)(1)(c)1.   Clearance.  The property owner shall maintain a
minimum clear area of three feet on all sides of each fire hydrant free of
landscaping (except grass) and any other obstructions.



   95.02(O)(1)(c)2.   Pump House.  The property owner is responsible
for the maintenance of the pump house, lines and fire hydrant from where the
isolation valve connects to the public water supply.



   95.02(O)(1)(c)3.   Backflow Preventers.  The property owner is
responsible for the maintenance of the backflow preventer, lines and fire
hydrant from the water meter or last valve connecting to the public water
supply before the backflow preventer.



   95.02(O)(1)(c)4.   Paint.  The property owner shall be responsible
that all fire hydrants are painted “chrome yellow” color with high gloss
finish, and such paint shall be maintained free of fading and peeling.



   95.02(O)(2)   Bonaventure Development District.  All fire hydrants
located in the Bonaventure Development District are owned and operated by the
City of Sunrise and shall be maintained as set forth in the “Water
Distribution Flushing Procedure” of the Administrative Policy from the
Utilities Department for the City of Sunrise.



   95.02(P)   Rights-Of-Way.  For those Rights-Of-Way within the City
that are 80 feet or less in width, it shall be the duty of each Owner of
property abutting such Rights-Of-Way to maintain the unpaved Swale portion of
the Right-Of-Way in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code.
Regardless of the width of the Right-Of-Way, all property Owners must
maintain any portion of their driveway that is within the Right-Of-Way.



   95.02(Q)   Dumpsters and Dumpster Enclosures.



   95.02(Q)(1)   The Owner of a commercial and/or industrial/office. 
Development shall be responsible for the maintenance of the dumpsters and
dumpster enclosures.



   95.02(Q)(1)(a)   Dumpsters shall be maintained free of jagged or
sharp edges or inside parts which could prevent the free discharge of their
contents.



   95.02(Q)(1)(b)   All Recycling containers shall be located within
the dumpster enclosure.



   95.02(Q)(1)(c)   Dumpsters shall remain closed at all times except
when refuse is being placed within the dumpster.  The dumpster enclosure
shall be completely closed at all times except when it is necessary for
ingress or egress to or from the dumpster.



   95.02(Q)(1)(d)   The dumpster, dumpster enclosure, and all
surrounding areas shall be maintained by the property Owner in accordance
with this Section, and shall be free of overflowing refuse, and shall be
clean at all times.  If a continuous problem of insufficient dumpster
capacity is proven to exist, in the sole discretion of the City, additional
or larger capacity dumpsters and enclosures or increased frequency of pickup
shall be required in order to eliminate the overflow problem.



   95.02(Q)(1)(e)   Dumpsters shall be emptied by a franchised
collector at intervals that will preclude overflow.  Dumpsters, dumpster
enclosures, and the area around the dumpster shall not be used for disposal
of furniture and major appliances, except during a scheduled bulk pickup by a
franchised collector, and shall not be used for storage of any other items,
other than described in this Section.



   95.02(R)   Lighting.  The Owner of, or the association responsible
for the maintenance of a commercial and/or industrial/office Development
shall be responsible for the maintenance of lighting systems on all Roadways,
parking lots and common areas where such lighting systems exist within such
Development.



   95.02(S)   Construction Waste and Construction materials. 



   95.02(S)(1)   It shall be the joint responsibility of any Owner of
real property upon which Construction is occurring, and any Person
responsible for the Construction, to ensure that the real property, all
adjacent Rights-Of-Way, and all properties in the area remain free at all
times of Construction Waste and Trash resulting from such Construction.



   95.02(S)(2)   It shall be joint responsibility of any Owner of real
property upon which Construction is occurring, and any Person responsible for
the Construction, to ensure that the real property remain free at all times
of stored Construction materials, except for those Construction materials
awaiting incorporation into the Construction which may be stored on the real
property for no more than ten days.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-07, passed 6-20-2011; Am. Ord.
2013-10, passed 9- 23-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-08, passed 3-3-2014; Am. Ord.
2014-10, passed 4-7-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-13, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord.
2015-10, passed 4-20-2015; Am. Ord. 2018-02, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 95.03  SIDEWALK REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT.



   95.03(A)   Sidewalks within the Private Rights-Of-Way.  For
Sidewalks within Private Rights-Of-Way, the Owner of the Sidewalk(s), and the
property Owner abutting the Sidewalk(s), shall maintain the Sidewalk(s) in a
safe condition, and shall repair and replace the Sidewalk(s) in accordance
with the requirements of this Section.



   95.03(B)   Repair.  Sidewalks with vertical displacement greater
than one-fourth inch but less than one-half inch shall be repaired, or
replaced in accordance with (C) below, and the source of Sidewalk
displacement shall be remedied to prevent future displacement. Repairs to
existing Sidewalks shall not require an engineering Permit.



   95.03(C)   Replacement.  Sidewalks with vertical displacement
greater than one-half inch shall be replaced in accordance with the City’s
Engineering Standards. The source of the Sidewalk displacement shall be
remedied to prevent future displacement. Replacement of existing Sidewalks
shall require an engineering Permit from the City.



   95.03(D)   Root removal.  If the City determines that roots are the
cause of a vertical displacement, the roots shall be properly Pruned by
making clean, smooth cuts on the roots with clean, sharp hand or mechanical
tools, to promote callus formation and wound closure by a City registered
Tree service provider.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-13, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 95.04  ENCLOSURES.



   All fences, garden walls, and similar enclosures shall meet the
maintenance and appearance standards set forth in this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 95.05  TEMPORARY OUTDOOR STORAGE CONTAINERS.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 124.37.2, a temporary outdoor
storage container (“container”) will be permitted on Private Property so
long as it meets the following standards:



   95.05(A)   The container shall not be allowed for a period in excess
of 96 hours, nor more often than once in any 12-month period, unless on
property that has a nonresidential zoning designation and there is an active
Building Permit in place;



   95.05(B)   Notwithstanding the limitation contained in subsection
95.05(A) above, the 12-month period shall restart with each change of
beneficial ownership of the property that is recorded in the public records;



   95.05(C)   The container must be kept clean and in good condition,
free of graffiti;



   95.05(D)   The container shall not be any larger than eight feet
wide, eight feet high and 16 feet long and may not have wheels or any other
device that raises it off of the ground;



   95.05(E)   The container must be placed on a driveway or other paved
surface if available; provided, however, if it must be placed on top of any
grass or other Landscaped area, the area must be fully restored once the
container has been removed;



   95.05(F)   There shall not be more than one container on any parcel
at the same time;



   95.05(G)   No container, or any part thereof (including its doors
when open) shall block the primary means of ingress and egress of any
Building nor any Sidewalk or encroach into any Right-Of-Way ;



   95.05(H)   The container shall be locked when not actually being
loaded or unloaded;



   95.05(I)   No hazardous materials may be stored in any container;



   95.05(J)   Any container shall bear a sign, no larger than two
square feet in area, identifying the name, address and telephone number of
the Owner of the container;



   95.05(K)   Other than as provided in subsection 95.05(J), no signage
is permitted on any container;



   95.05(L)   The date that the container was dropped off must be
clearly posted, in a weather resistant manner, on the container in an area no
larger than one square foot; and



   95.05(M)   Containers shall be removed immediately upon the issuance
of an official hurricane watch by the appropriate governmental entity with
the authority to issue a watch.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 96: LOST, UNCLAIMED OR ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY



Section



   96.01   Seizure of lost, unclaimed or abandoned personal property



   96.02   Notice



   96.03   Removal by City



   96.04   Redemption of property



   96.05   Destruction of property



   96.06   Costs and penalties



   96.07   Disposition of proceeds of unredeemed property



Abandoned and Junk Vehicles



   96.10   Storage of abandoned vehicles and vessels



   96.11   Removal procedure



§ 96.01  SEIZURE OF LOST, UNCLAIMED OR ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   The City shall seize and reduce to its possession any lost, captured,
abandoned or stolen personal property that may be found upon any of the
public Streets and highways of the City and shall restore such property as
provided herein.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 96.02  NOTICE.



   96.02(A)   Notice form.  Whenever the City ascertains that any
lost, captured, abandoned or stolen personal property is present on Public
Property or on Private Property contrary to this Chapter, he or she may cause
a notice to be placed upon such personal property in substantially the
following form:



NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. THIS
PROPERTY, TO WIT:



   (Setting forth brief description)



   LOCATED AT



   (Setting forth brief description)



   IS



   96.02(A)(1)   Unlawfully upon Public Property at (setting forth
brief description of location)



   OR



   96.02(A)(2)   Improperly stored and is in violation the provisions
of Chapter 96 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Weston, and



MUST BE REMOVED WITHIN FIVE DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE; OTHERWISE IT
SHALL BE PRESUMED TO BE ABANDONED AND WILL BE REMOVED AND DISPOSED OF
PURSUANT TO F.S. CHAPTER 705, AND CHAPTER 96 OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF WESTON. THE OWNER WILL BE LIABLE FOR THE COSTS OF REMOVAL, STORAGE,
DESTRUCTION AND PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.



   96.02(B)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to
the elements.



   96.02(C)   If the lost or abandoned personal property is located on
Private Property , the City may request in writing of the Owner of the
Private Property to remove the personal property from the real property, or
reduce the personal property to the possession of the City.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 96.03  REMOVAL BY CITY.



   If, at the end of five days after the posting of notice, the Owner or
any Person interested in the abandoned or lost personal property described in
such notice has not removed the property from the public or Private Property
, or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, then the City may cause the
abandoned property to be removed and either stored or destroyed.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 96.04  REDEMPTION OF PROPERTY.



   If the City determines that the lost or abandoned property has
sufficient value to justify its storage, the Owner of the personal property
may regain possession of the property from the City upon paying to the City
all costs of removal, plus storage charges of said property while in
possession of the City, plus all fines imposed upon the Owner for violation
of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 96.05  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   If the City determines that the abandoned property should be destroyed,
the Owner will be notified by certified mail and the property may be
destroyed 30 days thereafter. The value, if any, of such abandoned property
that is destroyed as authorized by this Chapter shall be retained by the City
to be applied against the costs associated with the removal of the property,
unless the costs of removal are paid by the Owner as provided in § 96.06, in
which case the value may be deposited in the City’s General Fund.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 96.06  COSTS AND PENALTIES.



   The Owner of any lost or abandoned personal property who, after being
given notice as provided in this Chapter, does not remove the personal
property within the specified period, shall be liable to the City for all
costs associated with the removal, storage, and/or destruction of such
property, less any salvage value received by the City, if any. Upon such
removal, the City shall notify the Owner of the amount owed and of the
penalty provisions within Chapter 31 of the Code .



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 96.07  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF UNREDEEMED PROPERTY.



   If no claim for the personal property is made within two months after
receipt thereof, the City may sell said property for the best price
obtainable as junk or otherwise, and the proceeds shall be available to pay
the reasonable charges for the expenses incurred in the processing, storage
and disposal of the property by the City, and any remaining balance shall be
paid into the General Fund.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES



§ 96.10  STORAGE OF ABANDONED VEHICLES AND VESSELS.



   96.10(A)   Abandoned vehicles.  No Person shall store, keep, or
permit to be stored or kept, an Abandoned vehicle or Vessel in plain view
upon Public or Private Property.



   96.10(B)   Storage in enclosed Building.  The following shall be
stored within a completely enclosed Building:



   96.10(B)(1)   All wrecked, junked, dismantled or partially
dismantled vehicles, Vessels or Trailers , including vehicles missing major
parts, including but not limited to, bodies, engines, transmissions and
bumpers; and



   96.10(B)(2)   All vehicles, Vessels and Trailers with bodies,
engines, transmissions, rear ends or other major components that are wrecked,
ruined or damaged to an extent that would render the vehicle, Vessel or
Trailer inoperative.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 96.11  REMOVAL PROCEDURE.



   96.11(A)   Effect of provisions.  The rights, powers, and
procedures set forth in this Section shall be supplemental to and cumulative
to the rights, powers, and procedures set forth elsewhere in this subchapter,
the City Code, or State statute.



   96.11(B)   Notice form.



   96.11(B)(1)   Whenever the Enforcement Officer ascertains that an
Abandoned vehicle or Vessel is present on Public Property or on Private
Property contrary to this Chapter, he or she may place a notice upon such
Abandoned vehicle or Vessel in substantially the following form:



NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. THIS
PROPERTY, TO WIT:



   (Setting forth brief description)



   LOCATED AT



   (Setting forth brief description)



   IS:



   96.11(B)(1)(a)   Unlawfully upon Public Property at (setting forth
brief description of location)



   OR



   96.11(B)(1)(b)   Improperly stored and is in violation of the
provisions of F.S. Chapter 705, and/or City CodeChapter 96.



MUST BE REMOVED WITHIN FIVE DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE; OTHERWISE IT
SHALL BE PRESUMED TO BE ABANDONED AND WILL BE REMOVED AND DISPOSED OF
PURSUANT TO F.S. CHAPTER 705. THE OWNER WILL BE LIABLE FOR THE COSTS OF
REMOVAL, STORAGE, DESTRUCTION, AND PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.



If the property is a Motor Vehicle or Vessel, the Owner will be liable for
the costs of removal and destruction and the hearing before the Special
Magistrate for the City, if such a hearing is requested by the property Owner
. The Person to whom this notice is directed or their duly authorized agents
may file a written request for a hearing before the Special Magistrate for
the City within five days after service of this notice for the purpose of
showing that the violation does not exist, or why such violation should not
be remedied by the City at the expense of such persons.



Dated this:  (setting forth the date of posting of notice).



Signed:  (setting forth name, title, address, and telephone number of the
Enforcement Officer ).



   96.11(B)(2)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to
the elements.



   96.11(C)   Notice to vehicle or VesselOwner.  The Enforcement
Officer shall also make a reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address
of the Owner of the Abandoned vehicle or Vessel. If such address is
reasonably available to the Enforcement Officer, he or she shall mail a copy
of such notice to the Owner on or before the date of posting. The Enforcement
Officer shall contact the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles
and/or the Department of Environmental Protection in order to determine the
name and address of the Owner and any Person who has filed a lien on the
vehicle or Vessel in accordance with Florida Statutes. Upon receipt of this
information, the law enforcement agency shall mail a copy of the notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Owner and to the lienholder,
if any.



   96.11(D)   Notice to real property Owner.  If the Abandoned
property is located on Private Property, the Enforcement Officer shall mail a
copy of the notice to the Owner of the real property upon which the Abandoned
property is located as shown by the real estate tax rolls of Broward County
on or before the date of posting such notice.



   96.11(E)   Removal by Enforcement Officer.  If, at the end of five
days after the posting of such notice, or the pre-taking hearing before the
Special Magistrate for the City, whichever occurs later, the Owner or any
Person interested in the Abandoned property described in such notice has not
removed the Abandoned property from public or Private Property, or shown
reasonable cause for failure to do so, then the Enforcement Officer may cause
the Abandoned property to be removed and either stored or destroyed.



   96.11(F)   Redemption of property.  If the Enforcement Officer
determines that the Abandoned property has sufficient value to justify its
storage, the Owner of the property may regain possession of the property from
the City by making application within two months after receiving notice from
the City as provided for above and upon paying to the City all costs of
removal, plus storage charges of said property while in possession of the
City, plus all fines imposed upon the Owner for violation of this subchapter.



   96.11(G)   Destruction of property.  If the Enforcement Officer
determines that the Abandoned property should be destroyed, the Owner will be
notified by certified mail and the property may be destroyed 30 days
thereafter. The value, if any, of such Abandoned property that is destroyed
as authorized by this subchapter shall be retained by the City to be applied
against the costs associated with the removal of the property, unless the
costs of removal are paid by the Owner as provided in subsection 96.11(F), in
which case the value may be deposited in the City’s General Fund.



   96.11(H)   Disposition of proceeds of unredeemed property.  If no
claim for the property is made within two months after receipt thereof, the
City may sell said property for the best price obtainable as junk or
otherwise, and the proceeds shall be available to pay the reasonable charges
for the expenses incurred in the processing, storage, and disposal of the
property by the City, and any remaining balance shall be paid into the
General Fund.



   96.11(I)   Abandoned vehicle - hazardous.  If an Enforcement
Officer ascertains that an Abandoned vehicle presents an immediate or
imminent threat or hazard to Traffic, Persons or surrounding property, he or
she may have the vehicle removed to a location to be designated for such
purpose by the City.



(Ord. 2010-16, passed 10-4-2010), Recreation and Special Events



TITLE X:  PUBLIC PARKS, RECREATION AND SPECIAL EVENTS



   Chapter



      100.   PUBLIC PARKS, RECREATION AND SPECIAL EVENTS



CHAPTER 100: PUBLIC PARKS, RECREATION AND SPECIAL EVENTS



Section



   100.01   Hours of operation



   100.02   Prohibited activities



   100.03   Traffic and motor vehicles in public parks



Public Property



   100.04   Permits and fees; use of public parks and recreation
facilities



   100.05   Closure of public facilities



Private Property



   100.06   Permits and fees; private property



   100.07   Event permit procedures



   100.08   Waiver of parking restrictions



   100.09   Alcoholic beverages



   100.10   Reserved



Sports Leagues in Public Parks



   100.11   Background checks



   100.12   Concussion and head injury regulations



   100.13   Designated supervisor



Indoor Instructors



   100.16   Indoor instructors



Mobile Vendors



   100.20   Mobile vendors



§ 100.01  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   100.01(A)   Hours of operation.  The City Manager shall designate
the hours of operation of each Public Park and Recreational Facility. The
hours of operation shall be clearly posted at each facility. The City Manager
may extend or shorten these hours for any Public Park or portion thereof.
Public Parks open beyond sunset and having lighted facilities shall be open
for use during the time such lights are illuminated, and upon cessation of
such illumination, the facilities shall be considered closed. No Person shall
enter or remain in any Public Park after Public Park closing hours without
authorization by the City Manager.



   100.01(B)   Closure of Public Park.  Any Public Park or
Recreational Facility, or portion thereof, may be closed to the public by the
City Manager at any time and for any interval of time.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 100.02  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   100.02(A)   Dangerous materials.  No Person, other than an
authorized City employee or LawEnforcement Officer, shall bring into any
Public Park or Recreational Facility, any explosive, fireworks, sling shot,
cross bow, bow and arrow, or any flammable liquid, other than that used for
the purpose of a barbecue or that which is contained within a fuel tank of a
Motor Vehicle.



   100.02(B)   Glass containers.  Glass containers of any kind are not
permitted within a Public Park.



   100.02(C)   Bicycles, roller skates, skateboards.  Bicycles, roller
blades, roller skates, and skateboards are prohibited on all basketball and
tennis courts.



   100.02(D)   Golf.  The playing, practicing, and use of golf clubs
and related equipment associated with the game of golf in Public Parks is
prohibited.



   100.02(E)   Alcoholic Beverages.  No Person shall bring into,
possess, consume, or sell Alcoholic Beverages in any Public Park or
Recreational Facility, unless a valid permit is issued by the City that
authorizes a special event to include the distribution and consumption of
Alcoholic Beverages.



   100.02(F)   Fires.  No Person shall start or maintain any outdoor
fire except in designated areas. Fires shall be limited to cooking on picnic
grills. No ground fires are permitted. No Person starting or maintaining any
fire in a Public Park shall leave the area without first extinguishing the
fire with water.



   100.02(G)   Feeding of wildlife.  The feeding of wildlife in any
Public Park area or Recreational Facility is prohibited.



   100.02(H)   Release of Animals.  The release of any Animal is
prohibited in Public Parks or Recreational Facilities.



   100.02(I)   Sale of goods or services.  No Person shall sell or
offer for sale any goods or services within any Public Park or Recreational
Facility unless authorized by the City Manager.



   100.02(J)   Advertising.  No advertising or publicity shall be
posted or announced in or on Public Park or Recreational Facility property
unless authorized by the City Manager.



   100.02(K)   Overnight stays.  No overnight stays are allowed in
Public Parks or Recreational Facilities without an event permit.



   100.02(L)   Dangerous objects.  No activities shall take place in
any Public Park or Recreational Facility involving the use of arrows,
javelins, or any other dangerous equipment. In addition, the take-off and
landing of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles is prohibited in all Public Parks and
Recreational Facilities without written authorization by the City Manager.



   100.02(M)   Reserved.



   100.02(N)   Organized sports.  The playing of organized games in
Public Parks or Recreational Facilities, including but not limited to soccer,
football, roller hockey, and baseball, is prohibited, except on fields,
courts, or areas so designated by the City Manager.



   100.02(O)   Mechanical rides.  Mechanical rides are prohibited in
all Public Parks or Recreational Facilities.



   100.02(P)   Carnivals.  Carnivals are prohibited in Public Parks
and Recreational Facilities.



   100.02(Q)   Property damage.  No Person shall damage, deface, or
destroy any property located within a Public Park or Recreational Facility.
In the event damage occurs, the City may repair the damaged property and
collect the City’s incurred costs from the Person responsible for the
damage.



   100.02(R)   Vegetation.  No Person shall willfully dig in, disturb,
pick, saw, chop, cut, carve, remove, or injure any grassy areas, flowers,
seeds, blooms, bark, branches, twigs, or leaves of any Tree, plant, Shrub,
Vine, bush, or any other vegetation on City property without authorization by
the City Manager.



   100.02(S)   Receptacles.  No Person shall willfully bring in or
dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans,
dirt, Rubbish, waste, Garbage, or Refuse, or other Trash; but shall place
same in the proper receptacles when these are provided; when receptacles are
not so provided, all such Rubbish or waste shall be carried away from City
property by the Person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of
elsewhere.



   100.02(T)   Construction.  No Person shall construct, or cause to
be constructed, any Building, Structure, or improvement of any kind, whether
permanent or temporary, on City property without written authorization from
the City Manager and any applicable Building Permits that may be required by
the Building Code.



   100.02(U)   Vehicles and Vessels.  No Person shall repair,
maintain, wash, or wax any vehicle or Vessel on City property without
authorization by the City Manager.



   100.02(V)   Fireworks.  No Person shall use fireworks within a
Public Park or Recreational Facility.



   100.02(W)   Animals.  No Person shall bring Animals into any Public
Park or Recreational Facility, except for domestic Animals in areas that are
clearly marked by Signs permitting domestic Animals. Any Person bringing
domestic Animals in Public Park or Recreational Facility permitted areas
shall keep the Animals on a leash, within six feet of the leash handle and
shall remove the Animals’ fecal matter from the Public Park or Recreational
Facility. Animals used by law enforcement or service dogs necessary to aid
individuals with physical disabilities shall be exempt from this Section.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-12, passed 9-12-2011; Am. Ord.
2017-16, passed 11-6-2017; Ord. 2018-16, passed 11-19-2018)



§ 100.03  TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   All applicable provisions of Laws and rules regulating the equipment
and operation of Motor Vehicles on State and local roads will be strictly
enforced in the Public Parks , together with such rules provided in this
Chapter:



   100.03(A)   No Person shall operate a vehicle in a Public Park
except upon designated paved or improved Public Park roads or driveways, or
else in and upon designated areas set aside for such use by vehicles, except
as authorized by the City Manager.



   100.03(B)   No Person shall operate a vehicle within any Public Park
or at any Recreational Facility in excess of ten mph, except upon those roads
or driveways where official Signs or markings designate a different speed
limit.



   100.03(C)   No Person shall operate any motorized device including,
but not limited to, go-peds, go-carts, scooters, or motorbikes not regulated
by StateLaw. This prohibition shall not apply to motorized devices used by
disabled Persons or Public Park maintenance personnel.



   100.03(D)   No Person shall Park a vehicle on Public Park property
other than in areas designated for parking, except in the event of an
Emergency or unless directed to do otherwise by City staff or Enforcement
Officers.



   100.03(E)   No vehicle shall be left parked on Public Park property
after Public Park closing hours without obtaining written permission from the
City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010)



PUBLIC PROPERTY



§ 100.04  PERMITS AND FEES; USE OF PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES.



   100.04(A)   Rules and regulations.  The City Manager may, from time
to time, establish rules and regulations for the use of each Public Park and
Recreational Facility and for obtaining permits pursuant to this Section. Any
Person seeking a permit to use any Public Park or Recreation Facility shall
comply with the City’s rules and regulations.



   100.04(B)   Activities that do not require a permit.  Except as
provided in this Section, all Public Parks may be used by members of the
general public, without a permit, for recreational purposes consistent with
the rules and nature of the Public Park, the safety of the public and of
Public Park property, the Code and the Comprehensive Plan.



   100.04(C)   Activities that require a private use permit.  Private
use permits may be issued for the activities described in this subsection.
Such activities are generally of a private nature, involving less than 50
Persons and not open to the public. All activities or facilities covered by
such permits shall be made accessible at reasonable times for inspection by
the City. Private use permit holders shall be responsible for maintaining the
facility consistent with the conditions outlined in the permit and shall
return the facility to its original condition prior to the permit holder’s
departure. The permit holder shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury
to any Person or property arising out of the use of the City facility by the
permit holder or permit holder’s guests, family members, invitees,
employees, independent contractors or other agents. The permit holder shall
be required to reimburse the City for maintenance, repair or cleanup costs
sustained by the City in restoring the facility to its original condition.
Private use permit fees shall be set forth by resolution of the City
Commission.



   100.04(C)(1)   Athletic facilities.  The use of athletic fields for
games and practice must be scheduled in advance by obtaining an athletic
facilities use permit from the City Manager. Athletic facilities use permits
for Use at athletic facilities may allow use for numerous days and time
periods.



   100.04(C)(2)   Picnic areas and use.  Picnic areas shall be
available upon a “first come, first served” basis, except that Persons
who obtain a picnic area use permit from the City Manager shall be entitled
to exclusive Use of such picnic area for the date and time specified on the
permit.



   100.04(C)(3)   Indoor Recreational Facilities.  Use of indoor
Recreational Facilities for any organized gathering or event shall require an
indoor Recreational Facilities use permit from the City Manager.



   100.04(D)   Public Property event permits.



   100.04(D)(1)   A Public Property event permit is required for the
following actions upon Public Property:



   100.04(D)(1)(a)   Any event, meeting, activity, gathering, or group
of Persons, having a common purpose, design or goal upon any public facility,
Public Right-Of-Way or Public Park that is attended by or anticipated to be
attended by 50 or more Persons;



   100.04(D)(1)(b)   Any exhibit, music or dramatic performance, fair,
concert, play, radio or television broadcast, other than a news transmission
in such a manner that interferes with the use and enjoyment by another Person;



   100.04(D)(1)(c)   The exhibition or display of any motion picture or
television program in such a manner that interferes with the use and
enjoyment by another Person, light or laser light display, or similar event;



   100.04(D)(1)(d)   Create or emit any amplified sound, except from a
radio, recorder or other device possessed and used by an individual for his
or her own enjoyment and operated in such a manner so as not to interfere
with the use and enjoyment by another Person;



   100.04(D)(1)(e)   Station or erect any Building , tent, canopy,
stand, bandstand, stage, tower, scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum or
other Structure ;



   100.04(D)(1)(f)   Station or use any electrical or electronic device
or equipment that would require outdoor auxiliary power;



   100.04(D)(1)(g)   Bring, land or cause to ascend or descend or
alight within any Public Park , any airplane, helicopter, flying machine,
balloon, parachute or other apparatus for aviation;



   100.04(D)(1)(h)   Film a media broadcast (other than a news
transmission), motion picture or still commercial photography for any purpose
other than for a personal use that does not interfere with the use and
enjoyment by another Person.



   100.04(D)(2)   During each calendar year, the maximum number of
activities that require traffic lane reductions or closures of Public
Rights-Of-Way shall be six.



   100.04(D)(2)(a)   In order to be eligible to apply for a Public
Property event permit for such an activity, an entity shall meet the
following criteria:



   100.04(D)(2)(a)(i)   Shall be exempt under the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 USC Sec. 501(c)(3) and Sec. 501(c)(4); and



   100.04(D)(2)(a)(ii)   Shall provide goods and/or services that
directly and substantially benefit individuals in the City; and 



   100.04(D)(2)(a)(iii)   Shall be registered in the State of Florida;
and



   100.04(D)(2)(a)(iv)   Shall be located in Broward County, Florida.



   100.04(D)(2)(b)   An application for a Public Property event permit
for such an activity may be submitted no earlier than 270 days in advance of
the event date.



   100.04(E)   Concessions.  Except for concession Owners or operators
that have contracted with the City to operate multiple concession stands, all
concession facilities and operators must obtain a concession permit from the
City Manager. Prior to applying or receiving a permit from the City Manager,
the concession facilities and operators shall comply with all codes,
including but not limited to building codes, health and sanitation codes,
food service codes, sales and use tax laws, and insurance requirements as
determined by the City and shall have all such clearances and operating
licenses or permits available for inspection by the City. If the operator is
not the Owner of the concession facility, both the operator and the facility
must each have a permit from the City.



   100.04(F)   Noise.  The activities that require a private use
permit or a special Public Property event permit shall be governed by the
noise regulations of Chapter 52 of the Code. Additionally, the activities may
be subject to specific limitations on noise in accordance with Chapter 52 of
this Code and as set forth in the permit, violations of which shall
constitute grounds for immediate revocation of the permit.



   100.04(G)   Exemptions.  This Section shall not apply to City
events or to any Person that has entered into a service agreement with the
City for an event.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-12, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord.
2019-07, passed 7-1-2019)



§ 100.05  CLOSURE OF PUBLIC FACILITIES.



   As a result of certain circumstances, including but not limited to
inclement weather or damage to public facilities, the City Manager may close
Public Property in accordance with consideration for public safety and
maintenance.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010)



PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 100.06  PERMITS AND FEES; PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   100.06(A)   Activities that require a Private Property event
permit.  The City shall require a special event permit for any event,
meeting, activity, gathering, or assembly of a group of Persons , having a
common purpose, design or goal, held upon any Private Property in a
nonresidential Area, where (i) the event substantially inhibits the usual
flow of pedestrian or vehicular Traffic on the surrounding Public Property ,
including but not limited to Streets, Sidewalks, alleys, and Public Parks, or
preempts use by the general public, or (ii) is anticipated to attract 50 or
more Persons . No permit shall be required if the event, meeting, activity,
gathering or assembly is the usual and customary use of the Private Property.



   100.06(A)(1)   The maximum duration of such events shall be three
days. An event shall include but not be limited to festivals, Carnivals ,
concerts, parades, walks, races, fundraising sales and similar gatherings,
grand opening promotions, City co-sponsored events and other similar events
not specifically permitted by City ordinance.



   100.06(A)(2)   Events held on Private Property,  having no impact
on Public Property or the public as described in this subsection, that
include a tent or any other temporarily erected Structure, shall require the
appropriate Building Permit(s) and review and approval of the Fire Marshal.



   100.06(A)(3)   The maximum number of such events shall be one per
Private Property per month. If an additional application for a Private
Property event permit is submitted, a major site plan amendment shall be
required. 



   100.06(A)(4)   When there is permitted exterior Construction within
the Private Property, such events shall be held at a minimum of fifty feet
from the perimeter of an exterior Construction site.



   100.06(B)   Limitations on special Private Property events.



   100.06(B)(1)   Mechanical rides.  All mechanical rides are
prohibited at special Private Property events.



   100.06(B)(2)   Carnivals.  Privately owned, profit-oriented
Carnivals are prohibited at special Private Property events if they are not
intended to directly benefit local educational, charitable, rehabilitative,
recreational, or religious organizations consisting largely of resident
citizens of the City, where any profits realized are to be channeled into
local religious, charitable, educational, rehabilitative, or recreational
usage of direct benefit and impact to the citizens of the City.



   100.06(B)(3)   Recreational vehicles.  If recreational vehicles are
to be utilized in connection with an event, a parking plan for such
recreational vehicles shall be required. The plan shall be subject to City
approval, which shall be in the sole discretion of the City Manager. The
number of recreational vehicles that may be parked shall be limited to a
reasonable amount and duration. A proper plan of sanitary disposal, in
compliance with F.S. § 513.08, and all other applicable Law, shall be
required. The parking of recreational vehicles shall be in compliance with
the City’s parking regulations and they shall not obstruct Traffic.



   100.06(B)(4)   Portable lighting.  If a portable lighting system is
to be utilized for an event, a plan for the usage of such portable lighting
system shall be required. The plan shall be subject to City approval, which
shall be in the sole discretion of the City Manager . The portable lighting
system shall not adversely affect the neighboring properties and shall be
consistent with the applicable provisions in § 124.52 of this Code.



   100.06(B)(5)   Outdoor Sales of certain goods. Outdoor sales of
secondhand or used goods are prohibited at Special Private Property events.



   100.06(C)   Seasonal Sales Permits.



   100.06(C)(1)   Seasonal sales permits may be issued to an Applicant
for special seasonal sales activities that are conducted for a period not to
exceed 30 calendar days in length conducted on Private Property .



   100.06(C)(2)   General criteria and limitations for seasonal sales
permits shall be as follows:



   100.06(C)(2)(a)   The activity must be compatible with the existing
surrounding land Uses , the Zoning Chapter and the Comprehensive Plan; no
seasonal sales permits shall be issued for events in areas zoned for
Single-Family residential.



   100.06(C)(2)(b)   No seasonal sales permit shall be approved when a
merchant exists who deals in the goods offered by the temporary use and whose
principal business is located within the same center or within 300 feet of
the proposed location of the temporary use.



   100.06(C)(2)(c)   If Off-Site parking is to be utilized, permission
must be in writing from the Owner of said property.



   100.06(C)(2)(d)   An Applicant may not receive a seasonal sales
permit more than three times within a Year, unless approved by the City
Manager.



   100.06(C)(2)(e)   No more than two seasonal sales permits may be
issued at one period of time, unless approved by the City Manager.



   100.06(C)(2)(f)   An Applicant must submit an affidavit that
permission has been secured from the Owner of the land upon which the
seasonal sale is to be held.



   100.06(C)(2)(g)   If recreational vehicles are to be utilized in
connection with a seasonal sales activity, a parking plan for such
recreational vehicles shall be required. The plan shall be subject to City
approval, which shall be in the sole discretion of the City Manager. The
number of recreational vehicles that may be parked shall be limited to a
reasonable amount and duration. A proper plan of sanitary disposal, in
compliance with F.S. § 513.08, and all other applicable Law shall be
required. The parking of recreational vehicles shall be in compliance with
the City’s parking regulations and they shall not obstruct Traffic.



   100.06(C)(2)(h)   If a portable lighting system is to be utilized
for a seasonal sales activity, a plan for the usage of such portable lighting
system shall be required. The plan shall be subject to City approval, which
shall be in the sole discretion of the City Manager. The portable lighting
system shall not adversely affect the neighboring properties and shall be
consistent with the applicable provisions of § 124.52 of this Code.



   100.06(D)   Permit Procedures.  The permit procedures applicable to
special event and seasonal sales activities on Private Property are set forth
in this Chapter 100.



   100.06(E)   Building Permits.  All applicable Building Permits
shall be obtained.



   100.06(F)   Noise.  The activities that require a special Private
Property event permit or a seasonal sales permit shall be governed by the
noise regulations in Chapter 52 of the Code. Additionally, the activities may
be subject to additional specific limitations on noise as set forth in the
permit, violations of which shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation
of the permit by the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-12, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord.
2014-17, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-11, passed 5-18-2015)



§ 100.07  EVENT PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   100.07(A)   Application Form.  An Applicant for a private use,
seasonal sales use, or special event (public and nonresidential Private
Property) permit shall apply to the City Manager for such permit by filing a
written application, with the required documentation and fees.



   100.07(A)(1)   Filing Deadline.  Applications shall be submitted to
the City Manager no later than 30 days prior to the scheduled date of the
event. For events occurring on Private Property, the Applicant shall be the
property Owner. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Manager may, upon a
showing of good cause, waive the 30-day requirement for time sensitive
events, provided that:



   100.07(A)(1)(a)   The Applicant waives his or her right to appeal or
agrees that the scheduled event will need to be postponed due to the appeal
process timeframes set forth in this Section; and



   100.07(A)(1)(b)   The City can properly prepare for the event with
reduced notification.



   100.07(A)(2)   Required Information.  The application for any of
the above described permits may include but is not limited to the following
information:



   100.07(A)(2)(a)   The names and addresses of all Persons who will in
fact be promoting, holding, and/or operating the event;



   100.07(A)(2)(b)   The type of event;



   100.07(A)(2)(c)   Disclosure of extraordinary uses;



   100.07(A)(2)(d)   Disclosure of the intent to serve Alcoholic
Beverages ;



   100.07(A)(2)(e)   The beneficiary of the event, if a charitable
event;



   100.07(A)(2)(f)   The exact date(s) and times the event will be held
and the times when any music or other outdoor activity, exhibition or special
event, show, or performance will occur;



   100.07(A)(2)(g)   The estimated number of performers and
participants in the event and the estimated number of spectators who will
witness the event;



   100.07(A)(2)(h)   The exact location where the event will be held,
including the necessity of Street closures and parking requirements;



   100.07(A)(2)(i)   The number and type of sanitary facilities
available for use by the performers, participants, and spectators;



   100.07(A)(2)(j)   The police and fire protection facilities and
equipment available;



   100.07(A)(2)(k)   The plan for Traffic management in the area where
the event shall be held;



   100.07(A)(2)(l)   The plan for crowd management at the event;



   100.07(A)(2)(m)   A projected financial statement for the event
consisting of a projected balance sheet, projected income statement, and a
statement of changes in the financial position certified by a certified
public accountant;



   100.07(A)(2)(n)   The Garbage and waste facilities and waste
disposal facilities, including mandatory Recycling , for participants and
spectators upon the Premises where the event will be held and the plan for
waste disposal;



   100.07(A)(2)(o)   Comments from the City’s Police, Fire and
Building Departments concerning public safety, Traffic and parking;



   100.07(A)(2)(p)   A hold harmless agreement on an approved City form;



   100.07(A)(2)(q)   A certificate of insurance naming the City, its
officers, agents, servants, and employees as additional insureds, with
minimum general liability limits of $2,000,000.00 for general aggregate and
products; $1,000,000.00 personal injury per occurrence; $50,000.00 fire
damage; $1,000,000.00 single limit automobile liability; and $1,000,000.00
excess liability. Proof of insurance for all vendors, contractors, and
subcontractors shall also be required in the above amounts. The certificate
shall also provide that the insurer shall give the City reasonable notice of
insurer’s intent to cancel the insurance coverage provided;



   100.07(A)(2)(r)   A plan for limited parking of recreational
vehicles that shall be utilized for the event, if applicable, specifying the
proposed location, number, size, duration and method of Sewage disposal;



   100.07(A)(2)(s)   Description of any portable lighting system that
shall be utilized for the event, if applicable.



   100.07(A)(3)   Application fee.  No application for an event permit
shall be considered unless the Applicant shall have paid at the time for
filing an application for permit the required non-refundable permit
application fee, and cost recovery in an amount in accordance with the
schedule of fees to be established by resolution. The collected permit fee
shall be used to defray the costs of the investigations required.



   100.07(A)(4)   Security deposit.  No permit shall be issued unless
the Applicant has paid, within the time prescribed by the City Manager, the
security deposit in an amount in accordance with the schedule of fees set by
resolution. The amount of the security deposit set forth in the schedule of
fees shall be equal to the estimated cost of policing, cleaning up, and
restoring the event site upon the conclusion of the use or activity. Promptly
after the conclusion of a permit activity, the City shall inspect the
Premises and equipment used by the permittee.



   100.07(A)(4)(a)   If it is determined that there has been no damage
to City property or equipment beyond reasonable wear and tear, the security
deposit shall be refunded in full within 30 days of the conclusion of the
permitted event.



   100.07(A)(4)(b)   If it is determined by such inspection, that the
permitted event proximately caused damage to City property in excess of
normal wear and tear and that requires repairs in excess of routine
maintenance, or determined that fines should be assessed against the
permittee pursuant to this Section, the City shall retain the security
deposit or any portion thereof, necessary to pay for the cost of repair or
any fines assessed against the permittee. The City Manager shall given
written notice of the assessment of damages or fine and retention of the
security deposit to the permittee by personal delivery or by United States
mail, with proper postage prepaid to the name and address set forth in the
application for permit. Any assessment of damages or fines in excess of the
security deposit shall be paid to the City within 30 days after notice of
such assessment of damages or fine is sent. If the permittee fails to pay the
total amount due to the City within the time prescribed above, the permittee
shall be assessed a late payment fee of the greater of $50.00 per day or 1%
of the total amount of the bill per day for each additional day that the bill
for such costs remain unpaid.



   100.07(A)(5)   User fees.  No permit shall be issued unless the
Applicant has paid, within the time prescribed by the City Manager, a user
fee and any other required fee in an amount in accordance with the schedule
of fees set by resolution. No permit shall be issued unless all required fees
are paid as specified in this Section.



   100.07(A)(6)   Special conditions.  The City Manager may impose
certain conditions relating to an event that shall be reflected on the
permit. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, limitations on
noise, lighting intensity and hours, violations of which shall constitute
grounds for immediate revocation of the permit by the City Manager. In
addition to compliance with the conditions, the permit holder shall be in
compliance with all applicable Laws and codes. Failure to comply with all
applicable Laws and codes shall also constitute grounds for immediate
revocation of the permit by the City Manager.



   100.07(A)(7)   Contact information.  The permit holder, or
designated representative of the permit holder, shall be present at the event
at all times (including set-up, take down and clean-up), and shall provide
the City Manager with a contact cellular telephone number where the permit
holder or designated representative of the permit holder may be contacted at
all times during the event and within 24 hours thereafter. The permit holder
or designated representative shall keep the permit on the site of the event
at all times. Failure to keep the permit on the site of the event shall also
constitute grounds for immediate revocation of the permit by the City Manager.



   100.07(B)   Permits not transferable.  No permit may be transferred.



   100.07(C)   Processing of application.



   100.07(C)(1)   Order.  Applications for permits shall be processed
in order of receipt; and the Use of a particular Public Park, or other City
property or part thereof shall be allocated in order of receipt of fully
executed applications accompanied by the required application fee.



   100.07(C)(2)   Approval or denial.  The City Manager shall not
consider an application for a permit unless all the required documentation
and fees accompany the application. All terms and conditions for issuance of
the permit must be completed at least 30 days prior to the event unless a
longer time period is prescribed by the City Manager or if such time period
is waived by the City Manager as described in this Section. The City Manager
shall act upon the completed application for a permit within seven days after
the receipt thereof, and must notify the Applicant of the approval or denial
of the application within that same time period. However, the City may extend
the period of review for an additional seven days by issuance of a written
notice of extension. Written notice of denial or notice of extension shall be
served on the Applicant by personal delivery, or by United States mail, with
proper postage prepaid, to the name and address set forth on the application
for permit.



   100.07(C)(3)   Contents of notice; grounds for denial.  Notice of
denial of an application for permit shall clearly set forth the grounds upon
which the permit was denied. Where an application or permit has been denied
because a fully executed prior application for the same time and place has
been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to the prior
Applicant authorizing uses or activities that do not reasonably permit
multiple occupancy of the particular area, the City may propose an
alternative place, if available for the same time, or an alternative time, if
available for the same place. The City may deny an application for permit on
any of the following grounds:



   100.07(C)(3)(a)   The application for permit (including any required
attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed;



   100.07(C)(3)(b)   The Applicant has not tendered the required
application fee with the application, or has not tendered the required user
fee, indemnification agreement, insurance certificate, security deposit or
waiver application within the times prescribed by the City Manager;



   100.07(C)(3)(c)   The application for permit contains a material
falsehood or misrepresentation;



   100.07(C)(3)(d)   The Applicant is legally incompetent to contract
or to sue and be sued;



   100.07(C)(3)(e)   The application or the Person on whose behalf the
application for permit was made has on prior occasions damaged City property
and has not paid in full for such damage, or has other outstanding and unpaid
debts to the City;



   100.07(C)(3)(f)   A fully executed prior application for permit for
the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be
granted to a prior Applicant authorizing uses or activities that do not
reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular Public Park , or other
Public Property or part hereof;



   100.07(C)(3)(g)   The use or activity intended by the Applicant
would conflict with planned programs organized and conducted by the City;



   100.07(C)(3)(h)   The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or
inconsistent with the Uses of the Public Park or other Public Property;



   100.07(C)(3)(i)   The use or activity intended by the Applicant
would present a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the Applicant ,
other users of the Public Park or other Public Property, City employees or
the public;



   100.07(C)(3)(j)   The Applicant has not complied or cannot comply
with applicable licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations of the City
concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services;



   100.07(C(3)(k)   The use or activity intended by the Applicant is
prohibited by Law, or City ordinances or regulations; or



   100.07(C)(3)(l)   The Applicant or the Person on whose behalf the
application for permit was made has on prior occasions made material
misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity
previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or
on behalf of the Applicant .



   100.07(C)(4)   Amendment or revision of applications.  Any
amendment or revision of an application or permit shall for purposes of
determining the priority of the application for permit, relate back to the
original filing thereof; but the time in which the City shall grant or deny
the application for permit and serve notice of such granting or denial shall
be computed from the date of the amendment or revision.



   100.07(D)   Procedures for review; waivers.



   100.07(D)(1)   Review by City Commission.



   100.07(D)(1)(a)   Appeal period.  Any Applicant who is denied a
permit or denied a request for a waiver of user fee, security deposit, or
certificate of insurance, or a permittee who has all or a portion of its
security deposit retained because it was assessed damages or a fine pursuant
to this ordinance may, within three days of the service of notice of such
determination, file a written appeal from such determination with the City
Commission. If the Applicant fails to file a written appeal within such
three-day period, then any rights to appeal shall be deemed waived;



   100.07(D)(1)(b)   Action by Commission.  The City Commission shall
have seven days from the date on which the appeal was received in which to
serve upon the Applicant a notice that the Commission has affirmed, modified
or reversed the denial of a permit, or retention of security deposit. Such
notice shall be deemed served upon the Applicant or permittee when it is
personally delivered or when it is sent by United States mail, with proper
postage prepaid, to the name and address set forth on the application for
permit. If such notice is not served upon the Applicant or permittee within
seven days of the date upon which the appeal was filed, then the denial or
retention of security deposit shall be deemed affirmed.



   100.07(D)(2)   Form of appeals.  Any appeals filed pursuant to this
Chapter shall state succinctly the grounds upon which it is asserted that the
determination should be modified or reversed and shall be accompanied by
copies of the application for permit, the written notice of the determination
of the City, and any other papers material to the determination.



   100.07(D)(3)   Waiver of requirements.  Any requirements for a user
fee, application fee, cost recovery fee, security deposits, or certificate of
insurance shall be waived by the City Manager, if the activity is protected
by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and the requirement
would be so financially burdensome that it would preclude the Applicant from
using City property for the proposed activity. However, fees for use of City
equipment and special services shall not be waived pursuant to this
subsection. Application for a waiver shall be made on a form prescribed by
the City Manager and submitted simultaneously with the permit application.
The application for a waiver must include an affidavit by the Applicant and
sufficient financial information about the Applicant to enable the City
Manager to determine whether the requirement(s) would be so financially
burdensome that it would preclude the Applicant from using City property for
proposed activity.



   100.07(D)(3)(a)   If it appears that the Applicant does not have the
ability to acquire sufficient funds to satisfy the user fee requirement prior
to the proposed event, but that the Applicant intends to raise sufficient
funds at the event, the City Manager shall require the Applicant to pay such
user fee out of the proceeds of the proposed event.



   100.07(D)(3)(b)   If no written denial is issued within 14 days of
the date on which the application for such waiver is fully completed,
executed and filed with the City Manager, the waiver request shall be deemed
denied. Denials of requests for such waivers shall be subject to the appeal
procedures contained in this Section.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 100.08  WAIVER OF PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   The prohibition of any manner of parking as specified in this Code may
be waived for a special event by the City Manager, provided that all required
permits are obtained and that Traffic movement arrangements have both been
reviewed and approved by the Police Department in advance.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 100.09  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   For those events where the Applicant wishes to serve Alcoholic
Beverages , the application must demonstrate that the following additional
criteria will be met:



   100.09(A)   Events with 50 or fewer participants.  Events where 50
or fewer participants are expected at any given time and that will be held
within 50 feet of the entrance of the establishment sponsoring the event:



   100.09(A)(1)   The event may not block the Sidewalk or any other
means of pedestrian travel; and



   100.09(A)(2)   If the Police Chief finds that there are special
circumstances requiring an off- duty deputy, he or she may require such off
duty Officers as he or she finds are necessary to maintain order (a decision
of the Police Chief to require off duty Officers may be appealed to the City
Commission pursuant to the procedures of § 124.69.)



   100.09(B)   Events with more than 50 participants.  For events
where more than 50 participants are expected at any given time or that will
be held further than 50 feet from the entrance of the establishment
sponsoring the event:



   100.09(B)(1)   A specific area must be designated where the
Alcoholic Beverages will be served and consumed. The Applicant must detail
what steps will be taken to ensure that no open container of alcohol is
removed from the designated area and that order is maintained at the event.
Such steps must include, but are not limited to:



   100.09(B)(1)(a)   Limiting access to the area;



   100.09(B)(1)(b)   Provision of off duty police Officers to enforce
order and the boundaries of the area as follows:



   100.09(B)(1)(b)1.   For events where the number of anticipated
participants does not exceed 100 at any given time, two Officers are required;



   100.09(B)(1)(b)2.   For events where the number of anticipated
participants exceeds 100 at any given time, two Officers plus one additional
Officer for each additional 100, or portion thereof, anticipated participants
at any given time (if, during the actual event, the City Manager finds that
there are significantly more participants at the event than the Applicant has
provided off duty Officers for, this may be considered in reviewing any
future application from the same or a related Applicant );



   100.09(B)(1)(b)3.   If the Police Chief finds that there are special
circumstances requiring a greater number of off duty deputies than required
by subsections 100.09(B)(1)(b)1. and 100.09(B)(1)(b)2. above, he or she may
require such additional off duty Officers as he or she finds are necessary to
maintain order (a decision of the Police Chief to require additional off duty
Officers may be appealed to the City Commission pursuant to the procedures of
§ 124.69);



   100.09(B)(2)   Provision must be made for appropriate Traffic
control, etc.;



   100.09(B)(3)   All Alcoholic Beverages must be served in paper or
plastic containers. No glass will be permitted; and



   100.09(B)(4)   Non- Alcoholic Beverage alternatives must be
available at all times when alcohol is being served.



   100.09(C)   Requirements.  General requirements for all events:



   100.09(C)(1)   All Federal, State, and local Laws must be complied
with, and all necessary State licensing must be in place.



   100.09(C)(2)   Proper training in the identification of minors and
individuals who are intoxicated must be provided to anyone who will be
serving the Alcoholic Beverages .



   100.09(C)(3)   No “drinking contests” will be permitted.



   100.09(C)(4)   No more than one permit allowing the serving of
Alcoholic Beverages will be issued to the same, or a related, entity in any
six-month period.



   100.09(C)(5)   In addition to the regular event permit fee, any
Applicant for a permit allowing the serving of Alcoholic Beverages shall pay
an Alcoholic Beverage permit processing fee in an amount to be set and
amended by resolution of the City Commission.



   100.09(C)(6)   No permit allowing Alcoholic Beverage consumption
will be issued for “youth-oriented” events, such as Carnivals , youth
sports events, etc.



   100.09(C)(7)   If at any time, in the opinion of the Police Chief,
or designee, proper order is not being maintained at the event, and a danger
to public safety exists, he or she may immediately revoke any permit issued
under this Section and the service of Alcoholic Beverages must immediately
cease.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 100.10  RESERVED.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-12, passed 5-5-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



SPORTS LEAGUES IN PUBLIC PARKS



§ 100.11  BACKGROUND CHECKS.



   100.11(A)   Background check requirement.  All Sports League
Officials shall be required to undergo background checks. The local level
governing board of the sports league shall ensure that such background checks
are conducted.



   100.11(B)   Type of background check.  A thorough State and
national background check that identifies an individual’s entire criminal
history shall be conducted in accordance with F.S. § 943.0438 and all other
applicable law.



   100.11(C)   Frequency of background checks.  Every adult who is new
to a City youth sports league shall be subject to an initial background check
that shall be completed prior to that adult’s involvement in any capacity.
A background check shall be conducted annually in accordance with F.S. §
943.0438 and all other applicable law.



   100.11(D)   Responsibility for payment of costs.  All background
check related costs shall be the sole responsibility of the league. In the
event that a Sports League Official is involved in more than one sports
league, the respective leagues should work together to share the costs in a
mutually beneficial manner.



   100.11(E)   Notification regarding compliance.  Prior to the
commencement of each Year’s practice season, the local level governing
board of the league shall submit written certification to the City that the
league has complied with the City’s requirements regarding background
checks on all Sports League Officials. The certifying document shall be
signed by the presiding officer of the local level governing board of the
league. Should an adult commence participation in the league after the
commencement of the practice season, the league shall, as soon as reasonably
possible, submit a supplemental certifying document regarding a background
check on the new adult participant. The certifying document shall read as
follows:



      “In accordance with and pursuant to Chapter 100 of the City of
Weston Code, the (League Name) hereby certifies that it has complied with the
City’s requirements regarding background checks on all Sports League
Officials.”



   100.11(F)   Responsibility of records maintenance, ownership, and
control.  Maintenance, ownership, and control of all background check
records and information generated, received, possessed and stored shall be
the sole responsibility of the league, and shall be retained for a period of
at least five Years in accordance with F.S. § 943.0438 and all other
applicable law.



   100.11(G)   Failure to mandate a State and national criminal
background check.  Any Sports League Official who has not passed a criminal
background check, in accordance with F.S. § 943.0438 and all other
applicable law, is prohibited from functioning in an official capacity until
such time as the process has been successfully completed.  Any sports league
that is found to be in violation of this Section is subject to a suspension
or revocation of its facilities use permit.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-2-2016)



§ 100.12  CONCUSSION AND HEAD INJURY REGULATIONS.



   Sports leagues shall comply with the regulations regarding concussion
and head injury in accordance with F.S. § 943.0438 and all other applicable
law. Any sports league that fails to comply with such regulations is subject
to a suspension or revocation of its facilities use permit.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-2-2016)



§ 100.13  DESIGNATED SUPERVISOR.



   100.13(A)   Management, control and supervision.  Any Person that
is granted a permit to utilize City athletic facilities for purposes of
athletics shall manage, control and supervise all players, coaches, managers,
officials and other volunteers required for the operation of its activity.



   100.13(B)   Designated supervisor requirement. Each Person utilizing
City athletic facilities must have a designated supervisor (who must be at
least 21 years of age) on site equipped with a cellular telephone during all
official games. The designated supervisor must be clearly identified by a
shirt, cap or other means acceptable to the City.



   100.13(C)   Authorization.  The designated supervisor shall be duly
authorized by the Person to take whatever actions they deem appropriate to
ensure the safety, health and welfare of the participants and spectators.



   100.13(D)   Failure to have designated supervisor.  Any Person that
fails to have a designated supervisor is subject to a suspension or
revocation of its facilities use permit.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-2-2016)



INDOOR INSTRUCTORS



§ 100.16  INDOOR INSTRUCTORS.



   No Person shall conduct any lessons, classes or training for a
particular activity in any CityBuilding without entering into a written
agreement with the City. Such agreement shall require the instructor to
submit to a screening and background check, in accordance with F.S. §
943.0438 and all other applicable law, indemnify the City, and provide proof
of insurance acceptable to the City.



(Ord. 2010-17, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-2-2016)



MOBILE VENDORS



§ 100.20  MOBILE VENDORS.



   Mobile Vendors shall comply with the regulations as set forth in
Chapter 89 of the Code.



(Ord. 2015-19, passed 9-11-2015)



TITLE XI:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      110.   SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING



      111.   WATER AND SEWER SERVICES



CHAPTER 110: SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING



Section



   110.01   Reserved



   110.02   Garbage standards



Recycling



   110.03   Recycling program



   110.04   Scavenging



Construction Debris



   110.10   Roll-off containers/dumpsters in single-family residential
districts (SF)



Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment



   110.20   General findings



   110.21   Legislative determination of special benefit



   110.22   Alternative method of action



   110.23   Annual solid waste collection services assessments



   110.24   Assessment roll



   110.25   Notice by publication



   110.26   Notice by mail



   110.27   Adoption of an assessment resolution



   110.28   Effect of adoption of assessment resolution



   110.29   Lien of solid waste collection services assessments



   110.30   Revisions to solid waste collection services assessments



   110.31   Procedural irregularities



   110.32   Correction of errors and omissions



   110.33   Interim assessments



   110.34   Method of collection



   110.35   Alternative method of collection



   110.36   Government parcels



§ 110.01  RESERVED.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed 6-17-2013)



§ 110.02  GARBAGE STANDARDS.



   110.02(A)   Single-family/curbside residential.  The following
requirements shall apply to all residential Solid Waste generated by
Single-Family/curbside residential consumers:



   110.02(A)(1)   Household Waste shall only be placed and kept in
Garbage bags inside an Automated Cart when put out for collection.



   110.02(A)(2)   Automated Carts put out for collection shall be
placed within two feet of the curb with the handle facing away from the curb.
Automated Carts shall be placed at least three feet away from any other
object, including but not limited to Trees , mailboxes, parked cars or
Utility lines. All Automated Carts and Recycling Bins or Recycling Carts
shall be shielded from visibility from any adjacent Street and from the view
of any abutting residence by Landscaping , screening or placement within an
enclosed garage or Structure at all times, except when put out for collection
in conformity with this Section. Automated Carts and Recycling Bins or
Recycling Carts shall not be put out prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day before
collection and shall be stored by 9:00 p.m. on the day of collection.



   110.02(B)   Multi-family residential and commercial customers. 
Waste generated by multi-family residential and commercial customers shall
only be placed and kept in Garbage bags inside a roll-off Container or
dumpster utilized for waste collection. Any roll-off Container or other form
of dumpster in a Multi-Family Residential or Commercial District must be
maintained to comply with the following standards:



   110.02(B)(1)   The Container or dumpster shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition free of rust and graffiti;



   110.02(B)(2)   If it is necessary to locate the Container on top of
any grass or other Landscaped area, the area must be fully restored once the
Container has been removed;



   110.02(B)(3)   The Container or dumpster shall not block the primary
means of ingress and egress of any Building nor any Sidewalk or encroaching
into any Right-Of-Way ;



   110.02(B)(4)   No more than one such Container or dumpster shall be
located on any parcel of property at any time; and



   110.02(B)(5)   The Container or dumpster shall not overflow.



   The violation of any of the above standards shall result in the City
immediately having the Container removed at the property Owner ’s expense.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



RECYCLING



§ 110.03  RECYCLING PROGRAM.



   110.03(A)   Single-Family/curbside residential.  The following
requirements shall apply to all Recyclable Material generated by
Single-Family/curbside residential consumers:



   110.03(A)(1)   Collection date.  Recyclable Material shall be
collected one day per week on a day that coincides with one of the
resident’s Solid Waste collection days.



   110.03(A)(2)   Materials to be collected.  The following materials
shall be segregated from all other Solid Waste material and may be commingled
in the Recycling Cart(s) provided: Newspapers, newspaper inserts, and all
clean paper, such as magazines, phone books, catalogs, junk mail, regular
paper, printer paper and receipts, colorless, green, and brown glass
containers, aluminum, steel, and bimetal containers, polycoated tabletop
containers and aseptic packages, plastic containers types #1, #2, and #3,
cereal boxes, shoe boxes, and cartons and drink boxes shall be placed in the
Recycling Cart provided. Completed folded cardboard boxes that are placed
beside a Recycling Cart, and newspapers placed in a Recycling Cart shall be
collected by the City’s Solid Waste contractor (“Contractor”).
Cardboard boxes and newspapers that have been properly set out and have
become wet due to local weather conditions shall be collected by the
Contractor.



   110.03(A)(3)   Requirements.  Food and beverage containers must be
rinsed clean of residue.



   110.03(A)(4)   Method of collection.  Recyclable Material, shall be
placed curbside on the scheduled collection day adjacent to the Solid Waste
in the Recycling Cart(s).



   110.03(B)   Multi-family residential and commercial customers.



   110.03(B)(1)   Multi-family residential customers shall be
responsible for implementing an On-SiteRecycling program for Recycling those
items set forth in subsection 110.03(A)(2) in conjunction with the City’s
Solid Waste contractor/franchisee.



   110.03(B)(2)   The Recycling program at each multi-family
residential facility shall ensure that each living unit has access to a
Recycling Cart(s) suitable for the collection of Recyclable Material. The
type and frequency of collection service and the type, number, and size of
Recycling Carts for multi-family residential customers shall be determined by
the Solid Waste Contractor/franchisee based on the requirements of the
particular location. Frequency of collection shall be at least once a week.
All Recyclable Material may be commingled in the Recycling Carts located at
multi-family residential facilities.



110.03(B)(3)   Commercial customers shall be responsible for implementing
an On-SiteRecycling program for Recycling those items set forth in subsection
110.03(A)(2).  The type and frequency of collection service and the type,
number, and size of Recycling Carts for commercial customers shall be
determined by the commercial customer and the commercial customer’s
selected recovered materials contractor based on the requirements of the
particular location.  Frequency of collection shall be at least once a week.



   110.03(C)   Hazardous materials.  Recycling Carts containing
hazardous or noxious wastes shall be excluded from the residential Recycling
program.



   110.03(D)   Commercial containers and carts.  All commercial
containers and/or carts used for accumulating Recyclable Material shall be
permanently labeled “FOR RECYCLING ONLY, NO TRASH”.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-05, passed 6-17-2013; Am. Ord.
2013-17, passed 12- 2-2013)



§ 110.04  SCAVENGING.



   Recyclable Materials , Solid Waste , Disaster Debris and bulk Trash are
the property of the Owner or Tenant of each individual residential unit and
multi-family residential unit until such time as they are collected by the
Contractor. It shall be a violation of this Section for any Person not
authorized in writing by the City, through its franchisee, to collect or
remove any item that has been specifically placed for collection through the
City’s Solid Waste , Disaster Debris , bulk Trash or Recycling program.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS



§ 110.10  ROLL-OFF CONTAINERS/DUMPSTERS IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS (SF).



   110.10(A)   General prohibition; exceptions.  All roll-off
containers or other forms of dumpsters are prohibited in all Single-Family
Residential Districts (SF) except:



   110.10(A)(1)   When a valid, City-issued Building Permit is active
on the property; or



   110.10(A)(2)   During periods of Construction that do not require a
Building Permit , so long as the roll-off container or other form of dumpster
is not on the property for more than ten-calendar days during any 90-day
period.



   110.10(B)   Standards.  Any roll-off container or other form of
dumpster in a Single-Family Residential District must be maintained to the
following standards:



   110.10(B)(1)   In a clean and sanitary condition free of rust and
graffiti;



   110.10(B)(2)   If it is necessary to locate the container on top of
any grass or other landscaped area, the area must be fully restored once the
container has been removed;



   110.10(B)(3)   Not blocking the primary means of ingress and egress
of any Building nor any Sidewalk or encroaching into any Right-Of-Way ;



   110.10(B)(4)   Not more than one such container or dumpster on any
parcel of property at any time;



   110.10(B)(5)   Not overflowing; and



   110.10(B)(6)   Not to be used for the disposal of any food waste,
Household Waste , or hazardous substance.



   The violation of any of the above standards shall result in the City
immediately having the container removed at the property Owner ’s expense.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES ASSESSMENT



§ 110.20  GENERAL FINDINGS.



   It is ascertained, determined, and declared that:



   110.20(A)   Powers.  The City Commission may exercise any
governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except
when expressly prohibited by Law, and the City Commission may legislate on
any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those
subjects described in F.S. § 166.021(3)(a), (b), (c), and (d). The subject
matter of F.S. § 166.021(3)(a), (b), (c), and (d) are not relevant to the
imposition of Assessments related to Solid Waste collection services of the
City.



   110.20(B)   Purpose.  The purpose is to:



   110.20(B)(1)   Provide procedures and standards for the imposition
of Citywide Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments on
Single-FamilyResidential Property ;



   110.20(B)(2)   Authorize a procedure for the funding of Solid Waste
collection services providing special benefits to Single-FamilyResidential
Property within the City; and



   110.20(B)(3)   Legislatively determine the special benefit provided
to Assessed Property from the provision of the City’s Solid Waste
collection services.



   110.20(C)   Non-ad valorem Assessments.  The Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessments imposed using the procedures provided in this subchapter
shall constitute non-ad valorem Assessments within the meaning and intent of
the Uniform Assessment Collection Act.



   110.20(D)   Imposition by the City Commission.  The Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessments to be imposed using the procedures provided
in this subchapter are imposed by the City Commission, not the Broward County
Board of County Commissioners, Property Appraiser or Tax Collector. The
duties of the Property Appraiser and Tax Collector under the provisions of
this subchapter and the Uniform Assessment Collection Act are ministerial.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.21  LEGISLATIVE DETERMINATION OF SPECIAL BENEFIT.



   It is ascertained and declared that Solid Waste collection services
provide a special benefit to assessed parcels because Solid Waste collection
services possess a logical relationship to the Use and enjoyment of improved
property by:



   110.21(A)   Cleanliness.  Maintaining cleanliness through the
proper, safe and cost effective removal of Solid Waste and Recyclable
Materials from the properties;



   110.21(B)   Reduction of opportunities of threats.  Reducing
opportunities for threats to health safety by removal of Debris and Garbage
from the Residential Properties;



   110.21(C)   Removal of materials supporting rodents.  Removing
materials that support rodent and other nuisance pest infestation from the
residential and surrounding properties; and



   110.21(D)   Protection and enhancement of property values. 
Protecting and enhancing property values resulting from uniform delivery and
availability of such residential Solid Waste collection services.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.22  ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF ACTION.



   110.22(A)   Alternative method.  This subchapter shall be deemed to
provide an additional and alternative method and shall be regarded as
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other Laws, and shall not
be regarded as a derogation of any powers now existing or that may hereafter
come into existence. This subchapter, being necessary for the welfare of the
inhabitants of the City, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes
hereof.



   110.22(B)   Notice.  Nothing herein shall preclude the City Manager
from directing and authorizing any of the following:



   110.22(B)(1)   Any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper,
necessary, or convenient by the City;



   110.22(B)(2)   Any notice required by this subchapter, or



   110.22(B)(3)   Any notice required by Law, including the Uniform
Assessment Collection Act .



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.23  ANNUAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES ASSESSMENTS.



   110.23(A)   Imposition.  The City Commission is authorized to
impose an annual Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment to fund all or
any portion of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessed Cost upon
benefitted property at a rate of Assessment based on the special benefit
accruing to such property from the City ’s provision of Solid Waste
collection services. All Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments shall be
imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this subchapter.



   110.23(B)   Apportionment methodology.  The amount of the Solid
Waste Collection Services Assessment imposed in a Fiscal Year against an
Assessed Property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment
methodology designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the
Solid Collection Services Assessed Cost among properties on a basis
reasonably related to the special benefit provided by Solid Waste collection
services funded with Assessment proceeds.



   110.23(C)   Imposition by Resolution.  The Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment for the last Fiscal Year may be imposed for the upcoming
Fiscal Year by resolution without a public hearing before the City Commission.



   110.23(D)   Notice and public hearing.  The City shall give notice
and hold a public hearing on the imposition of the Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment, if:



   110.23(D)(1)   Any of the rates of the Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment proposed for the upcoming Fiscal Year are increased over
any of the rates of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment for the
last Fiscal Year ;



   110.23(D)(2)   The geographical boundaries of the City have changed;



   110.23(D)(3)   There is a change in the purpose of the Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment ; or



   110.23(D)(4)   There is a change in the use of the revenue generated
by the collection services Assessment .



   110.23(E)   Inclusion on TRIM Notice.  Any Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment or proposed Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment
imposed pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall be included
on the TRIM Notice.



   110.23(F)   Government Parcel.  Nothing contained in this
subchapter shall be construed to require the imposition of a Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment against a Government Parcel.



   110.23(G)   Exemption.  The City may exempt from the Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment parcels used for purposes that provide total
exemption from ad valorem taxation under Florida Law.



   110.23(H)   Mixed residential and other uses.  Notwithstanding the
Land Use Title of the Code and corresponding designation assigned to a
parcel, if any parcel contains mixed residential and other uses, the City may
assess the portion of the property designated residential at the rate of
Assessment and unit of measurement applicable.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.24  ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   110.24(A)   Assessment Roll.  The City Manager shall prepare, or
cause to be prepared, the Assessment Roll, which shall contain the following:



   110.24(A)(1)   A summary description of all Assessed Property
conforming to the description contained on the Tax Roll ;



   110.24(A)(2)   The name of the Owner of the Assessed Property ; and



   110.24(A)(3)   The amount of the Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment to be imposed against each Assessed Property .



   110.24(B)   Retained by City Clerk.  The Assessment Roll shall be
retained by the City Clerk and shall be open to public inspection. The
foregoing shall not be construed to require that the Assessment Roll be in
printed form if the amount of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment
for each parcel can be determined by use of a computer.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.25  NOTICE BY PUBLICATION.



   110.25(A)   Notice.  The City Clerk shall publish in a newspaper of
general circulation within the City a notice stating that at a public meeting
of the City Commission on a certain date and hour, the City Commission will
hear and consider the objections of all Interested Persons to the Assessment
resolution that shall establish the rate of Assessment and approve the
Assessment Roll. This notice shall be published at least 20 calendar days
prior to the public hearing.



   110.25(B)   Requirements.  The published notice shall conform to
the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such
notice shall include:



   110.25(B)(1)   The name of the local governing board;



   110.25(B)(2)   A geographic depiction of the property subject to the
Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment ;



   110.25(B)(3)   The proposed schedule of the Assessment ;



   110.25(B)(4)   A brief and general description of the Solid Waste
collection services to be provided;



   110.25(B)(5)   The fact that the Assessment will be collected by the
Tax Collector ;



   110.25(B)(6)   A statement that all affected parcel Owners have the
right to appear at the public hearing and the right to file written
objections within 20 days of the publication of the notice; and



   110.25(B)(7)   A statement that the Assessment Roll is available for
inspection at the City Clerk’s Office or such other place as determined by
the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.26  NOTICE BY MAIL.



   110.26(A)   Notice by mail; TRIM notice.  In addition to the
published notice required by § 110.25, the City Clerk shall provide notice
of the proposed Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment by first class
mail to the Owner of each parcel of property subject to the Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment. Alternatively, notice pursuant to this
Section may be given through the TRIM Notice, provided that the TRIM Notice
contains all information required by this Section and the Uniform Assessment
Collection Act, if applicable.



   110.26(B)   Notice contents.  Such notice shall include:



   110.26(B)(1)   The purpose of the Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment ;



   110.26(B)(2)   The rate of Assessment to be levied against each
parcel;



   110.26(B)(3)   The unit of measurement applied to determine the
Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment ;



   110.26(B)(4)   The number of such units contained in each parcel;



   110.26(B)(5)   The total revenue to be collected by the City from
the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment ;



   110.26(B)(6)   A statement that failure to pay the Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued
against the property or foreclosure proceedings to be instituted, either of
which may result in a loss of title to the property;



   110.26(B)(7)   A statement that all affected Owners have a right to
appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the City Commission
within 20 days of the notice; and



   110.26(B)(8)   The date, time, and place of the hearing.



   110.26(C)   Requirements for mailed notice.  The mailed notice
shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment
Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed to each Owner at such address as is
shown on the Tax Roll. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior
to the public hearing. Notice shall be deemed given upon delivery thereof to
the possession of the United States Postal Service. Failure of the Owner to
receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the
validity of the Assessment Roll nor release or discharge any obligation for
payment of a Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment imposed by the City
Commission pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.27  ADOPTION OF AN ASSESSMENT RESOLUTION.



   110.27(A)   Written objections.  If a public hearing is required
for the imposition of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment, the
City Commission shall receive and consider written objections of Interested
Persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the City Commission
adopt an Assessment resolution. All written objections to the Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment, the Assessment Roll or the Assessment
resolution shall be filed with the City Clerk any time between the publishing
or mailing of the notice of public hearing and the date of the public
hearing, and shall be and become part of the record of the public hearing.



   110.27(B)   Assessment Resolution.  If a public hearing is not
required for imposition of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment,
the City Commission may adopt an Assessment resolution at a public meeting.



   110.27(C)   Resolution requirements.  The Assessment resolution
shall:



   110.27(C)(1)   Adopt, or amend and adopt as amended, the City
Manager’s report given pursuant to § 110.24;



   110.27(C)(2)   Establish the rate of Assessment to be imposed in the
upcoming Fiscal Year ;



   110.27(C)(3)   Approve the Assessment Roll, with such amendments as
the City Commission deems just and equitable; and



   110.27(C)(4)   Determine the method of collection.



   110.27(D)   Certification of Assessment Roll.  After the Assessment
resolution is adopted, the Assessment Roll shall be certified by the City
Clerk and delivered to the Tax Collector, as required by the Uniform
Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in §
110.35 is used to collect the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments,
such other official as the City Commission shall designate by resolution.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.28  EFFECT OF ADOPTION OF ASSESSMENT RESOLUTION.



   110.28(A)   Legislative determination.  The adoption of the
Assessment resolution by the City Commission shall constitute a legislative
determination that all parcels assessed derive a special benefit from the
Solid Waste collection services to be provided or construed and a legislative
determination that the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments are fairly
and reasonably apportioned among the parcels that receive the special benefit.



   110.28(B)   Final adjudication.  The adoption of the Assessment
resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to
Assessed Property (including, but not limited to, the determination of
special benefit and fair apportionment to the Assessed Property, the method
of apportionment and Assessment, the rate of Assessment, the validity of the
Assessment Roll, the presence of errors in the Assessment Roll and the levy
and lien of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments), unless proper
steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure
relief within 20 days of the date of the public hearing on the Assessment
resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to
affect the finality of any Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment not
challenged within the required 20-day period for those Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessments previously imposed against Assessed Property by the
inclusion of the Assessed Property on an Assessment Roll.



   110.28(C)   Adjustment.  If the Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment for any parcel shall be modified, increased, reduced, or abated by
the court, an adjustment shall be made on the Assessment Roll.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.29  LIEN OF SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES ASSESSMENTS.



   Upon the adoption of the Assessment Roll, all Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessments shall constitute a lien against Assessed Property equal
in rank and dignity with the liens of all State, county, district, or
municipal taxes and Special Assessments. Except as otherwise provided by Law,
such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages,
titles, and claims until paid. The lien for a Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment shall be deemed perfected upon the City Commission’s adoption of
the Assessment resolution. The lien for a Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach
to the property included on the Assessment Roll as of the prior January 1,
the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the Tax Roll . The lien for
a Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment collected under the alternative
method of collection provided in § 110.35 shall be deemed perfected upon the
City Commission’s adoption of the Assessment resolution, and shall attach
to the parcel on such date of adoption.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.30  REVISIONS TO SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES ASSESSMENTS.



   If any Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment made under these
provisions of this subchapter is either in whole or in part annulled,
vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction,
or if the City Commission is satisfied that any such Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be
enforced or collected, or if the City Commission has failed to include or has
omitted any property on the Assessment Roll, which property should have been
so included, the City Commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new
Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment against any property benefitted by
the Solid Collection Services Assessed Costs, following as nearly as may be
practicable, these provisions. In case such second Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the City Commission
may obtain and impose other Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments until
a valid Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment is imposed.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.31  PROCEDURAL IRREGULARITIES.



   Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with
the levy of any Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment under the
provisions of this subchapter shall not affect the validity of the same after
the approval thereof, and any Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment as
finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such Solid
Waste Collection Services Assessment was duly levied, that the Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other
proceedings adequate to such Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment were
duly had, taken, and performed as required by this subchapter. No variance
from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly
shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.32  CORRECTION OF ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   110.32(A)   No release or discharge of obligation for payment.  No
error or omission on the part of the City, Property Appraiser, Tax Collector,
City Manager, City Commission, or their deputies or employees, shall operate
to release or discharge any obligation for payment of a Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment imposed by the City Commission.



   110.32(B)   Omitted or erroneous Assessments.  When it shall appear
that any Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment should have been imposed
under this subchapter against a parcel specially benefitted by the provision
of Solid Waste collection services, but that such parcel was omitted from the
Assessment Roll, or was erroneously assessed, or was not listed on the Tax
Roll as an individual parcel as of the effective date of the Assessment Roll
approved by the Assessment resolution for any upcoming Fiscal Year, the City
Commission may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the Owner of
the omitted or erroneously assessed parcel in the manner and form provided in
§ 110.27 of this subchapter, impose the applicable Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment for the Fiscal Year in which such error or omission is
discovered, in addition to the applicable Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment due for the prior two Fiscal Years. Such Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment shall constitute a lien against Assessed Property equal
in rank and dignity with the liens of all State , county, district, or
municipal taxes and Special Assessments and superior in rank and dignity to
all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the
real property involved. Such Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment shall
be collected as provided in this subchapter, and shall be deemed perfected on
the date of adoption of the resolution imposing the omitted or erroneous
assessments.



   110.32(C)   Reclassification.  Prior to the delivery of the
Assessment Roll to the Tax Collector in accordance with the Uniform
Assessment Collection Act, the City Manager shall have the authority at any
time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed
petition from the Owner of any property subject to a Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment, to reclassify a parcel based upon presentation of
competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in applying the
Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment apportionment method to any
particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice
pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall
be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of
the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment imposed under the provisions.
All requests from affected property Owners for any such changes,
modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the City
Manager and not the Property Appraiser or Tax Collector.



   110.32(D)   Changes, modifications or corrections.  After the
Assessment Roll has been delivered to the Tax Collector in accordance with
the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or
corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures
applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the Tax Roll upon timely
written request and direction of the City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.33  INTERIM ASSESSMENTS.



   110.33(A)   Calculation.  An interim Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment may be imposed against all parcels for which a
Certificate Of Occupancy is issued after the adoption of the Assessment
resolution. The amount of the interim Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be
one-twelfth of the annual rate for such parcel computed in accordance with
the Assessment resolution for the Fiscal Year for which the interim Solid
Waste Collection Services Assessment is being imposed. Such monthly rate
shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the Fiscal Year.
In addition to the monthly rate, the interim Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment may also include an estimate of the subsequent Fiscal Year’s
Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment.



   110.33(B)   Collection.  Issuance of the Certificate Of Occupancy
without the payment in full of the interim Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment shall not relieve the Owner of such parcel of the obligation of
full payment. Any interim Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment not
collected prior to the issuance of the Certificate Of Occupancy may be
collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, under the
alternative method of collection provided in § 110.35, or by any other
method authorized by Law.



   110.33(C)   Lien.  Any interim Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the Certificate Of
Occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of
that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all
State, county, district or municipal taxes and Special Assessments, and
superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and
claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed
perfected upon the issuance of the Certificate Of Occupancy.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.34  METHOD OF COLLECTION.



   110.34(A)   Uniform method.  Unless otherwise directed by the City
Commission, the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments shall be
collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in the Uniform Assessment
Collection Act, and the City shall comply with all applicable provisions of
the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing or notice required by this
subchapter may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the
Uniform Assessment Collection Act or other provision of Law.



   110.34(B)   Delinquency.  The amount of a Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment to be collected using the uniform method pursuant to the
Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any specific parcel of benefitted
property may include an amount equivalent to the payment delinquency,
delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior year’s Assessment for a
comparable service, facility, or program provided:



   110.34(B)(1)   The collection method used in connection with the
prior year’s Assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of
collection authorized by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act ;



   110.34(B)(2)   Notice is provided to the Owner as required under the
Uniform Assessment Collection Act ; and



   110.34(B)(3)   Any lien on the affected parcel for the prior
year’s Assessment is supplanted and transferred to such Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to
the Tax Collector by the City.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.35  ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF COLLECTION.



   In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act , the City
Commission may elect to collect the Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessments by any other method that is authorized by Law or under the
alternative collection method provided by this Section:



   110.35(A)   Bills or accompanying explanatory material.  The City
Commission shall provide Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment bills by
first class mail to the Owner of each affected parcel subject to the Solid
Waste Collection Services Assessment. The bill or accompanying explanatory
material shall include:



   110.35(A)(1)   A brief explanation of the Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment ;



   110.35(A)(2)   A description of the unit of measurement used to
determine the amount of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment ;



   110.35(A)(3)   The number of units contained within the parcel;



   110.35(A)(4)   The total amount of the Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period;



   110.35(A)(5)   The location at which payment will be accepted;



   110.35(A)(6)   The date on which the Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment is due; and



   110.35(A)(7)   A statement that the Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment constitutes a lien against Assessed Property equal in rank and
dignity with the liens of all State, county, district or municipal taxes and
other non-ad valorem Assessments.



   110.35(B)   Recordation.  A general notice of the lien resulting
from imposition of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments shall be
recorded in the official records of the City. Nothing herein shall be
construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the
official records.



   110.35(C)   Foreclosure.  The City Commission shall have the right
to foreclose and collect all delinquent Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessments in the manner provided by Law for the foreclosure of mortgages on
real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and
collection proceedings. A Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment shall
become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date payment was
due. The City Commission or its agent shall notify any parcel Owner who is
delinquent in payment of his or her Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment within 60 days from the date such Assessment was due. Such notice
shall state that the City Commission or its agent will either:



   110.35(C)(1)   Initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and
cause the foreclosure of such parcel subject to a delinquent Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by Law
for foreclosure of mortgages on real property; or



   110.35(C)(2)   Cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent Solid
Waste Collection Services Assessment , not previously subject to collection
using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act , to be
collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year.



   110.35(D)   Costs, fees and expenses.  All costs, fees and
expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and title search expenses,
related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in
any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in
any such action, the City may be the purchaser to the same extent as any
Person. The City Commission or its agent may join in one foreclosure action
for the collection of Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments against any
or all parcels assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All
delinquent Owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an
apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City
Commission and its agents, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, in
collection of such delinquent Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments and
any other costs incurred by the City Commission as a result of such
delinquent Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments and the same shall be
collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action.



   110.35(E)   Uniform Assessment Collection Act.  In lieu of
foreclosure, any delinquent Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment and
the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant
to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that:



   110.35(E)(1)   Notice is provided to the Owner in the manner
required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this subchapter; and



   110.35(E)(2)   Any existing lien of record on the affected parcel
for the delinquent Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment is supplanted
by the lien resulting from certification of the Assessment Roll, as
applicable, to the Tax Collector .



   110.35(F)   Correction of errors and omissions.  Notwithstanding
the City Commission’s use of an alternative method of collection, the City
Manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and
omissions as provided to him or her or other City officials in § 110.32.



   110.35(G)   Resolution.  Any City Commission action required in the
collection of Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments may be taken by
resolution.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 110.36  GOVERNMENT PARCELS.



   110.36(A)   Assessment bills or accompanying explanatory material
for Government Parcels.  In the event that Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessments are imposed against Government Parcels, the City Commission shall
provide Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment bills by first class mail
to the Owner of each affected Government Parcel. The bill or accompanying
explanatory material shall include:



   110.36(A)(1)   A brief description of the Solid Waste Collection
Services Assessment ;



   110.36(A)(2)   A description of the unit of measurement used to
determine the amount of the Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment ;



   110.36(A)(3)   The number of units contained within the parcel;



   110.36(A)(4)   The total amount of the parcel’s Solid Waste
Collection Services Assessment for the appropriate period;



   110.36(A)(5)   The location at which payment will be accepted; and



   110.36(A)(6)   The date on which the Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment is due.



   110.36(B)   Due date.  Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments
imposed against Government Parcels shall be due on the same date as all other
Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments and, if applicable, shall be
subject to the same discounts for early payment.



   110.36(C)   Delinquency.  A Solid Waste Collection Services
Assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the
date payment was due, as identified in this Section. The City Commission
shall notify the Owner of any Government Parcel that is delinquent in payment
of its Solid Waste Collection Services Assessment within 60 days from the
date of such Assessment was due. Such notice shall state that the City
Commission will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to
compel payment.



   110.36(D)   Costs, fees and expenses.  All costs, fees and
expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and title search expenses,
related to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included
in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent Owners of
Government Parcels against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is
filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and
expenses incurred by the City, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, in
collection of such delinquent Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments and
any other costs incurred by the City Commission as a result of such
delinquent Solid Waste Collection Services Assessments and the same shall be
collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 111: WATER AND SEWER SERVICES



Section



   111.01   Applicability



   111.02   Required connections to utilities in the City



   111.03   Extensions of Utility systems in the City



   111.04   Property owner/developer responsibilities



   111.05   Utility placement



   111.06   City Commission approval for connection to utilities in the
City



   111.07   Tampering and damaging utility facilities in the City



   111.08   Modification of Service Connections and laterals



   111.09   Fees



   111.10   Penalties for illegal use of potable water



   111.11   Utility service customers, residential



Water



   111.20   Water shortage management



   111.21   Adequacy of water quantities and pressures



   111.22   Fire service connections



   111.23   Backflow prevention



   111.24   Temporary water meters



   111.25   Change in water meter size



Sewer



   111.30   Prohibited discharges



   111.31   Prohibited discharge standards



   111.32   Emergency suspensions



   111.33   State pretreatment standards



   111.34   Grease traps



   111.35   Infiltration and inflow



   111.36   Portable toilet facilities



§ 111.01  APPLICABILITY.



   111.01(A)   ITDD.  All water distribution systems and Sewage
collection systems owned by Indian Trace Development District (ITDD) within
the City are subject to all of the requirements of this Chapter unless
specifically noted otherwise.



   111.01(B)   BDD.  Water distribution systems and Sewage collection
systems in the Bonaventure Development District (BDD) owned by the City of
Sunrise (Sunrise Utilities) shall be subject to the requirements specified in
this Chapter only where specifically noted. For water distribution systems
and Sewage collection systems in the Bonaventure Development District (BDD)
owned by the City of Sunrise, the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances
regarding their water distribution and Sewage collections systems is
incorporated herein.



   111.01(C)   Additional local, State and Federal regulations.  In
addition to the regulations set forth in this Chapter, the water and Sewer
standards set forth in the applicable local, State and Federal regulations
shall apply to water and Sewer Systems within the ITDD and BDD, including,
but not limited to:



   111.01(C)(1)   Chapter 27, Broward County Code;



   111.01(C)(2)   Chapter 40E-21 and Rules 62-625 and 62-555, Florida
Administrative Code; and



   111.01(C)(3)   40 C.F.R. Parts 261.21 and 403.5.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.02  REQUIRED CONNECTIONS TO UTILITIES IN THE CITY.



   111.02(A)   ITDD.  Where an ITDDUtility service is available within
500 feet of an existing main of adequate Capacity to any facility within the
City requiring that type of service, the Utility system shall be extended to
a service connection and the Plumbing of the facility shall be connected to
the Service Connection.



   111.02(B)   BDD.  Connections to the Sunrise Utilities system
within the City shall comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances
regarding service connections.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.03  EXTENSIONS OF UTILITY SYSTEMS IN THE CITY.



   111.03(A)   ITDDService Laterals and Service Connections.  For
extensions of the ITDDUtility system in the City:



   111.03(A)(1)   If a main already exists in a Right-Of-Way abutting a
property line, but there is no Service Lateral, or a replacement lateral is
necessary, then the Owner /developer shall construct the Service Lateral and
Service Connection , or at the Owner /developer’s expense the City shall
construct the Service Lateral and Service Connection .



   111.03(A)(2)   If a new main is required, then both the main and the
Service Lateral may be constructed at the same time as the new main. A water
Service Connection may, at the sole discretion of the City, be constructed
either at the same time as the lateral or subsequently. If either one is
constructed by the developer, title to the completed product shall be
transferred to the Utility .



   111.03(B)   BDDService Laterals and Service Connections. 
Extensions of the Sunrise Utility system in the BDD shall comply with City of
Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding water and SewerUse.



   111.03(C)   New mains not in master plan.  Any new facilities
between those depicted in a master plan and the Service Laterals for a
Development shall be constructed by the Owner/developer, at his or her own
expense. Drawings and specifications shall be submitted to the applicable
Utility for review. The applicable Utility shall either approve them or
return them for revision and resubmittal. If the applicable Utility
determines that any portion of the work must be an Oversized Facility, then
the Owner/developer shall be required to design and construct the Oversized
Facility at Owner/developer’s cost and shall be required to dedicate said
facilities to the City.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.04  PROPERTY OWNER/DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES.



   111.04(A)   ITDD.  Property Owners/developers within the ITDD shall
be responsible for accomplishing the following prior to receipt of a
Certificate Of Occupancy:



   111.04(A)(1)   Permits for design and Construction of water and
SewerPlumbing.  Property Owners/developers shall be responsible for
designing and constructing all water and SewerPlumbing on the property
Owner’s side of each Service Connection. Application for permits and
payment of associated permit fees for Construction of this work shall be in
accordance with applicable Laws, ordinances and regulations for Building
Permits and Certificates Of Occupancy, as administered by the City;



   111.04(A)(2)   Permits for work in CityRights-Of-Way or easements. 
Property Owners/developers shall be responsible for obtaining all permits
required for any work to be done in CityRights-Of-Way or easements; and



   111.04(A)(3)   Permits for mains.  Property Owners/developers shall
be responsible for obtaining all permits required by Broward County and State
regulatory authorities for any mains to be constructed. Application and
payment of fees shall be as required by those authorities.



   111.04(B)   BDD.  A property Owner utilizing the Sunrise Utility
system shall comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding
water and SewerUse.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.05  UTILITY PLACEMENT.



   All new Utility facilities in the City shall be located either in a
Public Right-Of-Way or in a recorded easement dedicated to public use and
accepted by the City if a part of the ITDD system, and accepted by the City
of Sunrise if part of the Sunrise Utility system. Easements shall be used
only if specifically approved by the City of Weston for ITDD utilities or by
the City of Sunrise for Sunrise Utilities.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.06  CITY COMMISSION APPROVAL FOR CONNECTION TO UTILITIES IN THE CITY.



   111.06(A)   ITDD.  All new and existing Developments located within
the ITDD shall be required to connect to the ITDDUtility systems when
available. Such connections shall be made without any action by the City
Commission, except as follows:



   111.06(A)(1)   If a Developers Agreement is required, then the
Developers Agreement shall be accepted by resolution of the City Commission
prior to execution of the connection contract between the developer and the
City.



   111.06(A)(2)   A significant industrial user shall not be permitted
to connect to the ITDDSewer System unless, and until, the City has amended
the Code so as to incorporate an EPA approvable “Industrial Cost Recovery
System,” as defined in Federal Regulation 40 C.F.R. 35.



   111.06(B)   Outside the ITDD.  Property located outside the ITDD
shall not be allowed to connect to a CityUtility system unless the connection
is authorized by the City Commission.



   111.06(C)   BDD.  Approvals for connection to Utilities owned by
the Sunrise Utility system in the City of Weston shall be subject to City of
Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding Utilities.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.07  TAMPERING AND DAMAGING UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE CITY.



   111.07(A)   ITDD and BDD.  For tampering or damage to any Utility
facilities of any Utility system in the City the following apply:



   111.07(A)(1)   Prevention of water meter from registering quantity
of water.  It is unlawful to willfully alter, tamper with, or damage any
meter, meter seal, pipe, conduit, line or other apparatus or device belonging
to a water and Sewer System in the City in order to prevent any water meter
from registering the quantity of water which otherwise would pass through the
same; or to alter the index or break the seal of any such meter; or in any
way to hinder or interfere with the proper action or just registration of any
such meter or device.



   111.07(A)(2)   Metered or unmetered fire hydrant.  It is unlawful
for any Person, other than those individuals who are expressly authorized by
the Owner of the Utility System to do so, to willfully open, tamper with, or
damage a metered or unmetered fire hydrant, pipe, conduit, line, or other
similar apparatus or device belonging to the Owner of a water and Sewer
System in the City.



   111.07(A)(3)   Discontinued service.  It is unlawful to tamper with
or change, or make any connection with, the water and Sewer System in the
City without the written consent of the Owner of the Utility System, or to
make any reconnection with the water and Sewer System or any part thereof
when service has been discontinued for delinquent charges until all such
delinquent charges have been paid in full.



   111.07(A)(4)   Direct benefit.  It is unlawful to knowingly use, or
receive the direct benefit from the use of, the water and Sewer System in the
City, when such direct benefit has resulted from the tampering with, altering
of, or any injury to any connection, meter, pipe, conduit, line, or other
apparatus or device owned, operated, or controlled by the Owner of a water
and Sewer System in the City, for the purpose of avoiding payment.



   111.07(B)   ITDD.  In addition to subsection 111.07(A) above, for
tampering or damage to Utility facilities of the ITDDUtility system the
following shall also apply:



   111.07(B)(1)   Discontinuance of service.  The City has the right
to discontinue service in cases where an illegal connection is found and to
assess an average water bill for a period of up to 24 months when it has been
established that the user has been receiving water service without payment
for the same. This right shall not preclude the Owner of the system from
seeking and obtaining other remedies and penalties as permitted by Law.



   111.07(B)(2)   Prosecution.  The City may prosecute any Person
violating the provisions of this Section to the fullest extent permitted by
Law, and will enforce the provisions of this Section, or any penal law
relating to the subject matter herein, consistent with this Section and F.S.
§ 812.14. Any Person violating the provisions of this Section shall be
subject to a tampering fee, as established by a Resolution of the City.



   111.07(C)   BDD.  In addition to subsection 111.07(A) above, the
prohibitions in the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding tampering or
damage to Utility facilities of the Sunrise Utility system shall also apply.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.08  MODIFICATION OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND LATERALS.



   111.08(A)   ITDD.  If the Capacity of an existing Service Lateral
or an existing Service Connection within the ITDDUtility system is inadequate
to provide the quantity of service needed by a customer, the modification
shall be performed by the City or its approved agent, and the property Owner
shall reimburse the City, or its agent, for all costs actually incurred by
the City.



   111.08(B)   BDD.  Any modifications to Service Connections and
laterals owned by the Sunrise Utility system shall comply with the City of
Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding Utilities.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.09  FEES.



   111.09(A)   ITDD.



   111.09(A)(1)   Connection and usage.  Fees for connection and usage
of the water and Sewer Systems in the City shall be established by resolution
of the City Commission.



   111.09(A)(2)   Certifications for backflow prevention devices. Fees
for the processing of certifications for backflow prevention devices shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission.



   111.09(A)(3)   Utility deposits.  Utility deposit amounts shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission, and shall not be refundable
until the Utility account is satisfied and closed.



   111.09(B)   BDD.  Fees for connection and usage of the Sunrise
Utility system are set forth in the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances
regarding Utilities.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.10  PENALTIES FOR ILLEGAL USE OF POTABLE WATER.



   111.10(A)   ITDD.



   111.10(A)(1)   Penalties.  Penalties for illegal use of Potable
Water in the City are as follows:



   111.10(A)(1)(a)   First occurrence:  $1,000.00; and



   111.10(A)(1)(b)   Each additional occurrence:  $5,000.00.



   111.10(A)(2)   Removal of meter.  If a permanent water meter is
moved to an unauthorized location, the meter in question shall be removed by
the Owner of the Utility System and a fee, set by the ITDD, shall be charged
for reinstallation of one meter.



   111.10(B)   BDD.  Penalties associated with illegal use of Potable
Water supplied by the Sunrise Utility system are set forth in the City of
Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding Utilities.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.11  UTILITY SERVICE CUSTOMERS, RESIDENTIAL.



   111.11(A)   ITDD.  For residences provided service by ITDD, only
the Owner of a property where Utility service is obtained for use in Dwelling
Units may be a residential customer of the Utility, even if that property is
occupied by residents other than the Owner. A Tenant of a Residential
Property where Utility service is provided may not contract directly with the
Utility for use of the Utility service.



   111.11(B)   BDD.  Residences provided service by the Sunrise
Utility system shall comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances
regarding permitted contractual relationships for Utility service.



Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



WATER



§ 111.20  WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT.



   111.20(A)   ITDD.



   111.20(A)(1)   Intent; purpose.  It is the intent and purpose of
this Section to protect the Water Resources in the City from the harmful
effects of over-utilization during periods of water shortage and allocate
available water supplies in accordance with the South Florida Water
Management District water shortage plan.



   111.20(A)(2)   Application.  The provisions of this Section shall
apply to all Persons using the Water Resource within the geographical areas
subject to a water shortage or Water Shortage Emergency, as determined by the
South Florida Water Management District, whether from public or
privately-owned water Utility systems, private wells or private connections
with surface water bodies.



   111.20(A)(3)   Adoption of water shortage plan.  Chapter 40E-21,
Florida Administrative Code is incorporated herein by reference as a part of
this Code.



   111.20(A)(4)   Declaration of water shortage or Water Shortage
Emergency.  The City Manager shall declare that a water shortage or Water
Shortage Emergency exists within the City, upon such declaration of the South
Florida Water Management District or the Florida Department of Environmental
Protection. Such declaration shall invoke the provisions of this Section.
Upon such declaration, all water use restrictions or other measures adopted
by the South Florida Water Management District and/or the Florida Department
of Environmental Protection applicable to the City, or any portion thereof,
shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this Section. Any
violation of the provisions of Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code,
State statute or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of
this Section.



   111.20(A)(5)   Enforcement.  The City Manager shall delegate
appropriate personnel, agencies and departments of the City to diligently
enforce the provisions of this Section and/or any restriction imposed by the
South Florida Water Management District and/or the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection.



   111.20(A)(6)   Remedies cumulative.  The rights, powers, and
procedures set forth in this Section shall be supplemental to and cumulative
to the rights, powers, and procedures set forth in this Chapter, the City
Code, State statute or the Florida Administrative Code.



   111.20(B)   BDD.  Customers of the Sunrise Utilities system shall
comply with the water use restrictions set forth in the City of Sunrise Code
of Ordinances.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.21  ADEQUACY OF WATER QUANTITIES AND PRESSURES.



   111.21(A)   Extensions in ITDD.  All extensions to the ITDD water
system constructed by an Owner/developer shall be designed and constructed to
provide at least that capability in every area that may be served by the
extension. However, nothing in this Code shall be construed as a guarantee,
expressed or implied, that either the Utility or an Owner/developer shall
provide any specific quantity or pressure of water.



   111.21(B)   Extensions in BDD.  All extensions to the BDD water
system shall comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding
Utilities.



   111.21(C)   Inadequate quantity or pressure.  It shall be the
responsibility of each property Owner/developer to ascertain the quantity and
pressure actually available to the property. In the event the property
Owner/developer believes the quantity or pressure is not adequate for his or
her purposes, then the property Owner/developer shall construct, operate, and
maintain on his or her own property such auxiliary pumping and storage
facilities as he or she deems appropriate for his or her needs, subject to
approval by the ITDD or the City of Sunrise, as applicable.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.22  FIRE SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   111.22(A)   Separate fire Service Connections.  Any customer
operating Structures that have a required Fire Flow greater than 1,000
gallons per minute may request that he or she have one or more separate fire
Service Connections. If provided, the customer shall provide two separate
Plumbing systems on his or her property, one for normal water uses connected
to his or her standard Service Connection, and a second system connected to
the fire Service Connection.



   111.22(B)   Exclusively for firefighting purposes.  A fire Service
Connection and the Plumbing attached to it shall be reserved exclusively for
fire fighting. The fire Service Connection shall include a backflow
preventer, and there shall be no connection of any kind between the Owner’s
fire Plumbing and any Plumbing connected to the standard Service Connection.
The fire Service Connection shall include a double weighted check valve
fitted with a bypass having a detector meter. No water shall be drawn from a
fire Service Connection except for fire fighting purposes and periodic tests
of the fire systems. A City representative shall be present for all tests,
and City representatives shall be allowed unlimited access to inspect any and
all portions of the fire system.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.23  BACKFLOW PREVENTION.



   111.23(A)   ITDD.



   111.23(A)(1)   Certification.  An approved backflow prevention
device, consistent with the requirements of the Code, is required on all
Service Connections to the ITDD water lines. Along with the installation of a
backflow device, all nonresidential customers shall be required to have their
potable and fire line backflow devices certified at the time of installation
and tested annually. A passing certification from a certified backflow
prevention testing company shall be provided to the Utility indicating
compliance and shall be submitted to the Utility during the month of January
each Year. Certifications must be dated during the Year prior to the
submission of the certification to the Utility. Failure to comply with this
Section shall result in termination of water service to the customer until
the violation of this Section is cured.



   111.23(A)(2)   Compliance.  All devices shall adhere to the
requirements of the City and Rule 62-555 Florida Administrative Code.



   111.23(B)   BDD.  Customers of the Sunrise Utilities system shall
comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances and Rule 62-555 Florida
Administrative Code regarding backflow prevention.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.24  TEMPORARY WATER METERS.



   111.24(A)   ITDD.



   111.24(A)(1)   Temporary water meters shall only operate when there
is an active Building Permit for the property at which water from the
temporary water meter will be used.



   111.24(A)(2)   Application for a temporary water meter shall be
accompanied by a deposit and installation/removal fee in an amount set forth
by Resolution of the City Commission.



   111.24(A)(3)   Temporary water meters shall be installed solely by
the City.



   111.24(A)(4)   If an applicant requests and/or the City determines
that a temporary water meter be relocated, the temporary water meter shall be
relocated solely by the City.



   111.24(A)(5)   If a temporary water meter is lost, stolen or
damaged, an applicant forfeits the full deposit.



   111.24(A)(6)   No Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy , Certificate
Of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion for the property at which the water
from the temporary water meter is used shall be issued for that property
until the temporary water meter has been retrieved by the City and the
Utility account for the temporary water meter is paid in full.



   111.24(B)   BDD.  Temporary water meters are under the jurisdiction
of the City of Sunrise and are subject to the City of Sunrise Municipal Code
of Ordinances, policies and procedures.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.25  CHANGE IN WATER METER SIZE.



   111.25(A)   ITDD.



   111.25(A)(1)   Where a property owner with an existing water meter
desires to change the meter size, the property owner shall be responsible for
the following:



   111.25(A)(1)(a)   The property owner shall submit to the City a
letter prepared by and bearing the seal of a Florida licensed Professional
Engineer or a Florida Registered Architect showing the calculations that the
requested meter size is sufficient to supply water to the property or portion
thereof in the quantities and at the pressures required under the Building
Code.  The calculations and the requested change submitted by the property
owner shall be subject to review by and approval of the City.



   111.25(A)(1)(b)   Where the requested change is for a larger meter
size, the property owner shall provide to the City evidence that the property
currently has sufficient Equivalent Rate Connections ("ERCs") to accommodate
the requested change.  If there is not sufficient ERCs available to
accommodate the requested change, the property owner shall be responsible for
purchasing sufficient additional ERCs, if available, to accommodate the
requested change at the current ERC rate prior to the request being
approved.  If sufficient ERCs are not available for the property to
accommodate the requested change, the request shall be denied.



   111.25(A)(1)(c)   Where the requested change is for a smaller meter
size, the property owner shall not be entitled to any credit or refund based
upon the reduction of use of previously paid for ERCs, and the property owner
shall not be entitled to reverting to the displaced meter size without
complying with subsection 111.25(A)(1)(b).



   111.25(A)(1)(d)   Where the requested change is for the
consolidation of two or more meters, if the capacity increases the property
owner shall comply with subsection 111.25(A)(1)(b), if the capacity decreases
the property owner shall comply with subsection 111.25(A)(1)(c).



   111.25(A)(1)(e)   The property owner shall be responsible for all
fees and costs associated with the requested change, and shall also pay an
engineering review fee as set forth by a resolution of the City Commission.



   111.25(B)   BDD.   Changes in water meter sizes are under the
jurisdiction of the City of Sunrise and are subject to the City of Sunrise
Code of Ordinances, policies and procedures.



(Ord. 2011-14, passed 10-17-2011)



SEWER



§ 111.30  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   It shall be unlawful for any Person knowingly to Discharge any
substance as set forth in Chapter 27 of the Broward County Code of Ordinances
or set forth in the Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 62-625, into any
Sewer System .



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.31  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   111.31(A)   ITDD.  The following discharge standards apply to the
ITDDUtility system:



   111.31(A)(1)   General prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or
cause to be introduced into the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (“POTW”)
any pollutant(s) or Wastewater that causes Pass Through or Interference.
These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they
are subject to categorical Pretreatment standards or any other national,
State, or local Pretreatment standards or requirements.



   111.31(A)(2)   Specific prohibitions.  No user shall introduce or
cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
Wastewater:



   111.31(A)(2)(a)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW ,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.21;



   111.31(A)(2)(b)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than
9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment;



   111.31(A)(2)(c)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts that will
cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in Interference , but in
no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension;



   111.31(A)(2)(d)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause Interference with the POTW ;



   111.31(A)(2)(e)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than
150°F (65.5°C), or that will inhibit biological activity in the treatment
plant resulting in Interference , but in no case Wastewater that causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);



   111.31(A)(2)(f)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause Interference or
Pass Through ;



   111.31(A)(2)(g)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



   111.31(A)(2)(h)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the City Engineer;



   111.31(A)(2)(i)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or
other Wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the Sewers for maintenance or repair;



   111.31(A)(2)(j)   Wastewater that imparts color that cannot be
removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent;



   111.31(A)(2)(k)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable State or federal regulations;



   111.31(A)(2)(l)   Stormwater , surface water, ground water, artesian
well water, Roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
Wastewater , unless specifically authorized by the City Engineer;



   111.31(A)(2)(m)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
Pretreatment of industrial wastes;



   111.31(A)(2)(n)   Medical Wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the City Manager in a Wastewater discharge permit;



   111.31(A)(2)(o)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with
other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



   111.31(A)(2)(p)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other
substances that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW ;



   111.31(A)(2)(q)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable
origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l; or



   111.31(A)(2)(r)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion
hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW , or at any point in the
POTW , of more than 5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit of the meter.



   111.31(B)   BDD.  Customers of the Sunrise Utilities system shall
comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding Sewer discharge
regulations.



   111.31(C)   Discharge to the POTW.  Pollutants, substances, or
Wastewater prohibited by this Section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged into the POTW.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.32  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   111.32(A)   ITDD.  The following emergency suspension procedures
apply to the ITDDUtility system:



   111.32(A)(1)   Suspension.  The City Manager may immediately
suspend a user’s discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened Discharge that
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of Persons. The City Manager may also
immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the Environment. The City
maintains the right to recover the costs associated with any suspensions, and
the City may order the suspension of any further work, suspension of issuance
of a Certificate Of Occupancy, or lien the property until the costs are paid
in full.



   111.32(A)(2)   Result of suspension.  Any user notified of a
suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the City Manager may take such steps
as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the Sewer connection,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The City Manager may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the City Manager that the period of endangerment has passed.



   111.32(A)(3)   No hearing required.  Nothing in this Section shall
be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any Emergency suspension under
this Section.



   111.32(B)   BDD.  The Emergency procedures for customers in the BDD
are set forth in the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding Utilities.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.33  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   State pretreatment standards located in the Florida Administrative
Code, Volume 19, Chapter 62-625, are incorporated for the ITDD and Sunrise
Utility systems within the City.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.34  GREASE TRAPS.



   111.34(A)   ITDD.  The following Grease Trap regulations apply to
the ITDDUtility system:



   111.34(A)(1)   Requirement.  Any facility engaged in operations
producing greasy wastes, including but not limited to preparation or serving
of food for consumption by more than one family, shall install and operate
below-ground Grease Traps sufficient to ensure compliance with this Chapter.



   111.34(A)(2)   Approval.  All Grease Traps installed or replaced
after October 1, 2002, shall be below-ground and of a type and Capacity
approved by the City, Broward County Building Code, Florida Building Code,
and the Florida Department of Health, as applicable, and shall be located so
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



   111.34(A)(3)   Maintenance.  Grease Traps shall be maintained in
proper working condition at all times, cleaned on a schedule that assures
continued proper functioning, and repaired, as needed, at the
Owner/operator’s expense.



   111.34(B)   BDD.  Customers of the Sunrise Utilities system shall
comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding Grease Traps.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.35  INFILTRATION AND INFLOW.



   111.35(A)   ITDD.  No Person shall intentionally introduce
groundwater infiltration or surface inflow of Stormwaters into the Sewer
System. Plumbing to connect to the Sewer System shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in such a manner as to prevent such occurrences.
If analysis by the City indicates that infiltration or inflow is entering the
system through privately owned Plumbing, the customer shall be required to
repair or modify his or her Plumbing, at his or her sole expense, to
eliminate infiltration and inflow. Failure to comply shall result in a
surcharge being added to the customer’s monthly service charge. The
surcharge shall be equal to the then-existing rate per thousand gallons times
the City’s estimate of thousands of gallons of infiltration/inflow entering
the system through the customer’s Plumbing.



   111.35(B)   BDD.  Customers of the Sunrise Utilities system shall
comply with the City of Sunrise Code of Ordinances regarding infiltration and
inflow.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 111.36  PORTABLE TOILET FACILITIES.



   111.36(A)   General prohibition.  The use of Portable Toilet
Facilities shall be prohibited in all zoning districts, except during periods
of approved Construction permitted by the City or during an event for which a
private use permit or a special Public Property event permit has been issued
by the City.



   111.36(B)   Requirements.  Portable Toilet Facilities shall comply
with the following:



   111.36(B)(1)   Portable Toilet Facilities that are utilized in
connection with a Building Permit must be located within 200 feet walking
distance of the work site which it serves. One unit may serve workers during
active approved Construction for up to four work sites, if all work sites are
within 200 feet walking distance of the unit. Location, sanitary maintenance,
and use of the unit are the responsibility of the “builder of record” of
the Lot on which the unit is located.



   111.36(B)(2)   Portable Toilet Facilities shall be installed in a
reasonably level position and be easily accessible to users.



   111.36(B)(3)   Portable Toilet Facilities shall not be located upon
any Street or Public Right-Of-Way in the City.



   111.36(B)(4)   Portable Toilet Facilities shall be located upon
natural ground and not on an impervious surface such as asphalt or concrete.



   111.36(B)(5)   Portable Toilet Facilities must be cleaned and
serviced by a licensed Non- Sewer Toilet System (NSTS) service at least twice
per week, or more frequently as needed to maintain a sanitary use Environment
.



   111.36(B)(6)   Portable Toilet Facilities shall be placed at a
distance of at least 100 feet from any body of water, at the furthest point
possible from any abutting occupied residence and installed in such a way as
to ensure that there is no possibility of a spill or run-off into any body of
water.



   111.36(B)(7)   Portable Toilet Facilities shall only be located upon
the permitted Building or event site.



   111.36(B)(8)   All Portable Toilet Facilities shall be removed or
Secured within a permanent Structure in the event a Hurricane Watch is issued
by the appropriate governmental entity with the authority to issue a watch.



(Ord. 2010-18, passed 10-4-2010)



TITLE XII:  LAND USE



   Chapter



      120.   REAL PROPERTY TRANSFERS, EASEMENTS AND ENCROACHMENTS



      121.   EXCAVATION AND MINING



      122.   TREE PRESERVATION



      123.   LANDSCAPING



      124.   ZONING



      125.   LAND DEVELOPMENT



      126.   SIGNS



      127.   ENGINEERING STANDARDS



      128.   BUILDING CODES - ADOPTED



      129.   MINIMUM HOUSING



      130.   UNSAFE STRUCTURES



      131.   FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY




      132.   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGULATIONS FOR COMMUNICATIONS
SERVICE PROVIDERS




      133.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



      134.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION



CHAPTER 120:  REAL PROPERTY TRANSFERS, EASEMENTS AND ENCROACHMENTS



Section



   120.01   Transfer of real property interest to City



   120.02   Encroachment upon easements prohibited



   120.03   Common area transfers to City



§ 120.01  TRANSFER OF REAL PROPERTY INTEREST TO CITY.



   Every deed, easement or other document conveying, transferring or
dedicating an interest in real property to the City for any purpose must be
in a form and substance as prescribed by applicable Law and otherwise
acceptable to the City Attorney, and must be accepted by the City Commission.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 120.02  ENCROACHMENT UPON EASEMENTS PROHIBITED.



   120.02(A)   Encroachment prohibited on lake maintenance and lake
access easements.  No Encroachment, whether temporary or permanent in
nature, with the exception of grass, shall be permitted in lake maintenance
easements and lake access easements.



   120.02(B)   Limitations of Encroachments on Utility and drainage
easements.  No Encroachment, whether temporary or permanent in nature, shall
be permitted over any Utility or drainage easement, except:



   120.02(B)(1)   Grass, Ground Cover, or Shrubs .



   120.02(B)(2)   Landscaping Features and fences (except for concrete
fences), provided that:



   120.02(B)(2)(a)   Consent is obtained from the respective Utilities
and the drainage district or entity to which the property is dedicated.



   120.02(B)(2)(b)   The installation is placed in the easement at the
property Owner ’s risk, and the Utilities and drainage district or entity
to which the property is dedicated will have no obligation to replace or
repair damage to Landscaping or fences within easements in the event such
damage is caused as a result of work performed by the Utilities or drainage
district within the easement.



   120.02(C)   Removal of Encroachments.



   120.02(C)(1)   Any prohibited Encroachment on any Utility ,
drainage, lake access or lake maintenance easement shall be removed by the
Owner of the property, at the property Owner ’s expense, within 30 days
after written notice by the City, except in the event of an Emergency . Upon
such Owner ’s failure to comply with such notice within the time specified
in such order, the City may remove such Encroachment , by whatever means
necessary, at the property Owner ’s expense.



   120.02(C)(2)   In the event of an Emergency as determined by the
City, the property Owner shall immediately remove the Encroachment . If the
property Owner fails to remove the Encroachment , the City may remove such
Encroachment , by whatever means necessary, at the property Owner ’s
expense.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 120.03  COMMON AREA TRANSFERS TO CITY.



   120.03(A)   Criteria required.  In those cases where a
Homeowners’ or condominium Association desire to transfer a Common Area to
the City, the Applicant, shall provide the City with sufficient written
documentation demonstrating that the property meets each of the following
criteria:



   120.03(A)(1)   The property must abut an existing Public
Right-Of-Way or property currently owned by the City;



   120.03(A)(2)   The property and improvements must currently be in
compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, all applicable City Code provisions,
ordinances and City policies;



   120.03(A)(3)   The property must currently be in compliance with a
new or approved site plan;



   120.03(A)(4)   All improvements on the property must have, at a
minimum, ten Years of remaining useful life;



   120.03(A)(5)   If the property is served by an existing common
service ( Irrigation , electric, water, Sewer , etc.) provided from Private
Property , it must be connected with an existing or new service on City
property or a Right-Of-Way (any such reconnection must be completed prior to
transfer at the Applicant ’s expense);



   120.03(A)(6)   If the property includes any paved Right-Of-Way , the
Right-Of-Way drainage must be into a City owned system;



   120.03(A)(7)   A financial and operating analysis by the City must
show that accepting the property will not have a material negative impact on
the City;



   120.03(A)(8)   A Phase 1 environmental report must be submitted
showing no contamination on the property;



   120.03(A)(9)   An opinion of counsel, acceptable to the City
Attorney, must be submitted showing that the Association has complied with
all requirements of any homeowners’ documents for the transfer of such
property;



   120.03(A)(10)   Any provision of the homeowners’ documents
notwithstanding, the transfer must be approved by at least 66% of the Owners
in the Association ; and



   120.03(A)(11)   The Association shall provide the City with an
agreement acceptable to the City Attorney to indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless the City, its officers, agents, and employees, from and against any
and all claims, suits, actions, damages, liabilities, expenditures, or causes
of action of any kind arising prior to the transfer to the City.



   120.03(B)   Approval by City Commission.  Any transfer of Common
Areas to the City requires the approval of the City Commission.



   120.03(C)   Deed requirement.  If approved by the City Commission,
any such transfer shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.



   120.03(D)   Maintenance bond required for equipment transfer.  If
any equipment on or under the property is transferred, the Association must
provide the City with a one Year cash maintenance bond, in a form acceptable
to the City Attorney, covering the equipment in an amount determined by the
City.



   120.03(E)   Cost recovery deposit.  All applications for transfer
of Common Areas to the City shall be subject to cost recovery to cover the
amounts expended by the City in consideration of the application and must be
accompanied by a cost recovery deposit. The amount of the cost recovery
deposit shall be set and amended by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 121:  EXCAVATION AND MINING



Section



   121.01   Prohibition on blasting



   121.02   Excavation or mining without blasting



§ 121.01  PROHIBITION ON BLASTING.



   Blasting, including resource extraction, mining or other Excavations
with Blasting, is prohibited within the City.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 121.02  EXCAVATION OR MINING WITHOUT BLASTING.



   The Excavation or mining of sand, gravel, rock, and the operation of a
stone pit or quarry or other operation involving the extraction or mining of
natural material is prohibited, except as set forth in this Section.
Excavation or other operations (without blasting) involving the extraction of
sand, gravel, rock, or other natural material that is undertaken by a
landowner to create canals, waterways, or lakes or that is necessary in order
to develop that property in accordance with an approved Development Order is
permitted, provided, however, that a landowner undertaking such Excavation
shall use the material produced for backfill, grading, or such other purposes
as required for the Development of the property. The landowner shall be
entitled to remove surplus material from the property. The landowner shall
not Excavate below those levels necessary to provide proper drainage and that
quantity of material necessary to build drainage pads and roads for the
property.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 122:  TREE PRESERVATION



Section



Administration and Permit Procedure



   122.01   Purpose



   122.02   Interpretive publications



   122.03   Applicability and exemptions



   122.04   Permits



   122.05   Tree survey



   122.06   Additional wetlands permits required



   122.07   Arborist registration



Standards for Relocation and Replacement of Trees



   122.20   Relocation



   122.21   Replacement



   122.22   Cash payment



   122.23   Maintenance of relocated and replacement trees



   122.24   Credit for existing trees for required landscaping



   122.25   Tree Trust Fund



   122.26   Standards for tree protection during development



Violations and Enforcement



   122.40   Tree abuse



   122.41   Violations, enforcement and remedial actions



   122.42   Withholding or revocation of permits and approvals



 



   122.99   Penalty



ADMINISTRATION AND PERMIT PROCEDURE



§ 122.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Chapter is to perpetuate the protection,
preservation, and conservation of existing Trees , natural areas, and
Landscaped open space as an effective means of conserving energy and to
preserve Trees to improve the aesthetic quality of the City thereby promoting
the health and general welfare of the citizenry. Owing to these many benefits
provided by Trees , it is the intent of the City to protect this valuable
resource through permitting for Tree Removal . In the evaluation of a Tree
Removal permit, priority shall be given to protected Trees for the
preservation or relocation, replacement, and/or payment into the Weston Tree
Trust Account. In addition, it is the policy of the City Commission that
every effort shall be made to preserve and maintain natural vegetation within
the City as identified in the City’s Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.02  INTERPRETIVE PUBLICATIONS.



   For the purpose of this Chapter, the definitions in Chapter 1 shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
In construing the provisions of this Chapter, if no definition is provided
herein and when the context will permit, publications recognized as
authoritative in the scientific and engineering fields shall apply. Such
publications shall include:



   122.02(A)   “Dig Manual” by the State of Florida;



   122.02(B)   “Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance -
Standard Practices,” by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
A300);



   122.02(C)   “Z-133.1, Pruning, Repairing, Maintaining, and
Removing Trees , and Cutting Brush Safety Requirements;”



   122.02(D)   Florida Department of Agriculture publication, “Grades
and Standards for Nursery Plants,” Parts I and II, Florida Urban Forestry
Council;



   122.02(E)   “Selecting and Planting Trees for the South Florida
Urban Forest,” 2000;



   122.02(F)   Richard Harris, “Arboriculture Integrated Management
of LandscapeTrees , Shrubs and Vines ;”



   122.02(G)   Gary W. Watson and E.B. Himelick, “Principles and
Practices of Planting Trees and Shrubs ;” and



   122.02(H)   Florida Power and Light’s “Plant the Right Tree in
the Right Place” brochure.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.03  APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.



   122.03(A)   Applicability.  All Trees shall be subject to the
provisions of this Chapter unless specifically exempt as set forth below.



   122.03(B)   Exceptions.



   122.03(B)(1)   Where existing Trees need to be removed or relocated
due to a conflict with Utilities or a Roadway improvement project within the
Public Right-Of-Way, a Tree Removal / relocation permit shall be required,
notice shall be provided to the City and property Owner not less than six
weeks prior to any removal or relocation activity, but no fees or bonds shall
be required. Relocated and removed Trees shall be replaced where applicable
in accordance with this Chapter.



   122.03(B)(2)   State of Florida licensed plant and/or Tree nurseries
shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this Chapter only in
relation to those Trees planted and growing On-Site for wholesale and/or
retail sale purposes in the ordinary course of said permit holder’s
business.



   122.03(B)(3)   Trees less than one and one-half inches in diameter
as measured four and one- half feet from grade are exempt from the provisions
of this Chapter unless they are located within the Dripline of preserved
Trees . All Native Trees less than one and one-half inches Diameter Breast
Height (“DBH”) located within the Dripline of preserved Trees shall be
illustrated on Tree Protection/Dripline Encroachment Plans as a plant mass
and not individual Trees .



   122.03(B)(4)   Removal or relocation of any Tree on residential
properties with existing detached Single-Family or DuplexStructures (other
than a specimen Tree, preserved Tree, replacement Tree, or relocated Tree
that requires a permit) shall be exempt from this Chapter, however,
compliance with the Landscaping Chapter of the Code is still required.



   122.03(B)(5)   Trees that have been determined by the City to be
dead are exempt from the permit and fee requirements of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.04  PERMITS.



   122.04(A)   Permit requirement.  The removal or relocation of any
Tree requires a Tree Removal/relocation permit from the City. No permit shall
be issued for Tree Removal/relocation unless the City determines that there
are no other means to prevent the removal/relocation of the Tree(s)
(including, but not limited to, canopy trimming, root Pruning and
installation of root barriers), and that one of the following exists:



   122.04(A)(1)   A site plan submitted by the Applicant shows that a
proposed Structure , permissible under all applicable Laws and regulations,
can be situated on the subject parcel only if specific Trees are removed or
relocated, and the Applicant has made every reasonable effort to incorporate
and/or relocate existing Trees and to minimize the number of Trees removed.



   122.04(A)(2)   The Tree is in such proximity to existing or proposed
Structures that the Utility or structural integrity of such Structures is
materially impaired.



   122.04(A)(3)   The Tree materially interferes with the location,
servicing, or functioning of public Utility lines or service.



   122.04(A)(4)   The Tree obstructs safe vehicular cross-visibility or
otherwise creates a substantial traffic hazard.



   122.04(A)(5)   The Tree is diseased, injured, or in danger of
falling.



   122.04(A)(6)   Any Law or regulation requires the Tree’s removal.



   122.04(A)(7)   The vegetation is being maintained or planted for
municipal use under the direction of the City.



   122.04(B)   Application for permit.  The Owner of the property on
which the Tree will be removed or relocated from must make an application for
a Tree Removal/relocation permit required or authorized under this Chapter.
Where the Tree is relocated on property with different ownership then its
original location, then the Owner of the relocated property shall obtain a
permit at no cost. If any Person will be acting as agent for the property
Owner, the application must clearly indicate, by affidavit of the Owner, that
the Owner has given the agent full authority to bind the Owner to any
condition that may be imposed upon the issuance of the permit. Applications
for a Tree Removal/relocation permit shall be accompanied by the following:



   122.04(B)(1)   A completed, signed, and notarized application.



   122.04(B)(2)   A map showing the size and location of the site where
the permitted activities are to be conducted.



   122.04(B)(3)   A starting date and duration of the proposed permit
activities.



   122.04(B)(4)   A brief description of the work to be performed,
including a drawing of the proposed work on a certified site plan as
determined by the City, showing the location of all existing or proposed
Buildings , Structures, and site uses.



   122.04(B)(5)   A Tree Survey performed no more than six months
before the application date and certified by a Landscape Architect , and a
site plan of identical scale designating those Trees that are proposed to be
preserved, relocated, or removed. This subsection 122.04(B)(5) shall not
apply to Single-Family and Duplex properties, unless a proposed expansion or
demolition negatively impacts a specimen Tree, which shall be determined in
the sole discretion of the City.



   122.04(B)(6)   A Dripline Encroachment Plan shall be required for
all Trees whose Dripline is planned to be encroached upon by any Construction
, Excavation , fill, or other activities associated with the Development of
the site. The Dripline Encroachment Plan shall include:



   122.04(B)(6)(a)   A designation of each Tree subject to any Dripline
Encroachment;



   122.04(B)(6)(b)   The reasons for the Encroachment ;



   122.04(B)(6)(c)   A detailed description of the proposed efforts to
protect the Tree from damage due to the Encroachment ; and



   122.04(B)(6)(d)   A plan to ensure survivability per the “Tree
Protection Manual for Builder’s and Developers” by the Department of
Agriculture.



   122.04(B)(7)   The certified legal description of the site.



   122.04(B)(8)   In instances when a Tree will be removed or relocated
by an Association, from a Private Right-Of-Way, which is adjacent to a
residential property, for purposes other than those described in subsections
122.04(A)(2)-122.04(A)(7), the Association shall provide proof to the City
that the Association has notified the adjacent Owner or Owners of the
property on which the Tree will be removed or relocated of the Tree
Removal/relocation permit, in the form of an affidavit, executed by the
Association.



   122.04(C)   Application fee.



   122.04(C)(1)   All applications for a Tree Permit shall be
accompanied by the application fee in the amount set forth by a resolution of
the City Commission.



   122.04(C)(2)   The application fee is not refundable and may not be
applied to any permit application other than the one for which it was
originally paid.



   122.04(D)   Inspections.  An application for a Tree
Removal/relocation permit constitutes consent by the property Owner and/or
Applicant for the City to conduct site inspections in furtherance of this
Section on the subject property, pursuant to permit requirements.



   122.04(E)   Permit fees.  Upon approval of the application and
prior to the issuance of a permit, the Applicant shall pay a permit fee to
the City in the amount(s) set forth by a resolution of the City Commission.



   122.04(F)   Permit term.  The permit shall be granted for a maximum
of six months from the date of issuance or one Year from the approved
relocation date. A one-time extension upon written request may be granted for
an additional six-month period, provided that there is no change from the
original permit and the permit extension complies with all standards in
effect at the time of the permit extension.



   122.04(G)   Permit posting.  The relocation/removal permit shall be
posted in a protected area and in a conspicuous place on the site.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 122.05  TREE SURVEY.



   Upon submission of a Building Permit or Tree Removal /relocation
permit, the Applicant shall submit a sealed survey prepared by a Florida
licensed land surveyor that shows all Trees , in addition to all boundary
information, with the exact location. A Florida licensed Landscape Architect
or International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified Arborist shall
provide the information for the existing TreesOn-Site which shall include:
botanical and common name, height, canopy spread illustrated on the plan, and
diameter of all Trees at least one and one-half inches in diameter measured
four and one-half feet above ground level within the area affected by the
Development. Groups of nuisance Trees as defined herein may be designated as
“clumps,” with the predominant type shown. The expense of the survey
shall be borne by the Applicant . The requirements set forth herein are
requirements for all sites with existing Trees , and shall be noted as the
Tree Protection/ Encroachment Plan.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.06  ADDITIONAL WETLANDS PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Prior to any land clearing activity in a potential or existing Wetlands
area, as designated on the City’s “Floodplains and Wetlands Map” of the
Comprehensive Plan, a property Owner shall be responsible for obtaining the
necessary permits from the applicable agency having jurisdiction, in addition
to the permit required by this Code.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.07  ARBORIST REGISTRATION.



   122.07(A)   All Tree Service Providers and Arborists performing work
within the limits of the City shall be registered to do so with the City.



   122.07(B)   Tree Service Provider and Arborist registration shall be
valid for a period of one Year from the date of issuance and shall be subject
to the fees set by resolution of the City Commission. Registrations are not
transferable or refundable.



   122.07(C)   Registered Tree Service Providers and Arborists shall
maintain a copy of such registration On-Site for inspection when performing
work within the City.



   122.07(D)   A copy of the Business Tax Receipt (s) and valid
insurance certificate(s) shall be required to obtain a City registration.



   122.07(E)   Evidence shall be noted on the registration that proper
training has been granted from the International Society of Arboriculture
(ISA) and a Class A Tree trimmer license from Broward County for those
companies and individuals that are registered Arborists. A Class B Tree
trimmer license from Broward County is required for registration from those
companies and individuals that are not certified Arborists.



   122.07(F)   The City may revoke or deny renewal of a Tree Service
Provider or Arborist registration if such Tree Service Provider or Arborist
fails to conform to the Tree trimming standards prescribed hereof, or if
found to have committed Tree Abuse as defined in Chapter 1 of the Code .
Within ten days of receipt of written notice revoking registration or denying
renewal, a request may be made for a hearing before the City Manager to
review the decision of the City.



   122.07(G)   Tree Service Providers and Arborists performing work
within the City shall have the name as shown on their City registration
clearly marked on each of their vehicles/equipment, and the address and phone
number shall also be clearly denoted on the doors of the vehicle.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



STANDARDS FOR RELOCATION AND REPLACEMENT OF TREES



§ 122.20  RELOCATION.



   122.20(A)   Standards for relocation.



   122.20(A)(1)   Any Tree being relocated shall not be damaged during
removal, transport, or replanting of that Tree.



   122.20(A)(2)   If the species has a dormant period, the Tree shall
be relocated during that time.



   122.20(A)(3)   Adequate space for root and crown development shall
be provided.



   122.20(A)(4)   An inspection is required prior to root Pruning and
relocation. In addition, a final inspection is required after installation
and/or relocation.



   122.20(A)(5)   Trees shall be root Pruned according to sound
arboricultural standards prior to relocation. Root Pruning utilizing
mechanical methods such as backhoes or trenchers is prohibited, and shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter. Root Pruning shall extend to the
Dripline of the Tree to the maximum extent possible. Root Pruned Trees shall
remain in place for a minimum of eight weeks prior to relocation. Manual
watering shall be required during and following the root Pruning process
until re-established. The root ball must be kept moist at all times.



   122.20(A)(6)   All crown Pruning shall be minimized and done in
accordance with standards set by the American National Standards Institute.
No Pruning shall be done without prior City approval.



   122.20(A)(7)   Trees and vegetation to be relocated during
Construction or other Development activities shall be stored, staked, and
irrigated in a suitable area with the granting of a Tree Permit. One-time
relocation is preferred.



   122.20(A)(8)   During and following relocation, the root ball and
trunk shall be protected. The root ball shall be kept moist at all times.



   122.20(A)(9)   Relocated Trees shall be braced for at least one Year
or until establishment.



   122.20(A)(10)   Relocated Trees shall be watered sufficiently and
fertilized until the Tree growth is reestablished. All relocated Trees shall
have Terrasorb and appropriate fertilizer applied to the planting soil at the
time of relocation per the manufacturer’s specifications.



   122.20(A)(11)   Relocated Trees must be set in a clean soil mixture
of 50% sand and 50% muck. All palms must be set in a clean soil mixture of
80% sand and 20% muck.



   122.20(A)(12)   A written report including, but not limited to, how
the relocation is proposed is required. Additionally, experience and
references may be required.



   122.20(B)   Bond Requirements.  A permit holder conducting Tree
relocation activities involving Specimen Tree s shall post a Tree Bond with
the City , which shall be held by the City for one Year from the approved
relocation date to ensure Tree replacement in the event that Tree relocation
or Dripline Encroachment results in the death of any Specimen Tree subject to
a Tree Permit or for any Specimen Tree damaged or destroyed in any
pre-development or Development activities. Such bond amount shall be
determined by the City and shall be equal to twice the amount of the
published trade wholesale price.



   122.20(C)   Determination of condition of relocated Trees and
release of Tree Bond.



   122.20(C)(1)   A registered Landscape Architect or certified
Arborist shall determine the condition of each Tree one Year after the Tree
was relocated or planted. This determination shall be in writing and
submitted to the City for approval within 30 days of being made. Upon
approval of the City that the Specimen Tree relocation was successful, the
Tree Bond posted for Tree relocation shall be returned to the Applicant .



   122.20(C)(2)   Should any Tree die or be in a state of unnatural
decline within one Year of being planted or relocated, the permit holder
shall be required to replace the Tree within 60 days of that determination.
The one-Year monitoring and approval period shall begin anew whenever a Tree
is replaced. If that replacement Tree is found not to be viable at the end of
the second yearly monitoring period, the permit holder may pay the
appropriate amount into the Weston Tree Trust Fund as required in § 122.25
in lieu of planting a third replacement Tree. If the permit holder fails to
replace the Tree or to pay the appropriate amount into the Weston Tree Trust
Fund within the 60 days, then the permit holder shall be in violation of this
Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-18, passed 9-26-2016)



§ 122.21  REPLACEMENT.



   122.21(A)   Designation of Tree types.  Specimen Trees are defined
in Chapter 1 of the Code. All other Trees (including Trees in poor condition)
are non-specimen Trees.



   122.21(B)   Specimen Trees.  If it is determined by the City that
relocation of specimen Tree (s) is not feasible, then payment shall be made
into the Weston Tree Trust Fund or Florida grade no. 1 replacement Tree (s)
shall be required, at the sole discretion of the City . Payment shall be
based on the value of the Tree (s), determined by “The Guide for Plant
Appraisal,” 8th Edition, as amended, by the Council of Tree and Landscape
Appraisers. However, in no case shall the diameter inches of the replacement
Tree (s) be less than the diameter inches of the removed specimen Tree (s).
The replacement Tree (s) must be the largest available Tree from the City
replacement list and a minimum of 50% of the replacement Trees must be
native. All Native Trees shall be replaced with native species.



   122.21(C)   Non-specimen Trees.  A removed non-specimen Tree shall
be replaced with its equivalent Canopy Coverage as defined in the Equivalent
Canopy Coverage Replacement Table. However, under no circumstance shall any
Tree be replaced with a less than 300 replacement canopy area credit. The
replacement Tree or Trees shall be a type of species having shade potential
and other positive values, as described on the Tree Replacement List, and at
least equal Canopy Coverage replacement to that of the Tree being removed.



   122.21(C)(1)   Dicot and Conifer Trees.  Dicot and Conifer Trees
shall be installed as Florida grade no. 1 or better and pursuant to the
Equivalent Canopy Coverage Replacement Table and Tree Replacement List. A
minimum of 50% native replacement Trees are required. However, all Native
Trees shall be replaced with Native Trees, as approved by the City.



   122.21(C)(2)   Monocot Trees.  Monocot Trees shall be installed
with a minimum of seven feet of grey wood, when planted, have an overall
height of 20 feet, and be a grade of Florida No. 1 or better. A minimum of
50% native replacement Trees are required. However, all Native Trees shall be
replaced with native species as defined in Chapter 1 of the Code, as approved
by the City.



   122.21(D)   Tree replacement for non-specimen Trees.  When the City
has determined that a non-specimen Tree cannot be successfully relocated or
that cash payment in lieu of replacement is not acceptable, the Applicant
shall replace the non-specimen Tree with the type of Tree specified in the
Tree Replacement List, and with the equivalent Canopy Coverage specified in
the Equivalent Canopy Coverage Replacement Table for non-specimen Trees.



 


TREE REPLACEMENT LIST FOR NON-SPECIMEN TREES




Large Shade Trees: 16–18 ft. Overall Height, 6–8 ft. Spread, 5 ft. Clear
Trunk, 3–3.5 inch DBH




Botanical Name

 

Common Name





Bulnesia arborea
 
Verawood


Bursera simaruba
 
Gumbo Limbo


Calophyllum brasiliense
 
Beautyleaf


Calophyllum inophyllum
 
Mastwood


Ilex attenuata ‘East Palatka’
 
Holly


Ilex cassine
 
Dahoon Holly


Lagerstromeia indica
 
Crepe Myrtle


Magnolia grandiflora ‘Little Gem’
 
Magnolia


Magnolia grandiflora ‘DD Blanchard’
 
Magnolia


Noronhia emarginata
 
Madagascar Olive


Quercus virginiana
 
Live Oak


Tamarindus indica
 
Tamarind


Taxodium distichum
 
Cypress




 



 


Shade Trees: 12–14 ft. Overall Height, 5–6 ft. Spread, 4.5 ft. Clear
Trunk, 2.5–3 inch DBH




Botanical Name

 

Common Name





Bulnesia arborea
 
Verawood


Bursera simaruba
 
Gumbo Limbo


Calophyllum brasiliense
 
Beautyleaf


Calophyllum inophyllum
 
Mastwood


Elaeocarpus decipiens
 
Japanese Blueberry


Ilex attenuata ‘East Palatka’
 
Holly


Ilex cassine
 
Dahoon Holly


Lagerstromeia indica
 
Crepe Myrtle


Magnolia grandiflora ‘Little Gem’
 
Magnolia


Magnolia grandiflora ‘DD Blanchard’
 
Magnolia


Noronhia emarginata
 
Madagascar Olive


Quercus virginiana
 
Live Oak


Tamarindus indica
 
Tamarind


Taxodium distichum
 
Cypress




 



 


Small Trees: 10–12 ft. Overall Height, 4–5 ft. Spread, 4 ft. Clear Trunk,
2 inch DBH




Botanical Name

 

Common Name





Capparis cynophallophora
 
Jamaican Caper


Clusia guttifera
 
Small Leaf Pitch Apple


Cordia boissieri
 
White Geiger


Elaeocarpus decipiens
 
Japanese Blueberry


Filicium decipiens
 
Japanese Fern Tree


Guaiacum sanctum
 
Lignum-vitae


Ilex ‘Nellie Stevens’
 
Holly


Krugiodendron ferreum
 
Black Ironwood


Myrcianthes fragrans
 
Simpson Stopper


Sideroxylon salicifolium
 
Willow Bustic




 



 


Small Trees: 8–10 ft. Overall Height, 4 ft. Spread, 4 ft. Clear Trunk, 1.5
inch DBH




Botanical Name

 

Common Name





Capparis cynophallophora
 
Jamaican Caper


Clusia guttifera
 
Small Leaf Pitch Apple


Cordia boissieri
 
White Geiger


Elaeocarpus decipiens
 
Japanese Blueberry


Filicium decipiens
 
Japanese Fern Tree


Guaiacum sanctum
 
Lignum-vitae


Ilex ‘Nellie Stevens’
 
Holly


Krugiodendron ferreum
 
Black Ironwood


Myrcianthes fragrans
 
Simpson Stopper


Sideroxylon salicifolium
 
Willow Bustic




 



 


Large Palms: Minimum 7 ft. of Grey Wood




Botanical Name

 

Common Name





Bismarckia nobilis
 
Bismarck


Carpentaria acuminata
 
Carpentaria


Cocos nucifera
 
Coconut


Livistona chinensis
 
Chinese Fan


Roystonea elata
 
Florida Royal


Roystonea regia
 
Royal


Phoenix canariensis
 
Canary Island Date


Phoenix dactylifera
 
Date Palm


Phoenix reclinata
 
Senegal Date


Phoenix sylvestris
 
Sylvester


Ptychosperma macarthurii
 
Macarthur


Sabal palmetto
 
Sabal


Veitchia montgomeryana
 
Montgomery


Veitchia winin
 
Winin


Wodyetia bifurcata
 
Foxtail




 



 


Small Palms: Minimum of 3 to 1 with 2 ft. of Grey Wood




Botanical Name

 

Common Name



Hyophorbe lagenicaulis
 
Bottle


Hyophorbe verschaffeltii
 
Spindle


Thrinax morrisii
 
Key Thatch


Thrinax radiata
 
Florida Thatch



 



 


EQUIVALENT CANOPY COVERAGE REPLACEMENT TABLE FOR NON-SPECIMEN TREES




Non-Specimen Trees

 

Replacement Canopy Area Credit (In Square Feet or Palm for Palm)



Large Shade Trees: 16-18 ft. tall, 6-8 ft. spread, 3-3.5 inch Diameter at
Breast Height (DBH) and 5 ft. Clear Trunk (CT.)
 

300



Shade Trees: 12-14 ft. tall, 5-6 ft. spread, 2.5-3 inch DBH, and 4.5 ft. CT.
 

150



Small Trees: 10-12 ft. tall, 4-5 ft. spread, 2 inch DBH and 4 ft. CT.
 

100



Small Trees: 8-10 ft. tall, 4 ft. spread, 1.5 inch DBH and 4 ft. CT.
 

75




 



 


PALM TREE REPLACEMENT LIST FOR NON-SPECIMEN PALM TREES



Large Palms: minimum 7 ft. of grey wood.
 

Palm for Palm



Small Palms: minimum 3 to 1 with 2 ft. of grey wood.
 

Palm for Palm




 



   122.21(E)   Determination of Canopy Coverage.  The following are
methods for Canopy Coverage determination:



   122.21(E)(1)   Review of aerial photography;



   122.21(E)(2)   On Site inspection; and/or



   122.21(E)(3)   Review of Tree Survey.



   122.21(F)   Nuisance Tree Removal.  Nuisance Tree species removal
requires one-to-one replacement rather than equivalent Canopy Coverage
replacement. Melaleuca, Brazilian pepper, and Australian pine are exempt and
do not need to be replaced.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-18, passed 9-26-2016)



§ 122.22  CASH PAYMENT.



   122.22(A)   Replacement or payment.  When allowed by a Tree Removal
Permit, any Tree that is removed and not relocated shall be replaced or
payment shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. As
a condition of being granted permission to remove any Trees, the developer,
property Owner, or other Applicant shall be required to replace such Trees,
or the Applicant shall pay a replacement contribution into the Weston Tree
Trust Fund, as determined in the sole discretion of the City. This payment,
equal to the fair market value of the required Trees, shall be assessed for
replacement Trees to total the equal DBH removed. The fair market value shall
be established based upon published trade wholesale price lists with the
appropriate multiplier representing maintenance, installation, warranty, and
other costs factored in, and shall be paid by the Applicant after approval
from the City.



   122.22(B)   Exception.  This Section shall not apply to specimen
Trees.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.23  MAINTENANCE OF RELOCATED AND REPLACEMENT TREES.



   122.23(A)   Timing for Tree relocation, replacement and
maintenance.  Trees must be relocated or replaced as specified by this
Section within six months of the approval for Tree Removal/relocation;
provided, however, if the Trees are to be removed/relocated to facilitate
Construction or Development activities, said relocation or replacement must
be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate Of Occupancy on the
Construction, Development site, or phase of Development, as applicable. The
Trees to be relocated or replaced On-Site or Off-SitePrivate Property or
Public Property must be maintained in a healthy growing condition and
guaranteed for a period of at least one Year from the approved relocation
date or replacement Tree installation date.



   122.23(B)   Tree replacement conditions.   



   122.23(B)(1)   All Trees that are replaced within the City shall be
on the Tree Replacement List and shall be Florida grade no. 1 or better as
set forth in the Florida Department of Agriculture publication “Grades and
Standards for Nursery Plants,” Parts I and II. Any deviations from the Tree
Replacement List shall require City approval prior to installation.



   122.23(B)(2)   Trees that are replaced within the City shall not
interfere with existing or proposed Utilities either above or below ground.
Any Tree proposed under overhead Utility lines must be approved by the City.



   122.23(B)(3)   All replacement Trees shall be guyed and/or staked
pursuant to sound horticultural practices. In addition, all stakes or guys
must be removed within one Year of installation or Establishment as
determined by the City.



   122.23(B)(4)   All replacement Trees shall be planted in a Tree pit
with a minimum of two times the root ball and shall be filled with a clean
organic 50% muck and 50% sand planting soil mix. Any deviations shall require
City approval. The root ball shall be flush or 10% higher than grade and all
growbags/burlaps/wire baskets shall be removed prior to planting.



   122.23(B)(5)   All Trees shall be watered and fertilized
appropriately until established.



   122.23(B)(6)   No Pruning shall be done without prior City approval.
All Pruning shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the Code .



   122.23(B)(7)   A pre-Tree inspection is required prior to planting
replacement Trees . In addition, a final inspection is required after
installation.



   122.23(B)(8)   Under no circumstances shall Monocot Trees be
utilized for equal Canopy Coverage or one to one replacement for Dicot or
Conifer Trees.



   122.23(B)(9)   For Tree replacement requirements of one to five
Trees , a minimum of one species shall be utilized as a replacement Tree. For
six to ten replacement Trees required, a minimum of two species shall be
utilized. For 11 to 20 replacement Trees required, a minimum of three species
shall be utilized. For 21 to 50 replacement Trees required, a minimum of four
species shall be utilized. For 51 or more replacement Trees required, a
minimum of five species shall be utilized.



   122.23(B)(10)   For Trees removed pursuant to new or modified
Developments, an additional 50% replacement shall be required.



   122.23(B)(11)   A minimum of 50% shade Trees shall be utilized for
all Tree replacements. In addition, larger shade Trees and larger palms may
be required to match existing palms in a design.



   122.23(C)   Methods for relocation.  The following guidelines shall
be utilized to ensure successful relocation of Trees designated for
relocation:



   122.23(C)(1)   Any Tree being relocated shall not be unnecessarily
damaged during removal, transport, or replanting of that Tree.



   122.23(C)(2)   If the Trees have a dormant period, they should be
relocated during that time. Trees should not be relocated during periods of
strong, dry, winter winds or during droughts.



   122.23(C)(3)   Adequate space for root and crown development shall
be provided.



   122.23(C)(4)   An inspection is required prior to root Pruning and
relocation. In addition, a final inspection is required after installation
and/or relocation.



   122.23(C)(5)   Trees shall be root Pruned according to sound
arboricultural standards prior to relocation. Root Pruning utilizing
mechanical methods such as backhoes or trenchers is prohibited, and shall
constitute a violation of this Chapter. Root Pruning shall extend to the
Dripline of the Tree to the maximum extent possible. Root Pruned Trees shall
remain in place for a minimum of eight weeks prior to relocation. Manual
watering shall be required during and following the root Pruning process
until re-established. The root ball must be kept moist at all times.



   122.23(C)(6)   All crown Pruning shall be minimized and done in
accordance with standards set by the American National Standards Institute.
No Pruning shall be done without prior City approval.



   122.23(C)(7)   Trees and vegetation to be relocated during
Construction or other Development activities shall be stored, staked, and
irrigated in a suitable area with the granting of a Tree Permit. One-time
relocation is preferred.



   122.23(C)(8)   During and following relocation, the root ball and
trunk shall be protected. The root ball must be kept moist at all times.



   122.23(C)(9)   Relocated Trees shall be braced for at least one Year
or until establishment.



   122.23(C)(10)   Relocated Trees shall be watered sufficiently and
fertilized until the Tree growth is reestablished. All relocated Trees shall
have Terrasorb and appropriate fertilizer applied to the planting soil at the
time of relocation per the manufacturer’s specifications.



   122.23(C)(11)   Relocated Trees shall be set in a clean soil mixture
of 50% sand and 50% muck. All palms shall be set in a clean soil mixture of
80% sand and 20% muck.



   122.23(C)(12)   A written report including, but not limited to, how
the relocation is proposed is required. Additionally, experience and
references may be required.



   122.23(C)(13)   A pre-Tree inspection is required prior to root
Pruning and relocation. In addition, a final inspection is required after
installation.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.24  CREDIT FOR EXISTING TREES FOR REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.



   Existing Trees in a good condition, as determined by the City, may be
credited as provided below toward required Landscaping (not replacement Trees
) provided that they are designated for protection on the Dripline
Encroachment Plan on the final site plan and approved by the City.



 


DBH of Tree

 

Credit




6–10 in.

 

15 Plant Units




11–24 in.

 

20 Plant Units




25 in. and above

 

25 Plant Units




 



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.25  TREE TRUST FUND.



   The Weston Tree Trust Fund is hereby established as a depository for
Tree Removal fees, replacement payments, contributions and penalty monies.
The Weston Tree Trust Fund shall be utilized solely for the purpose of
funding Tree replacement or related items on Public Property within the City.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.26  STANDARDS FOR TREE PROTECTION DURING DEVELOPMENT.



   The following are minimum standards necessary to protect Trees
designated for preservation from damage during Development activities after
the Tree Permit has been approved:



   122.26(A)   Protection of existing Trees.



   122.26(A)(1)   Prior to any clearing of improved, vacant, or
unimproved land, unless specifically exempted from this Section (including
land designated for conservation by Broward County or as a preservation area
by the City), Trees to be preserved shall have barriers constructed around
each Tree or groups of Trees and Understory by the permit holder or land
clearing Person to prevent physical damage from heavy equipment and other
activities incidental to Development. Required barriers shall be subject to
inspection by the City as a condition of permit approval and prior to any
such clearing.



   122.26(A)(2)   The barriers or barricades shall be:



   122.26(A)(2)(a)   Large enough to include the entire area inside the
outer edge or Dripline of the Tree.



   122.26(A)(2)(b)   Conspicuous enough and high enough to be seen
easily by operators of trucks and other equipment.



   122.26(A)(2)(c)   Constructed of sturdy, orange, plastic barricading
with supports placed every five feet as approved by the City based on
professional judgment that the intent of this provision shall be met.



   122.26(A)(2)(d)   Constructed as a condition of the issuance of any
land clearing, Building , or other Development Permit and prior to any
Construction or other Development activities and required to remain in place
throughout the Construction period. Barriers or barricades shall be
completely removed from the site at the end of the Construction period
(immediately prior to the issuance of a Certificate Of Occupancy by the
City), unless otherwise stipulated in the approved Tree Protection/Dripline
Encroachment Plan.



   122.26(B)   Clearing Trees and vegetation.



   122.26(B)(1)   Within the Dripline of Trees designated for
preservation, only clearing by hand is permissible, unless otherwise
stipulated in the approved Tree Permit. Prohibited and exotic vegetation
shall be removed by hand within the Dripline of existing Trees to be
preserved.



   122.26(B)(2)   All Trees and vegetation cleared and stored pursuant
to this Section shall be removed within two days after completion of the
clearing.



   122.26(C)   Other requirements for the protection of Trees and
Understory.  The permit holder and any On-SitePerson shall protect the Trees
and Understory plants designated for preservation in the approved Tree Permit
from hazardous materials poisoning, mechanical removal, Excavation, and grade
changes to at least the following minimum standards:



   122.26(C)(1)   Utility line trenches shall be routed away from Trees
to an area outside the Dripline to the maximum extent possible.



   122.26(C)(2)   Within the Dripline of existing Trees to remain,
retaining walls and dry wells shall be utilized where needed to protect Trees
from severe grade changes. For shallow fills, the fill material shall be
gently sloped down to the level of the Tree roots leaving the Tree in a
depression larger than the spread of its crown. In no instance, unless
approved by the City, shall a maximum of six inches of fill be added within
the Dripline of any Tree.



   122.26(C)(3)   No parking, vehicle maintenance, storage of
Construction materials or Debris , or cleaning of equipment shall take place
within areas marked for preservation, specifically including, but not limited
to, within the Dripline of any individual Trees designated to remain. For all
parking and storage areas, the developer or contractor shall establish
regular parking and storage areas under the supervision of the City to
facilitate compliance with the above standard.



   122.26(C)(4)   Encroachment into any barricaded area shall be
strictly forbidden with the exception of activities specifically permitted by
the approved Tree Permit including the Dripline Encroachment Plan as
established herein.



   122.26(D)   Pruning of protected Trees under site plan approval or
Tree Removal/relocation permit.  Per the approved Tree Permit and/or site
plan process the permit holder shall be permitted to cut or Prune branches
and roots of Trees designed for protection on the protection/Dripline
Encroachment Plan only under the supervision of the CityInspector, who shall
be notified 48 hours prior to the anticipated Pruning. The standards for
Pruning as established by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
A300) shall be utilized for the Development site.



   122.26(E)   Root system protection.  The root system of Trees shall
be protected as follows:



   122.26(E)(1)   The City may approve a Dripline Encroachment Plan,
upon an Applicant ’s request to Excavate within the Dripline of a Tree, as
part of a Tree Permit.



   122.26(E)(2)   The City reserves the right to establish additional
standards for root protection to adapt to field conditions. If roots are
exposed, the permit holder shall provide temporary earth cover mixed with
peat moss and wrapped with burlap to prevent exposed roots from drying out
before permanent backfill is placed. Support of Tree or root systems are
critical. The permit holder shall also water, maintain in moist condition,
and otherwise temporarily support and protect the Tree or root from damage
until the Tree or root is permanently covered with earth.



   122.26(E)(3)   The permit holder shall protect Tree root systems
from damage due to noxious materials in solutions caused by runoff, spillage
during mixing and placement of Construction materials, or drainage from
stored materials. The permit holder shall also protect root systems from
flooding, erosion, or excessive wetting resulting from dewatering operations.



   122.26(F)   Trees damaged during Construction.



   122.26(F)(1)   The permit holder shall have Trees damaged by
Construction immediately repaired by a professional Arborist in a manner
acceptable to the City.



   122.26(F)(2)   The City must be notified immediately if any damage
occurs to any Tree due to Construction operations.



   122.26(F)(3)   Such repairs as necessary shall be made promptly
after damage occurs to prevent progressive deteriorations of damaged Trees .



   122.26(F)(4)   The permit holder shall remove Trees which are
determined by the City to be incapable of restoration to normal growth
pattern. Such Trees shall be subject to replacement under the provisions of
this Code.



   122.26(F)(5)   Any Person damaging a Tree designated for Tree
protection, which is damaged by Development activities, is in violation of
this chapter (not including bonded Trees in a Dripline Encroachment Plan)
under this subsection. Any Tree that dies as a result of this damage shall be
subject to double the Tree replacement requirements contained herein.
Additionally, this activity may result in a delay in release of the
Certificate Of Occupancy and/or Landscape acceptance.



   122.26(G)   Pruning.



   122.26(G)(1)   Tree Pruning.  All Trees shall be Pruned in
accordance with ANSI standards for Pruning as established by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI A300). No Person shall abuse a Tree
located within the City unless the abuse is limited to the minimum amount
necessary to alleviate a dangerous condition posing an imminent threat to the
public or property.



   122.26(G)(2)   Palm Pruning.  Many plants are not covered by
Pruning guidelines of the National ArboristAssociation. Among them are palms
and palm-like plants, such as cycads (zamia, sago, etc.). Most Pruning of
this plant group amounts to the removal of leaves (called fronds), the
inflorescence (flower spikes), remains of inflorescence, young seed stalks,
remains of seed stalks, and/or the fruits. Fronds that have dropped close to
vertical position provide little or no benefit to the plant and generally
shall be removed once they are dead (brown). From the plant’s perspective,
fronds shall not be removed until all traces of green are gone. The fronds
should be cut close to the trunk with a sharp Pruning saw or lopping shears.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 122.40  TREE ABUSE.



   122.40(A) The following actions shall constitute Tree Abuse and shall
be prohibited within the City:



   122.40(A)(1)   Hatracking a Tree.



   122.40(A)(2)   Pruning that reduces the height or spread of a Tree
that has not attained a height or spread of 30 feet.



   122.40(A)(3)   Cutting upon a Tree that destroys its natural habit
of growth.



   122.40(A)(4)   Pruning that leaves stubs or results in a flush cut;
or splitting of limb ends.



   122.40(A)(5)   Peeling or stripping of bark; or the removal of bark
to the extent that if a line is drawn at any height around the circumference
of the Tree, over one-third of the length of the line falls on portions of
the Tree where bark no longer remains.



   122.40(A)(6)   The use of climbing spikes, nails, or hooks, except
for purposes of total Tree Removal or as specifically permitted by standards
set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI A300).



   122.40(A)(7)   Pruning that does not conform to standards or
recommendations set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI A300),
with the exception of palm Pruning, which shall allow no pruning of fronds
above the horizontal plane.



   122.40(A)(8)   Hammering nails or other piercing devices into a Tree.



   122.40(A)(9)   Girdling of Trees by guying, staking, support, string
trimmers, or non-removal of planting materials from root balls.



   122.40(A)(10)   Lawn mower or mower deck damage inflicted on any
portion of a Tree or palm.



   122.40(A)(11)   Vehicular damage inflicted causing bark removal,
Tree leaning, and/or destruction.



   122.40(A)(12)   Structures being placed or constructed within or on
a Tree.



   122.40(A)(13)   Utilizing any portion of a Tree as a fence post or
similar structural support.



   122.40(A)(14)   Overlifting a Tree.



   122.40(A)(15)   Shaping a Tree.



   122.40(A)(16)   Removing palm fronds (other than dead, declining, or
objectionable due to contractor interference with a Building or Utility ).



   122.40(B)   Prohibitions of Tree Abuse.  No Person shall abuse a
Tree located within the City unless the abuse is necessary to alleviate a
dangerous condition posing an imminent threat to the public or property. Tree
Abuse shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary to alleviate the
dangerous condition.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-13, passed 11-18-2013)



§ 122.41  VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIAL ACTIONS.



   122.41(A)(1)   The City shall make necessary inspections in
connection with the enforcement of this Chapter. The City shall be
responsible for promptly stopping any work attempted to be done without or
contrary to any Tree Permit required under this Chapter; and shall further be
responsible for ensuring that any work not in accordance with a Tree Permit
is voluntarily corrected to comply with said requirements.



   122.41(A)(2)   Enforcement authorities.  The City Manager shall
enforce the provisions of this Section.



   122.41(A)(3)   Individual enforcement.  Each violation of this
Chapter is deemed a separate and distinct infraction of the City Code. Each
Tree to be protected may be the subject of individual enforcement.



   122.41(B)   Required actions.  The following remedial actions are
required for removal, Pruning and Tree Abuse:



   122.41(B)(1)   In the event a Person abuses a Tree in violation of
this Chapter, the Person/ Violator shall be responsible to undertake Pruning
and other remedial actions that the City determines are reasonably necessary
to protect public safety and property, and to help the Tree survive the Tree
Abuse damage.



   122.41(B)(2)   If the City determines that a specimen or
non-specimen Tree will not survive and/or will not grow in a safe manner
(i.e., threatens public safety or property) after the Tree Abuse damage with
the aid of remedial Pruning, or the natural habit of growth has been
destroyed, the Person/ Violator shall remove the abused Tree and install a
replacement Tree. The diameter inches of the replacement Trees shall be equal
to the diameter inches of the abused Tree. The Tree or Trees shall be the
largest available Tree species in the State of Florida from the Recommended
Tree List.



   122.41(B)(3)   If the City determines that the specimen or
non-specimen Tree Abuse damage was equal to or greater than 50% of the
Tree’s canopy, the Tree shall be removed and replaced. The diameter inches
of the replacement Tree shall be equal to the diameter inches of the abused
Tree. The Tree or Trees shall be the largest available Tree species in the
State of Florida from the Recommended Tree List.



   122.41(B)(4)   Replacement Trees shall be installed on site or on
public lands if such installation is approved by the City. If no suitable
public lands are located or if all replacement Trees cannot be accommodated
On-Site , the Person/ Violator shall pay a fee into the Weston Tree Trust
Fund. Each replacement Tree shall be a species found on the City’s
Recommended Tree List.



   122.41(B)(5)   Remedial actions, replacement, or donation required
under this Section shall be completed within 60 days of notice from the City
that such actions are required. The City may require the Violator to
immediately undertake remedial actions in the event the abused Tree is an
immediate threat to the public or property.



   122.41(C)   After the fact Tree Permit.  In cases where the City
determines that Tree Removal and/or relocation is carried out without the
necessary permit under the terms and conditions of this Section, the property
Owner shall be required to submit an application for an after-the-fact Tree
Permit. The application fee shall be triple the regular application fee. The
City Manager may grant an after-the-fact Tree Permit and shall require that
each Tree destroyed is to be replaced by Trees of equal or greater equivalent
replacement value. Such replacement Trees shall be located on the subject
site wherever practical, or they may be required to be located on Off-Site on
Private or Public Property. Such replacement Trees shall be assured by a cash
bond. If the conditions for an after-the-fact Tree Permit are not fulfilled,
the case shall be referred to the City Attorney’s office for appropriate
action under this Section.



   122.41(D)   Cease and desist order.  The City Manager shall
immediately issue an order to cease and desist any work being carried out in
violation of this Chapter or any permit conditions promulgated under this
Chapter. Upon notice of such violation, no further work shall take place
until appropriate remedial action is instituted, as determined by the
enforcement agency.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.42  WITHHOLDING OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND APPROVALS.



   Failure of any party to follow the procedures required by this Chapter
shall constitute grounds for withholding or revoking site plan approval,
planning and zoning permits, Certificate Of Occupancy permits, or any other
appropriate approvals necessary to continue Development. Such extraordinary
sanctions, however, shall be instituted immediately upon the direction of the
City Manager.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 122.99  PENALTY.



   Each violation of this Chapter is deemed a separate and distinct
infraction of the Chapter. Each violation of this Chapter shall be punishable
in a court of competent jurisdiction by a fine of no more than $500.00 plus
the cost of replacement of the Trees removed from the site, the costs
associated with investigation and prosecution, and any equitable remedies
deemed reasonable and proper by the court (cost of replacement Tree in this
context may be measured utilizing up to the removed Tree’s DBH to determine
its value or other such measures as deemed appropriate by the City). The
removal, relocation, abuse or destruction, including Dripline Encroachment,
of each Tree for which a Tree Permit is required in violation of this Chapter
shall constitute a separate offense under this Chapter. Each Tree to be
protected may be the subject of individual enforcement. The Owner of any
property where a Tree or Trees have been cut down, destroyed, removed,
relocated, destructively damaged or abused shall be held strictly liable for
a violation of this Chapter unless it can be proven that the damage was
caused by one of the following:



   122.99(A)   An act of God.



   122.99(B)   An act of war.



   122.99(C)   Development activities on the property pursuant to an
approved Tree Permit.



   122.99(D)   Damage alleged by the Owner to have been caused by
vandals or trespassers and the Owner of the property has filed a police
report for the incident and had taken reasonable security measures to prevent
unauthorized access to the property.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 123:  LANDSCAPING



Section



Design Standards



   123.01   Applicability and exceptions



   123.02 through 123.09  Reserved



   123.10   Landscape and irrigation plans



   123.11   Final landscape and irrigation installation inspections



   123.12   Cash bond for extension period



   123.13   Planting requirements



   123.14   Perimeter buffers, parking islands, and vehicular use areas



   123.15   Rights-Of-Way and accessway intersections



   123.16   Swale tree requirements



   123.17   Screening requirements



   123.18   Plant standards



   123.19   Installation standards



   123.20   Irrigation standards



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 123.01  APPLICABILITY AND EXCEPTIONS.



   A Landscape plan shall be submitted by the property Owner for all
Development within the City, except the following:



   123.01(A)   Enlargement or repair of a Single-Family detached
Dwelling Unit .



   123.01(B)   Portions of the property utilized for good faith
agricultural Uses , including, but not limited to, licensed plant nurseries
and grazing of livestock.



   123.01(C)   Parking or Vehicular Use Areas located within or atop a
Building .



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§§ 123.02 THROUGH 123.09  RESERVED.



§ 123.10  LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION PLANS.



   123.10(A)   Landscape plan requirements.  Landscape plans and
drawings shall be signed and sealed by a Landscape Architect. A digital and
hard copy of all Landscape plans shall be submitted to the City for review.
All Landscape plans shall meet the following requirements:



   123.10(A)(1)   The Landscape plan shall be of the same scale as the
site plan, but no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, with one inch equals
20 feet recommended for all planting plans.



   123.10(A)(2)   Landscape calculation table, on a form provided by
the City, shall be shown on planting plans.



   123.10(A)(3)   Concurrent with the submission of the Landscape plan,
the Applicant shall submit a Tree Survey bearing the seal of a Landscape
Architect indicating the location, number, names, DBH , species, size,
disposition, and condition of all existing Trees and vegetation On-Site to be
preserved, relocated, or removed. In the event there are no TreesOn-Site ,
the Applicant shall submit a letter bearing the seal of a Landscape Architect
stating that there are no existing TreesOn-Site .



   123.10(A)(4)   Location and outline of existing Buildings and site
improvements to remain.



   123.10(A)(5)   Location, condition, names, sizes, DBH , and
disposition of existing Trees , Hedges , and any site improvements along any
abutting properties within 25 feet of the property lines.



   123.10(A)(6)   Location of all proposed or existing Buildings and
site improvements, including but not limited to, parking spaces, access
aisles, driveways, Sidewalks and other Vehicular Use Areas to remain or be
removed.



   123.10(A)(7)   A proposed plant list by symbol, quantity, required
specifications, native or non-native, drought tolerance, and botanical and
common names. The plant list shall be indicated on all planting sheets.



   123.10(A)(8)   Location and labeling of existing and proposed sight
lighting.



   123.10(A)(9)   Location and labeling of existing and proposed fire
hydrants and Fire Department check valves.



   123.10(A)(10)   Location of existing and proposed easements,
Rights-Of-Way , drainage Structures, overhead Utility wires, underground
Utilities , controllers, above ground electrical elements, and transformers.



   123.10(A)(11)   Location and details including type, height, color,
and additional embellishment of walls, fence, gates, and Signs .



   123.10(A)(12)   All planting and staking details, including but not
limited to planting/staking specifications, general notes, and Tree
protection details.



   123.10(A)(13)   Existing and proposed water bodies and retention
areas indicating the required 4:1 slope(s).



   123.10(A)(14)   Existing and proposed berms indicating the required
slopes.



   123.10(A)(15)   Such other information that may be required to give
a complete understanding of the proposed plan.



   123.10(A)(16)   A zone layout plan (minimum scale one inch equals 20
feet).



   123.10(A)(17)   An indication of water source, valves, pumps,
backflow preventers, controllers, main line, lateral lines, sleeves,
headtypes, specifications, and spacing.



   123.10(A)(18)   An indication of methods used to achieve compliance
with University of Florida’s The Florida Friendly Landscaping Guide to
Plant Selection and Landscape Design as required by F.S. § 373.185, unless
provided for herein. The City adopts the Florida Friendly Landscape Program,
except for the provisions relating to attraction of wildlife, above ground
rain barrels, above ground cisterns, and composting.



   123.10(B)   Subdivision Common AreaLandscape plan requirements.  No
Building Permit shall be issued for any Lot or improvement within a
subdivision until a Landscape and Irrigation plan for all Common Areas is
submitted to and approved by the City.



   123.10(C)   Landscape plan amendment following a Disaster.  If the
City determines that any Trees are missing or have become substandard as a
result of a Disaster, and the property Owner is unable to replace these Trees
to meet the requirements of the Landscape plan approved by the City or
Broward County, the property Owner shall amend the Landscape plan to include
Trees that are provided on the City’s Tree Replacement List. The City shall
waive the Landscape plan amendment fee, if the property Owner replaces 100%
of the missing or substandard Trees with Trees that are included on the
City’s Tree Replacement List.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 123.11  FINAL LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION INSTALLATION INSPECTIONS.



   123.11(A)   Conditions.  No final Certificate Of Occupancy shall be
issued unless one of the following conditions have been met:



   123.11(A)(1)   The Landscape and Irrigation installation conforms to
the approved Landscape and Irrigation plan.



   123.11(A)(1)(a)   For multi-family residential or nonresidential
Development, the Landscape Architect who prepared the Landscape and
Irrigation plan for the project shall be required to inspect the property
after the installation of Landscaping and Irrigation to determine whether the
Landscaping and Irrigation installed conforms to the approved plan.



   123.11(A)(1)(b)   After the inspection, the Landscape Architect
shall submit a written report of compliance to the City.



   123.11(A)(1)(c)   Upon receiving this report, the City shall conduct
a final inspection. If the inspection reveals that the approved Landscape and
Irrigation plans have been satisfied, and the City has received a Landscape
and Irrigation certification letter, hardcopy of Landscape and Irrigation
plans, and as-built AutoCAD (.dwg) file, all signed and sealed by a Landscape
Architect , then the final Certificate Of Occupancy may be issued; or



   123.11(A)(2)   A bond is posted pursuant to § 123.12.



   123.11(B)   Inspection of property.



   123.11(B)(1)   Inspection.  The City shall inspect Landscape on
property located in a nonresidential zoning district, as well as on time
share or multi-family rental properties, to ensure that the Landscape has
been installed, maintained, and irrigated in accordance with the Landscape
plan approved by Broward County or the City and the provisions of this
Chapter and Chapter 122 of the Code. The property Owner/developer shall be
responsible for payment of a Landscape inspection fee in an amount as set
forth by resolution of the City Commission.



   123.11(B)(2)   Time limit for replacement of missing or substandard
Landscape. The property Owner is responsible for replacing any missing or
substandard Landscape to ensure that the property complies with the Landscape
plan within 60 days of the City’s notice of non-compliance. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, if the City determines that the missing or substandard
Landscape was caused by a Disaster, the property Owner shall be responsible
for the replacement of the missing or substandard Landscape in accordance
with the following provisions:



   123.11(B)(2)(a)   If the property is less than or equal to two
acres, any missing or substandard Landscape shall be replaced within 90 days
after the City’s notice of non-compliance with an approved Landscape plan;



   123.11(B)(2)(b)   If the property is greater than two acres, but
less than or equal to ten acres, any missing or substandard Landscape shall
be replaced within 120 days after the City’s notice of non- compliance with
an approved Landscape plan; or



   123.11(B)(2)(c)   If the property is greater than ten acres, any
missing or substandard Landscape shall be replaced within 150 days after the
City’s notice of non-compliance with an approved Landscape plan.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 123.12  CASH BOND FOR EXTENSION PERIOD.



   123.12(A)   Cash bonds.  Notwithstanding the failure to complete
the Landscaping and Irrigation requirements of the Landscaping and Irrigation
plans, a final Certificate Of Occupancy may be issued to a property Owner
upon the posting of a cash bond in the form of a certified or cashier’s
check made payable to the City in an amount equal to no less than 200% of the
estimated cost of installing the Landscaping, as calculated by the registered
Landscape Architect who prepared the Landscape plans and approved by the
City. An administrative fee of $500.00, or 5% of the cash bond, whichever is
greater, shall be included in addition to this estimated Landscape cost, and
shall be nonrefundable. In no case shall the amount of the cash bond be less
than $1,000.00. In addition, the property Owner shall execute and deliver to
the City a “Landscape and IrrigationConstruction easement and hold
harmless/indemnification agreement” in a form acceptable to the City
Manager and approved as to legality by the City Attorney, protecting the City
in the event that it must exercise its rights under the bond.



   123.12(B)   Time for performance.  The property Owner shall have 60
days from the issuance of the final Certificate Of Occupancy to complete the
Landscape and Irrigation installation in accordance with the approved
Landscape and Irrigation plan.



   123.12(C)   Release of cash bonds.  Prior to the expiration of the
60-day time for performance period, the Landscape Architect who prepared the
Landscape plan shall inspect the Landscaping to determine whether the
requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied and submit a written report,
with the inspection as described in § 123.11(B). If the City’s final
inspection reveals that the Landscape and proposed Irrigation requirements of
this Chapter have been satisfied, and the City has received a Landscape and
Irrigation certification letter, hardcopy of Landscape and Irrigation plans
and an as-built AutoCAD (.dwg) file, all signed and sealed by a Landscape
Architect, the cash bond shall be returned to the Owner less the
administrative fee.



   123.12(D)   Forfeiture and use of cash bond.  Upon the conclusion
of the 60-day time for performance period, the entire cash bond shall be
forfeited to and become the property of the City, unless the bond has been
released pursuant to § 123.12(C). If the bond is forfeited to the City, the
City shall install or cause the installation of the required Landscaping and
Irrigation in accordance with the Landscape and Irrigation plan required by
this Chapter. In the event that the costs to install required Landscaping
exceeds the cash bond amount, the City shall assess the property Owner for
any additional costs. In the event that the costs to install required
Landscaping is less than the cash bond amount, the City shall retain all
additional funds.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 123.13  PLANTING REQUIREMENTS.



   123.13(A)   Single-Family and Duplex residential Plant Units.  A
minimum of one Plant Unit shall be provided for each 50 square feet of
pervious Lot area in accordance with the Landscape Requirement Calculation
Form for Single-Family/DuplexDwellings , as provided by the City . The
Landscape Requirement Calculation Form for Single-Family/DuplexDwellings
shall be submitted with permit plans. Of the total Plant Units required, 50%
shall be Tree Plant Units (maximum 20% palms). The remainder Plant Units
shall be Shrubs. Maximum turf grass areas shall be 70% for Single-Family
residential (excluding the lake maintenance easement).



   123.13(B)   Multi-family residential and nonresidential Plant
Units.  On multi-family residential and nonresidential sites, a minimum of
one Plant Unit shall be provided for each 100 square feet of pervious Lot
area in accordance with the Landscape Requirement Calculation Form for
Multi-family and nonresidential sites, as provided by the City. The Landscape
Requirement Calculation Form for Multi-Family and nonresidential sites shall
be submitted with site plans.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2017-12, passed 9-13-2017)



§ 123.14  PERIMETER BUFFERS, PARKING ISLANDS, AND VEHICULAR USE AREAS.



   123.14(A)   Perimeter Buffers.  The following Landscape buffer
requirements shall be provided around the perimeter of the property related
to all Development projects from adjacent Rights-Of-Way and properties. The
LandscapePerimeter Buffer requirements shall not apply to Single-FamilyLots.
Such Perimeter Buffers may not be counted toward interior Landscape
requirements.



   123.14(A)(1)   Buffer width.



   123.14(A)(1)(a)   The portion of all Developments abutting
Rights-Of-Way shall have a Perimeter Buffer width in accordance with the
table below:



 


Right-Of-Way Width (feet)

 

Minimum Perimeter Buffer Width (feet)




80 or more

 

40




50 to 79

 

25




Under 50

 

10




 



   123.14(A)(1)(b)   All nonresidential Developments abutting property
zoned or used for residential purposes shall contain a minimum Perimeter
Buffer width of 25 feet on each side abutting property zoned or used for
residential purposes. All residential Developments abutting property zoned or
used for nonresidential purposes shall contain a minimum Perimeter Buffer
width of 25 feet on each side abutting property zoned or used for
nonresidential purposes.



   123.14(A)(1)(c)   All nonresidential Developments abutting property
that is not zoned or used for residential purposes shall contain a minimum
Perimeter Buffer width of ten feet on each side abutting property that is not
zoned or used for residential purposes.



   123.14(A)(2)   Accessways.  Perimeter Buffers may be traversed by
necessary accessways, if approved by the City.



   123.14(A)(3)   Berms.  Berms shall be provided along all Perimeter
Buffers except at approved ingress/egress openings. Required berms shall be
not less than four feet in height measured from the crown of the Roadway or
abutting residential pad finish floor elevation (FFE), whichever is higher;
have a slope of not less than 3:1; and be fully sodded and irrigated. All
contour lines with heights shall be depicted on all planting plans. Berms
shall consist of a minimum of 50% sand and a maximum of 50% muck, with a pH
between 6.5 and 7.0, and free of Construction Debris, weeds, and rocks.



   123.14(A)(4)   Plant Units.  Perimeter Buffers shall include a
minimum of one Plant Unit for every 25 square feet of buffer area. The
remainder of the Perimeter Buffer shall be covered with grass, Ground Cover,
or other Landscape treatment (no sand, gravel, pavers, or pavement). In
addition, a Hedge, wall, or other durable Landscape barrier shall be placed
along the inside perimeter of such buffer and maintained at a height of three
feet along abutting Rights-Of-Way. In cases where nonresidential Property
abuts Residential Property, the City can require such additional Landscaping
as is necessary to protect the aesthetics and minimize the impact on the
abutting Residential Area.



   123.14(B)   Parking islands.  The following Landscaping
requirements shall apply to the interior of parking areas containing ten or
more spaces.



   123.14(B)(1)   Planting areas and Plant Units.  Planting areas
shall be located in islands and optional Medians.



   123.14(B)(2)   Terminal islands.  Landscaped terminal islands of at
least 11 feet in width (including curbs)and 18 feet in length shall be
provided at the end of each parking row. All islands of less than 11 feet due
to turning radii requirements shall have polyethylene root barriers installed
against the full perimeter of the island. All limerock shall be Excavated
from islands to a depth of two and one-half feet and backfilled with the
specified planting mix.



   123.14(B)(3)   Interior islands.  At least one Landscaped interior
island shall be provided for every ten parking spaces. Interior islands shall
measure at least 11 feet in width (including curbs) and 18 feet in length.
All limerock shall be Excavated from islands to a depth of two and one-half
feet and backfilled with the specified planting mix.















Fig. 1  Interior Islands




   123.14(B)(4)   Optional divider Medians.  When provided, divider
Medians shall be a minimum of eleven feet in width, including Type D curbs.



   123.14(B)(5)   Landscape treatment.  All interior planting areas
not dedicated to Trees, Shrubs, or existing vegetation shall be Landscaped
with sod, Ground Cover, or other appropriate Landscape treatment (no sand,
rock, pavement, or base soil). In no instance shall there be less than one
Tree and 25 Shrubs for each Landscaped island.



   123.14(B)(6)   Site lighting and Trees.  No light Poles shall be
located within 15 feet of a canopy Tree or within seven and one-half feet of
a palm species or small Tree. All final light Pole locations shall be
illustrated on the planting plans.



   123.14(C)   Vehicular Use Areas.  The following standards shall
apply to areas which serve vehicular movement, access, storage, display,
queuing, or stacking. (Vehicular Use Areas include bank or Restaurant
drive-through facilities and unenclosed automobile, boat, or RV sales and
storage areas.)



   123.14(C)(1)   Planting area.  At least 60 square feet of planting
area with five Plant Units shall be provided for each parking space provided.
All Trees shall be planted within 55 feet from a parking space, measured from
the trunk.



   123.14(C)(2)   Landscape treatment.  All required planting areas
not dedicated to Trees, Shrubs, or existing vegetation shall be Landscaped
with grass, Ground Cover, or other appropriate treatment (no sand, rock,
pavement, or soil).



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 123.15  RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND ACCESSWAY INTERSECTIONS.



   123.15(A)   Sight triangles.  Sight triangles are required and
shall include the area on each Right-Of-Way or accessway corner that is
bounded by the line that connects the sight or “connecting” points
located on each of the Right-Of-Way or property lines of intersecting
Rights-Of-Way or accessways. Sight triangles shall be depicted on all
planting plans.



   123.15(B)   Sight triangle dimensions.



   123.15(B)(1)   Sight triangle requirements for the intersections of
all Rights-Of-Way and accessways shall conform with the criteria outlined in
the following standards:



   123.15(B)(1)(a)   AASHTO’s A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets.



   123.15(B)(1)(b)   FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards, Index
Nos. 545, 546, and 700.



   123.15(B)(1)(c)   FDOT Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for
Design, Construction , and Maintenance for Streets and Highways.



   123.15(B)(2)   If an individual private driveway intersects with any
Public Right-Of-Way, no sight distance obstruction will be permitted within
the ten-foot by 50-foot triangular area formed by the intersection of each
side of the driveway and the Ultimate Right-Of-Way or property lines with the
driveway side of the triangle being ten feet in length, the Public
Right-Of-Way side of the triangle being 50 feet in length, and the third side
of the triangle being the line connecting the ends of the two other sides.



   123.15(B)(3)   These requirements may be reduced to ten-foot by
35-foot, subject to City approval, if the public Right-Of-Way is a Local
Street with a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less.



   123.15(B)(4)   For all On-Site intersections of private internal
accessways, driveways, and/or private drive aisles, a minimum ten-foot by
25-foot sight triangle must be maintained from the intersecting edges of the
travel way, with the ten-foot side of the triangle being along the minor
drive aisle and the 25-foot side of the triangle being along the major drive
aisle.



   123.15(C)   Clear visibility requirements.  No Structure or
planting (at mature growth) that exceeds two and one-half feet in height
above Street grade shall be permitted within required sight triangles.
Exceptions are permitted if the lower canopies of Trees allow a clear line of
sight between two and one-half feet and eight feet above adjacent Street
grade and the trunks of such Trees are sufficiently spaced or located so as
to be unlikely to interrupt the line of sight.







 



Fig. 2  Clear Visibility Requirements



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 123.16  SWALE TREE REQUIREMENTS.



   Applicants for a Development Permit shall submit a plan to provide for
Swale Trees adjacent to their property.



   123.16(A)   Swale Tree location and purpose.  Swale Trees shall be
required along improved Rights-Of-Way. The species and location of Swale
Trees shall not conflict with improvements and Utilities.



   123.16(B)   Size, spacing and planting width.  Swale Trees shall,
at time of planting, have a Clear Trunk of at least four and one-half feet, a
height of at least 14 feet, and a DBH of two and one- half inches. Swale
Trees shall be spaced at average intervals of 35 feet. Existing planting
areas of less than six feet in width shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches.
Roads fronting Single-Family Residences shall comply with these provisions.
For all other Roadways, all Trees with existing or expected trunk diameters
of four inches or greater must be located outside of the Roadway clear zone
as established by applicable Roadway safety criteria. Average spacing
requirements for grouped one Family units (zero-Lot -line or Townhouse) shall
be based on total Frontage of the adjacent Street and not on individual Lot
widths. Required Swale Trees shall be installed prior to the final Building
inspection.



   123.16(C)   Root barriers.  Root barriers are required where Swale
Trees are planted within five feet of a Sidewalk or Roadway. Root barriers
shall be placed against the edge of the Sidewalk and the edge of the
pavement, and shall extend five feet in both directions parallel to the
Sidewalk and Roadway.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-21-2015)



§ 123.17  SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.



   123.17(A)   Above-ground elements.  Dumpsters, transformers, air
conditioning units, mechanical equipment, and all other aboveground
freestanding Utility equipment or enclosure elements shall be fully screened
on all nonaccessible portions with Hedge material equal to the height of such
elements.



   123.17(B)   Generators.



   123.17(B)(1)   New Development other than Single-Family and
Duplex.  Generators and above ground gas tanks shall be fully screened on
all nonaccessible portions with Hedge material equal to the height of the
generator and the gas tanks. Above ground gas tanks are not permitted in
Single-Family and Duplex.



   123.17(B)(2)   Existing Development other than Single-Family and
Duplex. Except when determined by the City that screening is impracticable,
generators and above ground gas tanks installed on existing developed
properties shall be fully screened on all nonaccessible portions with Hedge
material equal to the height of the generator and the gas tanks.



   123.17(C)   Foundation planting.  Adjacent to proposed Buildings,
Landscape material shall be installed at, at least the lesser of one-half the
Height of the Building, or 17.5 feet, covering a minimum of 30% of the
BuildingFaçade on all sides. A minimum five-foot planting area shall be
provided around all Buildings with the exception of service areas. All
Landscape areas along Buildings shall be Excavated to a depth of 12 inches
and backfilled with a composed of a minimum of 50% sand and a maximum of 50%
muck soil mix.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-15, passed 11-18-2013; Am.
Ord. 2018-05, passed 6-4-2018)



§ 123.18  PLANT STANDARDS.



   All Landscaping required by this Section shall comply with the
following:



   123.18(A)   Plant Unit equivalencies.  Many of the requirements of
this Section are expressed in terms of “Plant Units.” In all cases, a
minimum of 50% of all required Plant Units shall come from Trees. The
following provides a breakdown of Plant Unit equivalencies:



 


PLANT UNIT EQUIVALENCY TABLE




Plant Type

 

Plant Units





Large Tree
 

10



Specimen palm Tree species (royal palms, Bismarckia, Canary Island date palms
and medjool palm with 10 feet of grey wood with 20-inch DBH)
 

10



Small Tree
 

5



Large palm species (royal palms, Bismarckia, Canary Island date, medjool and
Sylvester with 7 feet of grey wood with 15-inch DBH)
 

5



Other palm species
 

2.5



Shrub
 

1





 







 



Fig. 3  Plant Unit Equivalences



   123.18(B)   Plant Unit sizes.  Minimum size of required Trees and
Shrubs (at time of planting) shall be:



 


Type

 

DBH

 

Height/Spread



Large Tree
 

2-1/2 in.

 
14 ft., 5 to 6 ft. spread, with 4-1/2 ft. Clear Trunk


Small Tree
 

1.75 in.

 
10 ft., 5 ft. spread, 4 ft. Clear Trunk


Specimen palm species
 

20 in.

 
10 ft. wood


Large palm species
 

15 in.

 
7 ft. wood


Other palm species
 

N/A

 
12 ft. to 14 ft. overall height


Shrubs
 

N/A

 
2 ft. overall height, 18 in. spread,18 in. on center



 



   123.18(C)   Plant Location.



   123.18(C)(1)   Trees and Palms.



   123.18(C)(1)(a)   All proposed Trees and palms shall not be planted
under Roof , overhangs, and balconies.



   123.18(C)(1)(b)   All proposed Trees and palms within or overhanging
pedestrian areas shall have a Clear Trunk high enough to allow unobstructed
pedestrian movement under or around.



   123.18(C)(1)(c)   All proposed tot lots or swimming pools, except
for a Single-Family home, shall be required to have a minimum shade
requirement to allow Persons to seek refuge from the sun.



   123.18(C)(1)(d)   The use of very poisonous, thorny, spiny,
deciduous, messy fruit or an aggressive root system Tree or palm shall be
reviewed case by case.



   123.18(C)(1)(e)   All Trees and palms shall be a minimum of four
feet from all underground Utility lines.



   123.18(C)(1)(f)   All shade Trees shall be installed a minimum of 15
feet away from light Poles . All small Trees and palms shall be installed a
minimum of seven and one-half feet away from light Poles .



   123.18(C)(1)(g)   All Trees and palms shall be installed seven and
one-half feet from the front and sides of fire hydrants and four feet from
the rear.



   123.18(C)(2)   Shrubs.



   123.18(C)(2)(a)   Shrubs shall be planted in a manner that prevents
branches from touching the Building walls or walkways at time of planting.



   123.18(C)(2)(b)   Shrubs shall be installed seven and one-half feet
from the front and sides of fire hydrants and four feet from the rear.



   123.18(C)(2)(c)   Planting Shrubs around Trees shall be done in a
manner that prevents trunk damage.



   123.18(C)(2)(d)   Planting Shrubs in layers shall be done in a
manner that promotes plant species diversity and the City’s aesthetics with
taller Shrubs in the back and shorter Shrubs in the front.



   123.18(C)(3)   Ficus species.  Ficus species shall not be permitted
within ten feet of any Structure, Utility, or Street. Such species may be
permitted only if they are:



   123.18(C)(3)(a)   Located on a berm of at least four feet in height
within a minimum 25-foot Perimeter Buffer .



   123.18(C)(3)(b)   Maintained as a Hedge that is neat and orderly in
appearance.



   123.18(D)   Plant Standards.



   123.18(D)(1)   Trees and Palms.



   123.18(D)(1)(a)   All proposed multi-trunk Trees shall have a
minimum of three trunks with no more than five trunks of equal diameters
originating from the base of the Tree with angles no greater than 45 degrees.
(The City can require either multi-trunk or single trunk on certain Trees .)



   123.18(D)(1)(b)   All proposed coconut palms shall be certified to
be resistant to lethal yellowing.



   123.18(D)(1)(c)   The use of wind tolerant Trees and palms are
required due to the high risk of hurricanes in South Florida. Every effort
shall be utilized to reduce the risk of damage and liability by utilizing
more wind tolerant Landscaping .



   123.18(D)(2)   Shrubs.



   123.18(D)(2)(a)   Shrubs shall be multi-stem with a minimum of three
stems originating from the base of the Shrub .



   123.18(D)(2)(b)   The use of plant material that can be hazardous to
Persons, pets or property shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.



   123.18(D)(3)   Vines.  Vines used for vertical screening shall be a
minimum 60 inches in supported height immediately after planting. The method
of Attachment shall be indicated on the Landscape plans. The use of very
poisonous, thorny, spiny, deciduous, or messy fruit Vines shall be subject to
the approval of the City. Support Structures, including, such as, but not
limited to, pergolas, trellises and arbors, require Vines.



   123.18(E)   Plant species.



   123.18(E)(1)   Native and drought-tolerant species.



   123.18(E)(1)(a)   Use of site specific material:  Plants used in
the Landscape design shall be appropriate to the environmental conditions.



   123.18(E)(1)(b)   Drought tolerant Landscape species and grouping of
plant material by water requirements are required.



   123.18(E)(1)(c)   Minimum requirements for required plant species
shall be as follows:



 


Type

 

Minimum Required Percentage**



Native species*
 

50



Drought tolerant*
 

50



*   As defined in the South Florida Water Management District’s
Xeriscape Plant Guide III and University of Florida’s The Florida-Friendly
Landscaping Guide to Plant Selection & Landscape Design


**   Percentages are not cumulative and may be overlapping



 



   123.18(E)(2)   Tree species diversity.  The Tree species diversity
shall be as follows:



 


Number of Trees

 

Minimum Number of Species*




1—4

 

1




5—0

 

2




11—25

 

4




26—50

 

5




51+

 

6



* Not more than 20% of the Tree requirement shall be palm species



 



   123.18(F)   Plant quality.  Plant materials used in accordance with
this Code shall conform to the standards for Florida grade no. 1 or Florida
Fancy as provided for in the latest edition of Grades and Standards for
Nursery Plants, State of Florida Department of Agricultural and Consumer
Services. For standards not addressed in the Florida Grades and Standards for
Nursery Plants, plant materials shall conform to the American National
Standards Institute ANSI Standards Z60.1.



   123.18(G)   Existing vegetation.  At the discretion of the City,
vegetation and plant material that exists on a site prior to its Development
may be used to satisfy the requirements of this Section, provided that such
vegetation meets the Landscape standards in this Section. However, no credit
shall be permitted for:



   123.18(G)(1)   Vegetation not properly protected from damage during
Construction .



   123.18(G)(2)   Plant species classified as “prohibited” or
“controlled.”



   123.18(G)(3)   Vegetation that is dead, dying, diseased, or infested
with insects.



   123.18(G)(4)   Existing plant material noted as prohibited shall be
removed from the site.



   123.18(H)   Replacement of Landscape material.  All vegetation,
including credited Landscaping per an approved plan, that subsequently die
shall be replaced by the requisite number of Landscaping according to the
standards established in this Chapter.



   123.18(I)   Ground treatment.  Pervious Areas within required
planting areas not dedicated to Trees, Shrubs, or other vegetation shall
receive appropriate Landscape treatment and present a finished appearance and
complete coverage upon planting. No sand, gravel, pavement, or base soil
shall be permitted. The following standards shall apply:



   123.18(I)(1)   Topsoil/planting soil.  Topsoil and/or planting soil
shall have a pH between 6.5 and 7.0; be composed of a minimum of 50% sand and
a maximum of 50% muck; and be free of Debris, weeds, and rocks.



   123.18(I)(2)   Ground Cover.  Ground Cover may be planted in lieu
of sod. Ground Cover shall provide not less than 75% coverage upon planting
and 100% coverage within three months after planting. All Ground Cover shall
be planted so not to touch the Building walls or walkways at time of
planting. Planting Ground Cover around Trees shall be done in a manner that
prevents trunk damage.



   123.18(I)(3)   Mulch.  Three inches of shredded, organic, arsenic
free Mulch shall be installed around each Tree planting for a minimum of 18
inches beyond its trunk in all directions, including palms, and throughout
all Hedge, Shrub, and Ground Cover planting; Mulch shall be pulled a minimum
of two inches away from Trees and palms.



   123.18(I)(4)   Decorative rock Mulch.  In lieu of installing Mulch,
decorative rock Mulch, ranging in size of two inches to four inches, may be
installed provided that only the following rock types are utilized:  egg
rock, jade rock, river jack rock, Mexican pebble, red quartzite, red lava
rock, butter rock, and river rock.



   123.18(I)(4)(a)   Residential.  Decorative rock Mulch may be
incorporated into designed Landscape beds up to a maximum 5% of the site
Pervious Area excluding lake maintenance easements and Swales. These
Landscape beds shall be contained by Landscape edging and shall not be
located in the Swale areas or lake maintenance easements.



   123.18(I)(4)(b)   Commercial and multi-family.  Decorative rock
Mulch may be designed into foundation Landscape area beds around Buildings,
pools, fountains and Monument Signs if contained by a poured concrete
boundary.



   123.18(I)(5)   Sod.  All sod areas, including but not limited to,
Swales, lake maintenance easements, and Retention Areas, shall be solid St.
Augustine Floratam, Palmetto or Bermuda laid on a smooth planting base with
tight joints at 100% coverage at time of planting and cut to fit all
Landscape planters and curb areas. Sod shall be green, healthy, clean, and
visibly free of weeds, pests, and diseases. Sod areas shall be identified and
labeled on the Landscape plans. Seeding and plugs are prohibited. No more
than the following percentages of planting areas may be in sod:



 


Land Use Type

 

Maximum Percent of Landscape Area in Sod*



Single-Family residential
 

70



Multi-Family residential
 

60



Nonresidential
 

50



*   Maximum percent of planting area in grass exclusive of lake
maintenance area.



 



   123.18(J)   Prohibited plant species.  The following plant species
shall not be used:



 

 

Botanical Name

 

Common Name





(1)
 
Acacia auriculaeformis
 
earleaf acacia


(2)
 
Araucaria heterophylla
 
Norfolk Island pine


(3)
 
Ardisia solanecea
 
shoebutton ardisia


(4)
 
Bischofia javanica
 
toog


(5)
 
Brassaria actinophylla
 
schefflera


(6)
 
Casuarina trees
 
Australian pine


(7)
 
Cupaniopsis anacardiodes
 
carrotwood


(8)
 
Dalbergia sisoo
 
rosewood


(9)
 
Grevillea robusta
 
silk oak


(10)
 
Hibiscus tiliaceus
 
mahoe


(11)
 
Lucaena leucocephala
 
lead Tree or jumbie bean


(12)
 
Melaleuca quinquenervia
 
punk Tree or paper bark


(13)
 
Metopium toxiferum
 
poisonwood


(14)
 
Rhodomyrtus tomentosa
 
downy rose myrtle


(15)
 
Schinus terebinthifolius
 
Brazilian pepper or Florida holly


(16)
 
Bucida buceras
 
black olive


(17)
 
Callistemon viminalis
 
weeping bottlebrush




 



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 9-23-2013)



§ 123.19  INSTALLATION STANDARDS.



   All Landscaping shall be installed according to sound nursery practices
in a manner designed to encourage vigorous growth. All required Landscape
material shall be healthy and in place prior to, and at the time of, issuance
of the final Certificate Of Occupancy .



   123.19(A)   All Trees , palms, Shrubs , and Ground Covers shall be
planted with a minimum of 12 inches or two times the size of the rootball of
planting soil around rootball.



   123.19(B)   A minimum of three inches of shredded, approved arsenic
free, organic Mulch , or Ground Cover shall be installed around each Tree
planting for a minimum of 18 inches beyond its trunk in all direction,
including palms, and throughout all Hedge, Shrub , and Ground Cover planting.
The use of Mulch obtained from Melaleuca, Eucalyptus, or other invasive plant
species is encouraged in order to reduce their impact on the Environment and
to preserve the remaining native plant community.



   123.19(C)   All Trees /palms shall be properly guyed and staked at
time of planting until one Year from Landscape final approval or
establishment. All guying and staking shall be removed within one Year of
approval or establishment. The use of nails, wire, rope, or any other method
which damages the Trees or palms is prohibited.



   123.19(D)   All plants shall be installed so the top of the rootball
is 10% above the surrounding soil grade. All synthetic string, synthetic
burlap, cords, or wire baskets shall be removed prior to planting.



   123.19(E)   All parking islands, Medians, and other Landscape areas
shall be installed with continuous Type “D” curbing to prevent damage to
the planting material and the displacement of soil and Mulch . Also, all
Landscape islands, divider Medians, and planters shall be Excavated of
limerock and/or compacted soil to a depth of 30 inches and backfilled with
specified planting mix to the top of curb. Additionally, all areas along
Buildings shall be Excavated to a depth of 12 inches and backfilled with
specified planting mix.



   123.19(F)   All parking Structures require irrigated planters with
plant material that screens and buffer the parking Structures on all sides.



   123.19(G)   All Landscaping shall be installed with slow release
fertilizer that is made of trace minor elements in addition to minimum 8%
nitrogen, 2% phosphorus, and 12% potassium per manufacturer’s
recommendations. 50% of the nitrogen must be derived from an organic source.



   123.19(H)   All plant rootball sizes shall conform or exceed the
minimum standards in the current edition of Florida Grades and Standards.



   123.19(I)   All Landscaping , including Trees , palms, Shrubs ,
Vines , and Ground Covers shall be guaranteed for one Year after final
Landscape approval. A written warranty shall be submitted to the City prior
to final Landscape approval.



   123.19(I)(1)   All invasive, exotic pest plants shall be removed
prior to final inspection.



   123.19(I)(2)   All Landscape substitutions shall require City
approval prior to installation.



   123.19(I)(3)   Inspections.



   123.19(I)(3)(a)   A pre-inspection of the site with the Landscape
contractor shall be required to discuss all the City’s requirements, answer
any questions and determine and site conditions for appropriate use and
selection of Landscape material prior to installation.



   123.19(I)(3)(b)   A final Landscape inspection shall be required
upon completion.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 123.20  IRRIGATION STANDARDS.



   Landscaped areas shall be irrigated to maintain required plant
materials in good and healthy condition. Irrigation systems shall be
installed underground and comply with the following:



   123.20(A)   All required planting areas shall be served by a
permanent Irrigation system maintained in good working order and designed to
minimize water on Impervious Areas. Drip Irrigation systems, where practical,
shall be encouraged.



   123.20(B)   Irrigation systems shall be designed to apply water onto
Shrub and Tree areas less frequently than those onto Lawn areas. Irrigation
systems shall be designed to have 100% coverage with 100% overlap.



   123.20(C)   Rain sensors shall be installed on systems with
automatic controllers.



   123.20(D)   All Irrigation systems utilizing non- Potable Water
shall include a treatment system to prevent rust stains.



(Ord. 2010-19, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 124:  ZONING



Section



General Provisions



   124.01   Scope of regulations



   124.02   Repository of the official zoning map



   124.03   Applicability to City uses



Zoning Districts



   124.10   Listing of zoning districts



   124.11   Maximum permitted units



   124.12   Interpretation of district boundaries



   124.13   Prohibited uses



Residential



   124.14   Single-Family Residential Districts (SF)



   124.15   Multiple Family Districts (MF)



Industrial, Office, Commercial (IOC)



   124.16   IOC Districts



   124.17   Food service and alcoholic beverage establishments -
counter seating



   124.18   Community Facilities (CF) District



   124.19   Golf Course District (GC)



   124.20   Municipal Use (MU)



   124.21   Planned Development District (PDD)



   124.22   Planned Employment Center District (PECD)



   124.23   Agricultural/Estate District (AE)



   124.24   Conservation District



   124.25   Hospital Zoning District (HZ)



   124.26   Reserved



Special Districts



   124.27   Town Center Overlay District



   124.28   Weston Commons Planned Employment Center District (PECD)



   124.29   Isles at Weston Planned Development District



   124.30   Florida Nature and Culture Center Planned Development
District



   124.31   Estates of Swan Lake Planned Development District



Accessory Uses and Structures



   124.32   Dumpsters and dumpster enclosures



   124.33   Fences and walls



   124.34   Swimming pools



   124.35   Home-based public assembly uses



   124.36   Accessory use regulations



   124.37   Pain management clinics



   124.37.1   Electric vehicle charging stations



   124.37.2   Outdoor storage



Non-Conforming Uses and Structures



   124.38   Non-conforming structures and uses



Temporary Uses and Structures



   124.40   Tents



   124.41   Outdoor sales



   124.42   Outdoor manufacturing and services



   124.43   Temporary sales/rental/leasing offices



   124.44   Temporary construction trailers and storage units



Regulations



   124.47   Lot size, height and setbacks



   124.48   Supplemental setback regulations



   124.49   Exclusion from height limits



   124.50   Double frontage regulations



   124.51   Land use separation



   124.52   Lighting standards



   124.53   Street frontage required



   124.54   Off-street parking and loading



   124.55   Reserved



   124.56   Use of premises without buildings



   124.57   Use of residentially zoned land for access



Administration and Enforcement



   124.60   General provisions



   124.61   Enforcement



   124.62   Procedures for a text change or zoning district change



   124.63   Zoning and planning application fees



   124.64   Temporary or permanent taking of private property or vested
rights



   124.65   Determination of uses not listed



   124.66   Building permits



   124.67   Certificate Of Occupancy or certificate of completion



   124.68   Certificates of use



   124.69   Appeal of a City administrative decision



Variances and Special Exceptions



   124.80   Variances



   124.81   Special exceptions



   124.82   Recordation and expiration



   Appendix A:  Town Center Overlay District Design Guidelines



   Appendix B:  Isles at Weston Planned Development District Design
Guidelines



   Appendix C:  Florida Nature and Culture Center Planned Development
District Design  Guidelines



   Appendix D:  Estates of Swan Lake Planned Development District Design
Guidelines



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 124.01  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   No Building or Structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed or altered and maintained, and no existing Use , new Use , or
change of Use of any Building , Structure or land of part thereof shall be
made or continued, and no occupancy permit shall be issued, except in
conformity with the provisions of these zoning regulations. This Section
shall not apply to complete applications submitted prior to the effective
date of this ordinance.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.02  REPOSITORY OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   The official zoning map shall be on file and available to the public in
the City Clerk’s Office.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.03  APPLICABILITY TO CITY USES.



   The provisions of this Chapter and the Land Development Chapter shall
not apply to the Use of any property by the City and its dependent districts
in any government capacity, function, or purpose.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 124.10  LISTING OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   124.10(A)   The City is divided into zoning districts of such
number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purpose
of these zoning regulations. Such districts shall be represented on the
official zoning map adopted by the City Commission. The table below explains
the symbols used for each designation.



 



Single-Family Districts (§ 124.14)


R1
 
Single-Family Residential Medium


R2
 
Single-Family Residential Moderate


R3
 
Single-Family Residential Moderate/Low


R4
 
Single-Family Residential Low


RE
 
Estate Residential


RZ
 
Single-Family Residential zero Lot line


Multiple Family Districts (§ 124.15)


MF1
 
Villa and Townhouse and Duplex


MF2
 
Low Rise Multi Family


MF3
 
Mid Rise Multi Family


MF4
 
High Rise Multi Family


Office District


O-1
 
Office (§ 124.16(B))


Commercial Districts


C-1
 
Commercial (§ 124.16(C))


Industrial District


I-1
 
Industrial (§ 124.16(A))


Specialized Use Districts


GC
 
Golf Course (§ 124.19)


MU
 
Municipal Use (§ 124.20)


PECD
 
Planned Employment Center District (§ 124.22)


PDD
 
Planned Development District (§ 124.21)


AE
 
Agricultural Estate (§ 124.23)


CF
 
Community Facilities (§ 124.18)


CV
 
Conservation (§ 124.24)




 



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-17, passed 9-12-2016; Am. Ord.
2018-10, passed 7-2-2018)



§ 124.11  MAXIMUM PERMITTED UNITS.



   124.11(A)   The maximum number of units permitted on a site shall be
equal to the maximum permitted density per acre as set forth in the
Comprehensive Plan multiplied by the gross number of acres of the site. For
Hotel and Motel units in residential zoning districts, every two sleeping
rooms shall count as one Dwelling Unit .



   124.11(B)   Density from one site shall not be transferred to
another site.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.12  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   124.12(A)   In cases where a boundary line is given a position
within a Street or alley, easement, canal, waterway, it shall be deemed to be
in the center of the Right-Of-Way of the Street , alley, easement, canal or
waterways.



   124.12(B)   If a site is crossed by a zoning district boundary and
thus lies in more than one district, the district boundary shall be treated
as if it were a Lot line separating the two separately zoned parcels.



   124.12(C)   The boundary line for properties having a Lot line
adjacent to a waterway, lake or canal is the bulkhead. If a bulkhead does not
exist, the property line shall be as shown on a survey that is signed and
sealed by a professional surveyor and mapper in the State of Florida.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.13  PROHIBITED USES.



   124.13(A)   Unless a use is specifically listed as a permitted Use ,
or is found to be permitted pursuant to § 124.65, it shall be prohibited.



   124.13(B)   Any use that produces unmitigated hazardous effects,
including but not limited to, fumes, odors, noise, dust, smoke, or glare, to
the extent that it disturbs the quiet enjoyment of adjoining property.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



RESIDENTIAL



§ 124.14  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (SF).



   District purpose:  These districts are designed to permit the
Development and maintenance of detached Single-Family residential homes and
to promote and encourage a quiet and safe environment.



   Permitted Uses :  Residential Structures containing a
Single-FamilyDwelling Unit .



   Setback/Development standards:  See § 124.47.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.15  MULTIPLE FAMILY DISTRICTS (MF).



   District purpose:  These districts are intended to permit the
Development and maintenance of Buildings with multiple Dwelling Units and
Hotel Uses, where permitted, to encourage a land use pattern of appropriate
locations for multiple Story Buildings.



   District purpose:  These districts are intended to permit the
Development and maintenance of Buildings with multiple Dwelling Units and to
promote and encourage a quiet and safe environment.



   Permitted Uses :  Residential Structures containing two or more
Dwelling Units .



         HotelUses only in the M4 district.



   Special exception Uses :  Timeshare units.



   Prohibited Uses:   Vacation Rentals are prohibited in any
condominium, cooperative or multi-family Residential Property with more than
four Dwelling Units.



   Setback/Development standards:  See § 124.47.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-17, passed 9-12-2016; Am. Ord.
2018-07, passed 6-4-2018)



INDUSTRIAL, OFFICE, COMMERCIAL (IOC)



§ 124.16  IOC DISTRICTS.



   124.16(A)   Industrial district (I-1).



   District purpose:  This district is intended to permit professional
and real estate office Uses as well as the interior storage, manufacture and
distribution of products that can be accomplished without the production of
noise or vibration, smoke or noxious odors beyond the interior of the
Structure (s).



   Permitted Uses : See § 124.16(D).



   Setback/Development standards:  See § 124.47.



   124.16(B)   Office district (O-1).



   District purpose: This district is intended to permit professional,
medical and real estate office Uses .



   Permitted Uses :  See § 124.16(D).



   Setback/Development standards:  See § 124.47.



   124.16(C)   Commercial district (C-1).



   District purpose:  This district permits the Development of land in a
commercial manner with Uses that provide for the sale of goods and products
that are needed throughout the entire City.



   Permitted Uses :  See § 124.16(D).



   Setback/Development standards:  See § 124.47.



   124.16(D)   Permitted Uses.



 


USES

 

I-1

 

O-1

 

C-1





(P indicates that the Use is permitted in the zoning category, SE indicates
that the Use requires special exception approval in the zoning category, NP
indicates that the use is prohibited in the zoning category.)


Academic Tutorial Services
 

SE

 

P

 

P



Adult education facility
 

SE

 

SE

 

SE



Adult Entertainment Establishment*
 

P*

 

NP

 

NP



Amusement Center
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Amusement Arcade
 

NP

 

NP

 

P




 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Animal hospital
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Appliance repair
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Appliance sales
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Appliance/furniture rental agencies
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Assembly (industrial)
 

P

 

NP

 

NP



Auditorium/assembly hall
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Bakery
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Banks
 

NP

 

P

 

P



Banquet facility
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Bar
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



Barber/beauty salon
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Book store
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Bowling center
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



Bulk film processing lab
 

SE

 

NP

 

NP



Call center/telemarketing
 

P

 

P

 

NP



Catering facility
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Cemeteries and crematoriums
 

SE

 

NP

 

NP



Chemical bulk storage
 

SE

 

NP

 

NP



Child Care Facility
(freestanding building only)
 

NP

 

SE

 

SE



Commercial gymnasium, athletic facility
 

P

 

P

 

P



Commercial pool
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



Convenience Store
 

NP

 

P

 

P



Courier services
 

P

 

P

 

P



Dinner theatre
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Drive-through facilities/freestanding
 

NP

 

P

 

P



Dry cleaner (on premise)
 

P

 

NP

 

SE



Construction Equipment renting
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Essential services and Utilities
 

P

 

P

 

P



Florist
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Food processing establishment
 

P

 

NP

 

NP



Food take-out or delivery
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Fuel Station
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



Funeral home/mortuary
 

SE

 

NP

 

NP



Furniture sales
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Game room/billiards
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



Golf course
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Grocery store
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Gun/knife store
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Hair stylist
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Hardware store
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Health spa
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Hobby supply
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Hospital
 

P

 

P

 

P



Hotel/Motel, Timeshare
 

P

 

P

 

P



House of worship
 

P

 

P

 

P



Jewelry sales
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Library
 

P

 

P

 

P



Light manufacturing
 

P

 

NP

 

NP



Limousine/taxi service
 

SE

 

NP

 

NP



Martial arts academy
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Massage facility (on ground floor only)
 

NP

 

P

 

P



Medical Office
 

NP

 

P

 

P



Medical/dental laboratories, public
 

P

 

P

 

P



Medical/dental laboratories, research or testing
 

SE

 

SE

 

NP



Medical/dental office
 

NP

 

P

 

P



Medical Marijuana Retail Center
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Nail salon
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Nursing Home/Residential Care Facility
 

NP

 

SE

 

NP



Community Center
 

P

 

P

 

P



Pet supply
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Pharmacy
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Photocopy or printshop
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Post office
 

P

 

P

 

P



Private club or lodge
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Professional office
 

P

 

P

 

P



Real estate office
 

P

 

P

 

P



Repair shop (household and personal)
 

P

 

NP

 

P



Research and testing facility (not medical or dental)
 

P

 

NP

 

NP



Restaurant
 

NP

 

P

 

P



Retail sales
 

NP

 

NP

 

P



Retail Vaporizer Shop
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



School, Dance
 

P

 

P

 

P



School, Gymnastic
 

P

 

NP

 

P



School, Private & Public
 

SE

 

P

 

P



School, Trade
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Self service carwash
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Self storage Warehouse
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Small equipment rental agencies
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Tanning facility
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



Theater, movie
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Tobacco store
 

NP

 

NP

 

SE



Utilities
 

P

 

NP

 

NP



Vehicle cleaning
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Vehicle parts and accessory installation
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Vehicle rental agency
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Vehicle service and repair
 

SE

 

NP

 

SE



Warehouse and distribution
 

P

 

NP

 

NP



Wireless telecommunications facility
 

P

 

P

 

P



*Subject to spacing requirements set forth in the Adult Business Chapter.




 



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-08, passed 4-2-2012; Am. Ord.
2012-12, passed 6-18-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-21, passed 10-20-2014; Am. Ord.
2014-25, passed 12-1-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-13, passed 6-20-2016; Am. Ord.
2016-19, passed 10-17-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-11, passed 9-13-2017; Am. Ord.
2017-14, passed 11-6-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-18, passed 12-3-2018)



§ 124.17  FOOD SERVICE AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS - COUNTER
SEATING.



   When a food service establishment or Bar offers seating for its patrons
at a bar or counter, there shall be no more than one seat per 24 lineal
inches of bar/counter, excluding any service area.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.18  COMMUNITY FACILITIES (CF) DISTRICT.



   124.18(A)   Purpose of district.  The CF Community Facilities
District is intended to accommodate governmental, cultural, community, and
health needs of a particular neighborhood or region.



   124.18(B)   Uses permitted.  No Building or Structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used in whole or in part for other
than one of the following Uses:



   124.18(B)(1)   Museums, libraries, auditoriums, and civic centers.



   124.18(B)(2)   Non-municipal police and fire protection facilities.



   124.18(B)(3)   Non-municipal Governmental facilities.



   124.18(B)(4)   Public works and related facilities.



   124.18(B)(5)   Judicial Courts and related facilities.



   124.18(B)(6)   Non-municipal recreational facilities.



   124.18(B)(7)   Hospitals, convalescent homes and nursing homes.



   124.18(B)(8)   Places of public assembly.



   124.18(B)(9)   Non-municipal Utilities .



   124.18(B)(10)   Public and Private Schools .



   124.18(B)(11)   Child Care Facilities .



   124.18(C)   Size of plot.  Every plot upon which a permitted
Structure or Use, other than an Accessory Structure or Use, is erected or
placed shall not be less than 43,560 square feet of area and have at least
150 feet of Street Frontage.



   124.18(D)   Height.  No Building, Structure, or Use shall be
erected, placed, or altered to exceed the maximum Height permitted within the
zoning district on adjacent property. The most restrictive Height shall apply
if the existing Height limits on adjacent properties vary.



   124.18(E)   Yards.  Every plot shall have a front yard of not less
than 25 feet in depth. Every plot shall have a side and rear yard of not less
than 25 feet.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.19  GOLF COURSE DISTRICT (GC).



   124.19(A)   Purpose of district.  The purpose of the GC Golf Course
District is to designate areas for golf courses and directly related Uses to
preserve areas of open space by limiting the intensity of Development.



   124.19(B)   Site Development Plan.  The site Development Plan for a
plot in a GC District shall provide, for such an arrangement and location of
Uses and facilities on the plot as to give maximum possible separation from,
and protection to, contiguous and nearby property. Where the nature of the
activities or facilities on the plot present any potential hazard or
detriment to contiguous properties from noise, glare, odors, smoke,
vibration, flying objects, or Traffic, protection to such contiguous
properties shall be provided in the form of open space, fences, walls,
Landscaping enclosures, and/or by such other means as may be appropriate and
effective to prevent or minimize such hazards.



   124.19(C)   Uses permitted.  No Building or Structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used in whole or in part for other
than one of the following Uses:



   124.19(C)(1)   Golf courses.



   124.19(C)(2)   Golf clubhouse.



   124.19(C)(3)   The following Uses , if determined by the City
Commission to be directly associated with the primary golf course Use :



   124.19(C)(3)(a)   Tennis courts.



   124.19(C)(3)(b)   Swimming pools.



   124.19(C)(3)(c)   Unlit driving ranges.



   124.19(C)(3)(d)   Restaurants or lounges.



   124.19(C)(3)(e)   Pro shops.



   124.19(C)(3)(f)   Accessory Buildings , including but not limited
to; snack shops, maintenance facilities, storage facilities, and restrooms.



   124.19(D)   Height.  No Building, Structure, or Use shall be
erected, placed, or altered to a Height exceeding 42 feet.



   124.19(E)   Area.  All golf courses and related permitted Uses must
have a minimum area of 50 acres.



   124.19(F)   Setbacks.



   124.19(F)(1)   All permitted Structures shall have the following
Setbacks :



   124.19(F)(1)(a)   Minimum Front Setback: 100 feet.



   124.19(F)(1)(b)   Minimum Side Setback: 100 feet.



   124.19(F)(1)(c)   Minimum Rear Setback: 100 feet.



   124.19(F)(2)   No parking area shall be located within 50 feet of
any residentially zoned property.



   124.19(G)   Plot coverage.  The combined area occupied by all main
and Accessory Buildings and Structures shall not exceed 10% of the total area.



   124.19(H)   Fences and walls.  No fences or walls shall be located
in the GC District without City Commission approval.



   124.19(I)   Landscaping.  All required yards and open spaces
adjacent to Streets and contiguous to residential property shall be planted
and maintained with suitable material in the form of grass, Shrubs, Hedges,
and Trees to present an attractive appearance.



   124.19(J)   Poles, netting, lighting, and other buffers.  Poles,
netting, lighting, and other buffers surrounding an unlit driving range shall
be permitted only as a special exception.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.20  MUNICIPAL USE (MU).



   Property designated as Municipal Use are limited to those properties
that are owned by the City, and may be used as deemed appropriate by the City.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.21  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PDD).



   124.21(A)   Purpose of district.



   124.21(A)(1)   The Planned Development District is intended to
encourage the implementation of innovative land planning and site designs
that create enhanced living and working environments by providing flexible
land Use and design regulations. A PDD would allow small- to large-scale
areas to be developed with a variety of residential types and nonresidential
Uses that may contain both individual Building sites and common property,
which are planned and developed as a unified district.



   124.21(A)(2)   The Planned Development District to be designed and
organized so as to be capable of satisfactory Use and operation as a separate
entity without necessarily needing the participation of other Building sites
or other common property in order to function as a neighborhood. This Section
specifically encourages innovations so that the growing demands of
residential and nonresidential Uses may be met by a greater variety in type,
design, and siting of Buildings and by the conservation and more efficient
Use of land. This Section shall also be utilized to protect, preserve, and
enhance lands designated “Agriculture” by the certified Future Land Use
Element of the City Comprehensive Plan through the adoption and enforcement
of creative land development regulations.



   124.21(A)(3)   This Section recognizes that standard zoning and
subdivision functions are appropriate for the regulation of land Use in areas
of neighborhoods that are already substantially developed. Therefore, where
Planned Development District concepts are appropriate, the land may be
rezoned to a PDD District. In doing so, conventional Use and dimensional
specifications are replaced by an approval process in which an approved plan
becomes the basis for continuing land Use controls. This provides the
mechanism by which the City Commission may approve land Development Plans
which meet or exceed the level of Development quality required by adopted
City zoning standards.



   124.21(A)(4)   It is intended that this district offer Development
design flexibility to developers in order to encourage imaginative,
functional, high quality Development Planning. The Use of this district shall
be limited to those Development projects which will result in desirable
community Environmental qualities and Development which is compatible with
the surrounding lands and activities and consistent with the permitted Uses
of the Comprehensive Plan.



   124.21(B)   Design guidelines.



   124.21(B)(1)   Petitioner shall submit a Master Development Plan as
part of the rezoning request. The site Development Plan shall contain design
guidelines that shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



   124.21(B)(1)(a)   Signage.



   124.21(B)(1)(b)   Housing type.



   124.21(B)(1)(c)   Minimum Lot size.



   124.21(B)(1)(d)   Minimum LotFrontage .



   124.21(B)(1)(e)   Minimum square footage and, Building type for
residential and nonresidential Structures.



   124.21(B)(1)(f)   Maximum Height .



   124.21(B)(1)(g)   Front, Side, Rear Street , side yard Setbacks .



   124.21(B)(1)(h)   Setbacks to Accessory Uses (pools, patios, etc.).



   124.21(B)(1)(i)   Typical Landscape for a detached residential unit.



   124.21(B)(1)(j)   StreetLandscape .



   124.21(B)(1)(k)   Common AreaLandscape .



   124.21(B)(1)(l)   Buffer Landscape .



   124.21(B)(1)(m)   Lighting.



   124.21(B)(1)(n)   Drainage.



   124.21(B)(1)(o)   Internal circulation.



   124.21(B)(1)(p)   Signage.



   124.21(B)(2)   Such design guidelines shall become a part of the PDD
rezoning ordinance.



   124.21(C)   Common open space.



   124.21(C)(1)   All common open space shall be preserved for its
intended purpose as expressed in the Master Development Plan . The developer
shall choose one or a combination of the following three methods of
administering common open space, subject to approval by the City, and the
method chosen by the developer shall be stated in the Master Development Plan
:



   124.21(C)(1)(a)   Dedication to the City of the common open space.
This method is subject to formal acceptance by the City in its sole
discretion.



   124.21(C)(1)(b)   Conveyance to one or more associations, nonprofit
corporations, or other appropriate entities provided all Persons owning
property within the Planned Development are members of one or more of the
associations, nonprofit corporations or other entities so that the common
open space will be used as specified on the Master Development Plan and all
common open space will be properly maintained.



   124.21(C)(1)(c)   Retention of ownership, control, and maintenance
of all common open space by the developer.



   124.21(C)(2)   If the developer elects to administer common open
space through one or more associations, not-for-profit corporations, or other
entities, said organizations shall conform to the following requirements:



   124.21(C)(2)(a)   They shall be created prior to the sale of any
property within a phase of the PDD.



   124.21(C)(2)(b)   Membership shall be mandatory for all property
owners within the Planned Development or any phase thereof, and the
organizations shall not discriminate as to race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, age, marital status, political affiliation, their membership or
shareholders.



   124.21(C)(2)(c)   They shall:



   124.21(C)(2)(c)1.   Manage all common open space and Recreational
and cultural Facilities that are not dedicated to the public.



   124.21(C)(2)(c)2.   Provide for the maintenance, administration, and
operation of said land and any other land within the planned Development not
publicly or privately owned.



   124.21(C)(2)(c)3.   All privately owned common open space shall
conform to the intended Use of and remain as expressed in the Master
Development Plan through the inclusion of appropriate covenants in all
conveyances of land within the PDD. These covenants shall run with the land
and be for the benefit of present and future property owners.



   124.21(C)(2)(c)4.   All common open space and public Recreational
and cultural Facilities shall be specifically included in a Development Plan
schedule that shall set forth the proposed improvements including but not
limited to Landscaping , hardscape features, recreational components both
passive and active and lighting and be completed by the developer in
accordance with such schedule.



   124.21(D)   Land Use regulations.



   124.21(D)(1)   Minimum size.  All planned Developments shall
contain a minimum of five acres.



   124.21(D)(2)   Minimum Lot area, distance between Structures,
Frontage, Setbacks, and Height regulations.



   124.21(D)(2)(a)   No minimum Lot size shall be required within a
Planned Development except as specified by the Master Development Plan ,
however, in no case shall the minimum Lot size be less than the smallest Lot
permitted in any zoning category or in any other restrictive criteria for
that particular Use .



   124.21(D)(2)(b)   No minimum distance between Structures shall be
required within a Planned Development District , except as specified by the
Master Development Plan or by the Building Code adopted by the City.



   124.21(D)(2)(c)   Each Dwelling Unit or other permitted Use shall
have access to the public Street either directly or indirectly via an
approach, private road, pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated to
public or private Use or common easement guaranteeing access. The City shall
be allowed access on privately owned roads, easements, and common open space
to ensure the police and fire protection of the area, to meet Emergency
needs, to conduct municipal services, and to generally ensure the health and
safety of the residents of the Planned Development.



   124.21(D)(2)(d)   There shall be no specified Setbacks or yards
except as approved by the Master Development Plan , together with the
following:



   124.21(D)(2)(d)1.   There shall be a Setback or yard not less than
25 feet in depth abutting all Public or Private road Rights-Of-Way .



   124.21(D)(2)(d)2.   All lots of a Planned Development are to be
controlled by the Master Development Plan in accordance with the provisions
of the City’s Land Development Chapter. The provisions governing changes in
the Master Development Plan will apply to the amendment of Lot lines depicted
on the Master Development Plan .



   124.21(D)(2)(e)   No maximum Height limitations shall apply in a PDD
except as specified in the Master Development Plan .



   124.21(D)(3)   Landscaping.  Landscaping shall meet all the
requirements of the City Code, provided that additional Landscaped areas may
be required for site plans that are adjacent to LAPCs, NRAs, parks, or
residential zoning districts.



   124.21(D)(4)   Signs.  Signs within a PDD shall comply with the
City Code according to the types and density and intensity of Uses permitted
by the Master Development Plan.



   124.21(D)(5)   Density and intensity of land Uses.  The density and
intensity of land Uses permitted within a PDD shall conform with the Future
Land Use Element of the City’s Comprehensive Plan, in accordance with the
categories of Planned Developments set forth below.



   124.21(D)(6)   Platting.  The property within a PDD shall be
platted in conformance with the approved Master Development Plan.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.22  PLANNED EMPLOYMENT CENTER DISTRICT (PECD).



   124.22(A)   Purpose of district.  The Planned Employment Center
District (PECD) is intended to encourage nonresidential Development and
certain residential Uses, which generate employment that is compatible with
residential and other less intensive land Uses.



   124.22(B)   Permitted Uses.  No Building or Structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used in whole or in part for other
than one of the following Uses:



   124.22(B)(1)   Planned light industrial parks, which may include
research and development, assembly, and light manufacturing.



   124.22(B)(2)   Planned office parks, which may include business and
professional offices, medical facilities, and private and commercial Schools.



   124.22(B)(3)   Planned special complexes, which may include
recreational, cultural, educational, adult residential facilities, or other
community facilities.



   124.22(B)(4)   All Uses permitted in the Commercial District (C-1).



   124.22(C)   Common open space.



   124.22(C)(1)   All common open space shall be preserved for its
intended purpose as expressed in the Master Development Plan . The developer
shall choose one or a combination of the following three methods of
administering common open space, subject to approval by the City, and the
method chosen by the developer shall be stated in the Master Development Plan
:



   124.22(C)(1)(a)   Dedication to the City of the common open space.
This method is subject to formal acceptance by the City in its sole
discretion.



   124.22(C)(1)(b)   Conveyance to one or more associations, nonprofit
corporations, or other appropriate entities, provided all persons and
entities owning property within the Planned Development are members of one or
more of the associations, nonprofit corporations, or other entities so that
the common open space will be used as specified on the Master Development
Plan all common open space will be properly maintained.



   124.22(C)(1)(c)   Retention of ownership, control, and maintenance
of all common open space by the developer.



   124.22(C)(2)   If the developer elects to administer common open
space through one or more associations, nonprofit corporations, or other
entities, said organizations shall conform to the following requirements:



   124.22(C)(2)(a)   They shall be created prior to the sale of any
property within a phase of the PECD.



   124.22(C)(2)(b)   Membership shall be mandatory for all property
owners within the Planned Development, and the organizations shall not
discriminate as to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital
status, political affiliation, their membership or shareholders.



   124.22(C)(2)(c)   They shall:



   124.22(C)(2)(c)1.   Manage all common open space and Recreational
and cultural Facilities that are not dedicated to the public.



   124.22(C)(2)(c)2.   Provide for the maintenance, administration, and
operation of said land and any other land within the Planned Development not
publicly or privately owned.



   124.22(C)(2)(c)3.   All privately owned common open space shall
conform to the intended Use of and remain as expressed in the Master
Development Plan through the inclusion of appropriate covenants in all
conveyances of land within the PECD. These covenants shall run with the land
and be for the benefit of present and future property owners.



   124.22(C)(2)(c)4.   All common open space and public Recreational
and cultural Facilities shall be specifically included in the Development
Plan schedule and be completed by the developer in accordance with such
schedule.



   124.22(D)   Land Use regulations.



   124.22(D)(1)   Minimum size.  All planned employment centers shall
provide for a minimum of ten acres of contiguous land, unless the City
Commission finds that a tract which contains less than ten acres is suitable
as a planned employment center by virtue of some unusual condition.



   124.22(D)(2)   Minimum Lot area, distance between Structures,
Frontage, and Setbacks.



   124.22(D)(2)(a)   No minimum Lot size shall be required within a
Planned Employment Center District.



   124.22(D)(2)(b)   No minimum distance between Structures shall be
required within a Planned Employment Center District.



   124.22(D)(2)(c)   Setbacks or yards are to be controlled by the site
Development Plan rather than by the provisions of the zoning regulations that
otherwise would be applicable. The provisions governing changes in the site
Development Plan will apply.



   124.22(D)(3)   Landscaping.  Landscaping shall meet all
requirements of the City Code provided that site plans may require additional
area where such districts are adjacent to local areas of particular concern
(LAPCs), natural resource areas (NRAs), parks, or residential zoning
districts.



   124.22(D)(4)   Signs.  Signs within a planned employment center
shall meet all requirements of the City Code.



   124.22(E)   Procedure for rezoning to a Planned Employment Center
District. The following applications, exhibits, and procedures shall be
required when applying for rezoning to a Planned Employment Center District.



   124.22(E)(1)   Application form.  The Applicant shall complete a
standard rezoning application form and submit it with the appropriate filing
fee to the Planning and Zoning Department. Information necessary to review
the impact of the proposed Development upon public services and facilities,
including Traffic, drainage, and natural resources, shall accompany the
application.



   124.22(E)(2)   Site Development Plan.  The Applicant shall submit a
site Development Plan to be included with the rezoning request. The site
Development Plan shall be adopted as part of the rezoning approval and shall
specify Setbacks or yards, plot coverage, Height, Landscaping, Common Areas,
drainage, internal circulation, and signage.



   124.22(E)(3)   Design guidelines.  Petitioner shall submit design
guidelines which shall include, but not be limited to, the following and
shall become a part of the PECD rezoning ordinance:



   124.22(E)(3)(a)   Signage.



   124.22(E)(3)(b)   Housing type.



   124.22(E)(3)(c)   Minimum Lot size.



   124.22(E)(3)(d)   Minimum LotFrontage .



   124.22(E)(3)(e)   Minimum home square footage, Building type.



   124.22(E)(3)(f)   Maximum Height .



   124.22(E)(3)(g)   Front, Side, Rear Street , Side yard Setbacks .



   124.22(E)(3)(h)   Setbacks to Accessory Uses (pools, patios, etc.).



   124.22(E)(3)(i)   Typical home Landscape .



   124.22(E)(3)(j)   StreetLandscape .



   124.22(E)(3)(k)   Common AreaLandscape .



   124.22(E)(3)(l)   Lighting.



   124.22(F)   Conformance to approved site Development Plan.



   124.22(F)(1)   After rezoning to Planned Employment Center District,
no permits shall be issued by the City and no Development shall commence
unless in conformance with the approved site Development Plan , unless a
change or deviation is approved.



   124.22(F)(2)   All changes will require an amendment to the zoning
ordinance creating the PECD.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.23  AGRICULTURAL/ESTATE DISTRICT (AE).



   124.23(A)   Purpose of district.  The Agricultural/Estate District
is intended to apply to those areas of the City the present or prospective
Use of which is primarily agricultural. The regulations of this district are
intended to protect, preserve, and enhance agricultural Uses in compliance
with the agricultural land Use designation of the certified Future Land Use
Element of the City Comprehensive Plan.



   124.23(B)   Permitted Uses.  No Building or Structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used, or land or water used, in whole
or in part, for other than one or more of the following specified Uses:



   124.23(B)(1)   Single-FamilyDwellings on a plot at least 87,120
gross square feet (minimum plot size), with 35,000 square feet net buildable
area, in area, with a minimum 125 feet Street Frontage . The clustering of
units is prohibited.



   124.23(B)(2)   Publicly owned or operated Buildings and Uses ,
including community Buildings , Public Parks , and playgrounds, but excluding
dumps, sanitary fills, or incinerators.



   124.23(B)(3)   Groves, produce farms, truck gardens, horticultural
farming, botanical gardens, floriculture, nurseries, sod farms, crop raising,
hydroponic gardens, greenhouses, forestry, or beekeeping with Use or keeping
of Animals only as incidental and accessory thereto.



   124.23(B)(4)   Cattle or stock grazing, dairy farming, not including
hog raising.



   124.23(B)(5)   Raising of fish.



   124.23(B)(6)   Driveways or access roads to property in a zoning
district other than Agricultural/Estate.



   124.23(B)(7)   Accessory Uses and Structures.



   124.23(B)(8)   Keeping, boarding, or raising of Animals as an
Accessory Uses to a residence on a minimum-sized plot. The total number of
Animals on any minimum-sized plot as permitted in this subsection
124.23(B)(8) shall not exceed four of any combination of horses, cattle,
sheep, and goats; no more than ten of any combination of cats and dogs; and
no more than 20 of any combination of fowl and rabbits. The total number of
Animals permitted hereby shall not include offspring of any Animal under the
normal weaning age for that Animal . Nor does this requirement refer to any
Animal incidentally found which has been injured or Abandoned. Such Animal
may be maintained or harbored until the Animal’s state of health permits it
to be returned to its natural habitat or to an appropriate agency caring for
the welfare of Animals . Structures housing these Animals shall be a minimum
of 150 feet from any plot line.



   124.23(C)   Height.  No Building or Structure shall be erected or
altered to a Height exceeding 30 feet.



   124.23(D)   Exception to minimum plot size.  Plots for any
permitted Use shall have a minimum area of 87,120 gross square feet and a
minimum Frontage of 125 feet, except that a plot specifically delineated on a
Plat as a single Lot, which Plat was recorded or had received final City Plat
approval prior to the effective date of this Section, may be utilized for a
Single-Family Dwelling if the Plat has not less than 10,000 square feet of
area and 100 feet of Street Frontage.



   124.23(E)   Plot coverage.  The combined area occupied by all main
and Accessory Buildings and Structure shall not exceed 25% of the plot area
for a plot.



   124.23(F)   Yards.  Every plot shall have front, side, and rear
yards of not less than 25 feet.



   124.23(G)   Minimum floor area.  The minimum floor area of a
Single-Family Dwelling shall be 1,000 square feet.



   124.23(H)   Paved access to Structures.  There shall be paved
access, 12 feet in width, to all new Structures in excess of 1,000 square
feet.



   124.23(I)   Communication Towers.  Any communication Tower that was
constructed and operational on a parcel or plot within this district prior to
October 5, 1998 shall be a legal, conforming Use and may be repaired or
rebuilt if it is damaged or destroyed. Provided, however, such repair or
reconstruction may not enlarge the Use that existed prior to damage or
destruction.



   124.23(J)   Special exceptions.  The Uses that may be permitted as
special exceptions are as follows:



   124.23(J)(1)   Stables.



   124.23(J)(2)   Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels, Animal
boarding.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.24  CONSERVATION DISTRICT.



   124.24(A)   Purpose of district. The Conservation District is
intended to:



   124.24(A)(1)   Apply to those natural reservation areas designated
for conservation Use on the future land use element map series, including
public lands which are conservation areas operated by contractual agreement
or managed by a federal, state, regional, or local government or nonprofit
agency.



   124.24(A)(2)   Promote the acquisition, retention, and management of
unique natural areas in order to preserve their Environmental, recreational,
and other public benefits.



   124.24(A)(3)   Protect publicly owned sanctuaries, preserves,
Archaeological or historic sites, open space, natural areas, ecological
communities, and designated wildlife management areas.



   124.24(B)   Permitted Uses in Conservation District.  No Building
or Structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used, or land or
water used, in whole or in part, for other than one or more of the following
specified Uses:



   124.24(B)(1)   Passive Outdoor recreational Uses such as wildlife
sanctuaries and feeding stations, nature centers and trails, Outdoor research
stations, walkways, and Uses accessory to these Uses .



   124.24(B)(2)   Uses that do not impair the natural ecosystem of the
area and that are not in conflict with any applicable contractual agreement
or management policies of the federal, State, regional, county, municipal, or
nonprofit agency that manages the natural reservation.



   124.24(B)(3)   Water control Structures and associated facilities.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.25  HOSPITAL ZONING DISTRICT (HZ).



   124.25(A)   Purpose of district.  The Hospital Zoning District (HZ)
provides for the continued growth and development of a Hospital Use and
associated Accessory uses and ancillary facilities, which are supportive of,
but clearly subordinate to, the primary Hospital facility to readily enable
physical plant improvements and additions necessitated by advances in medical
technology and patient treatment, and expansion to accommodate the healthcare
needs of the region's population. Except as specified herein, all other
provisions of the City Code are applicable to the Hospital Zoning District.
Where a conflict of provisions exists, the provisions of the Hospital Zoning
District shall prevail.



   124.25(B)   Permitted uses.  No Building or Structure, or part
thereof, shall be erected, altered, or used in whole or in part for other
than one of the following Uses:



   124.25(B)(1)   Hospital .



   124.25(B)(2)   Medical lab.



   124.25(B)(3)   Medical Office.



   124.25(C)   Accessory Uses.  The following Accessory Uses shall be
permitted if they serve the population of the Hospital:



   124.25(C)(1)   Pharmacy.



   124.25(C)(2)   Professional Offices (businesses that support 
Hospital and medical uses).



   124.25(C)(3)   Restaurant/cafes (no drive-thru) to serve the
population of the Hospital .



   124.25(C)(4)   Cafeterias to serve the population of the Hospital .



   124.25(C)(5)   Auditorium/assembly hall/conference center.



   124.25(C)(6)   Hotels.



   124.25(C)(7)   Retail commercial (gift shop, flower shop, retail
that supports Hospital and medical Uses ).



   124.25(C)(8)   Plant operations (generators, processing plant,
laundry service, food and beverage).



   124.25(C)(9)   Helipad/heliport.



   124.25(C)(10)   Parking garage.



   124.25(C)(11)   Rehabilitation/Fitness center



   124.25(C)(12)   Uses incidental and customarily associated with
Hospital uses.



   124.25(C)(13)   Temporary parking areas and temporary parking
Structures (provided the primary purpose of said Lots is to serve employees
of the Hospital facilities and/or Accessory Uses ).



   124.25(D)   Size of Lot.  Minimum contiguous acreage shall be 25
acres, which may be separated by no more than an 80 foot Right-Of-Way.



   124.25(E)   Height.  No Building, Structure or use shall be
erected, placed, or altered to a Height exceeding 95 feet, except for parking
Structures/garages.



   124.25(F)   Setback/Yards.  Setbacks along the property lines shall
be 35 feet for Buildings up to 45 feet in Height and 50 feet for Buildings
greater than 45 feet in Height.



   124.25(G)   Distance between Buildings and Structures. No minimum
distance between Buildings and/or Structures shall be required, except as
specified by the Florida Building Code.



   124.25(H)   Administrative site plan review. The following types of
applications shall be subject to the requirements for administrative site
plan review:



   124.25(H)(1)   Amendments to the site plan under the following
conditions:



   124.25(H)(1)(a)   The site plan amendment does not require
modifications or deletion of any conditions of the original site plan
approval or any approved amendments thereto;



   124.25 (H)(1)(b)   The site plan amendment adds only non-habitable
space;



   124.25(H)(1)(c)   The amendment does not exceed 5% of the originally
approved Height;



   124.25(H)(1)(d)   Any increase in the Gross Square Footage of the
Building when there is sufficient parking to accommodate the change and there
is no change in the footprint of the Building;



   124.25(H)(1)(e)   The amendment does not require a variance or
special exception approval;



   124.25(H)(1)(f)   The amendment does not result in a change to any
of the Building elevations (as long as the changes match the existing
finishes);



   124.25(H)(1)(g)   The amendment does not change the location of any
Structure on the property; or



   124.25(H)(1)(h)   The amendment does not alter the location of any
points of ingress or egress from the Public Right-Of-Way.



   124.25(H)(2)   Temporary surface parking lots,  provided that the
primary purpose of temporary surface parking lots is to serve employees of
the Hospital facilities and Accessory Uses .  A permit for an approved
administrative review site plan for a temporary surface parking lot must be
obtained within one year from the date the site plan is approved by the City
Manager.  Prior to the expiration of the one year period, the Applicant may
request and the City Manager may grant a one time, one year extension. 
After such time, the site plan must come in to compliance with the general
City Code requirements.  The permit shall be valid for a period of five
years.  The City Manager may grant one, five year extension after which any
further extensions shall require City Commission approval.



   124.25(I)   Signage.  Signs shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 126 except as specified herein.  The City hereby finds that the
permitted and accessory uses allowed in the Hospital Zoning District require
Sign standards that are tailored to the unique nature of these uses, in order
to protect the health, safety and welfare of those persons visiting them. 
Color and lettering of Signs shall be uniform throughout the property.



   124.25(I)(1)   Wall Signs.



   124.25(I)(1)(a)   Illuminated and non-illuminated white channel
letters are permitted, but limited to a maximum of 60 inches in Height. 
Overall size limited to 300 square feet.  Illuminated and non-illuminated
channel letter Signs specifically for designated emergency care areas are
permitted to be red.



   124.25(I)(1)(b)   No more than two Signs per wall.



   124.25(I)(2)   Reserved.



   124.25(I)(3)   Reserved.



   124.25(I)(4)   Reserved.



   124.25(I)(5)   Reserved.



   124.25(I)(6)   Monument Signs.



   124.25(I)(6)(a)   Maximum one per entrance from Public Right-Of-Way.



   124.25(I)(6)(b)   Maximum one per intersection of two Public
Right-Of-Ways.



   124.25(I)(6)(c)   Maximum Sign area limited to 60 square feet.



   124.25(I)(6)(d)   Maximum Height of Sign limited to nine feet.



   124.25(I)(6)(e)   Channel or reverse channel illumination is
permitted.



   124.25(I)(7)   Banner Signs. 



   124.25(I)(7)(a)   Banner Signs are permitted if related to the
permitted principal and accessory uses in the HZ District.



   124.25(I)(7)(b)   Maximum Sign area of 400 square feet.



   124.25(I)(7)(c)   Maximum three per wall, exclusive of other signage.



   124.25(I)(7)(d)   Banner Signs may be placed on poles on the
property within the district.



   124.25(I)(7)(e)   Banner Signs are not required to be consistent
with the architectural style of the Development/Building or permanent signage.



   124.25(I)(7)(f)   Banner Signs shall be of a durable material
customarily used for such signs.



   124.25(I)(7)(g)   Temporary Banner Signs may remain in place for no
more than 180 days and each message on a Temporary Banner Sign may be
advertised once in a 12-month period.



   124.25(I)(8)   Prohibited Signs.  Unless otherwise authorized in
this section, the Signs prohibited by § 126.10(B) of the City Code are
prohibited.



   124.25(I)(9)   Sign Illumination.  Illuminated Signs are permitted
to be illuminated 24 hours a day, 365 days per year.



   124.25(J)   Poles.



   124.25(J)(1)   Poles related to uses specifically for security
equipment and surveillance, such as cameras and lighting, are limited to a
Height of 100 feet.



   124.25(J)(2)   Poles unrelated to uses specifically for security
equipment and surveillance must comply with the Height restrictions as
provided for in this Code.



   124.25(K)   Parking Structures/garages.



   124.25(K)(1)   Parking Structures/garages are permitted with a
maximum Height of 60 feet.



   124.25(K)(2)   Parking Structures/garages shall be designed to have
a decorative appearance consistent with the overall architectural composition
of the Development, by providing unified design elements with the main
Buildings through the use of similar materials and color, vertical and
horizontal elements, and architectural style.



   124.25(K)(3)   Parking Structures/garages are also subject to the
following additional requirements:



   124.25(K)(3)(a)   Architectural features shall be incorporated into
the façade to mitigate the mass and bulk of the Building.



   124.25(K)(3)(b)   Decorative architectural elements on the ground
floor level shall be designed to accommodate the pedestrian scale.



   124.25(K)(3)(c)   Parking levels above the ground floor shall
maintain the same vertical and horizontal articulation or rhythm and
incremental appearance established on the ground floor.



   124.25(K)(3)(d)   Ramps shall be visually screened from Streets and
oriented towards the interior of the Lot where possible within the
Development.  Ramp profiles shall be hidden on the exterior elevations.



   124.25(K)(3)(e)   Roof top parking shall be visually screened with
articulated Parapet walls and/or other architectural treatments.



   124.25(K)(3)(f)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall provide cut-off
shielding in order to eliminate glare and spillage onto adjacent properties
and Roadways.



   124.25 (K)(3)(g)   The openings of the garage shall be designed in a
manner that obscures parked vehicles when possible.



   124.25(K)(3)(h)   The ground floor perimeter of the garage may be
devoted to window displays or floor area for active Accessory Uses to the
Hospital .



   124.25(L)   Temporary surface parking areas.



   124.25(L)(1)   Design.



   124.25(L)(1)(a)   The perimeter of any temporary surface parking
areas must be screened with a minimum three foot high Hedge upon
installation. 



   124.25(L)(1)(b)   Terminal islands of at least 11 feet in width and
18 feet in length shall be provided at the end of each parking row. 
Terminal islands shall be striped at a minimum and may be curbed.  When
striped the island area shall be signed "No Parking Any Time".  When curbed
the island area shall be treated with Landscape or hardscape or any
combination of the two.



   124.25(L)(1)(c)   Trees shall be prohibited in temporary surface
parking areas.



   124.25(L)(1)(d)   All interior planting areas not dedicated to
Shrubs, or existing vegetation shall be Landscaped with sod, Ground Cover, or
other appropriate Landscape treatment (no sand, rock, pavement, or base soil).



   124.25(L)(1)(e)   Striping shall be provided to properly delineate
the parking area from the driving area.



   124.25(L)(1)(f)   There shall be no maximum number of consecutive
parking spaces and no required intermediate Landscape island or Trees.



   124.25(L)(2)   Screening and buffers.



   124.25(L)(2)(a)   Screening and/or buffering elements, such as
Landscaping, berms, fencing, walls or any combination thereof, shall be
utilized to screen temporary parking areas from Roadways and adjacent
properties.



   124.25(L)(2)(b)   Walls and/or fences used to screen temporary
parking areas must be at least three feet in Height and be consistent with
adjacent Development in design, color, etc.



   124.25(L)(3)   Surfaces.  All surfaces shall be asphalt, except for
a temporary parking lot serving hospital employees only, which may be gravel.
A temporary parking lot shall not count towards required parking nor shall be
available for public parking.



(Ord. 2011-06, passed 6-20-2011; Am. Ord. 2015-08, passed 4-6-2015; Am. Ord.
2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 124.26  RESERVED.



SPECIAL DISTRICTS



§ 124.27  TOWN CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   Development of property within the Town Center Zoning Overlay District
shall be governed by, and comply with, the Design Guidelines set forth. Those
aspects of the Development that are not regulated by the Design Guidelines
shall be governed by the underlying zoning district’s provisions. See
Appendix A for the Town Center Overlay District Design Guidelines.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-18, passed 8-18-2014)



§ 124.28  WESTON COMMONS PLANNED EMPLOYMENT CENTER DISTRICT (PECD).



   124.28(A)   Introduction and Site Development Concept.



   124.28(A)(1)   Weston Commons, as shown and legally described in
Ord. 2007-05, is a 60 +/- acre Planned Employment Center District (PECD)
comprising Special Residential (includes 55-and-over communities “Adult”
and Special Residential Facilities), and Retail parcels. This constitutes the
“Employment Center” element of the Emerald Estates and Park of Commerce
Development of Regional Impact (DRI).







 







 







Weston Commons Business Center



Location Sketch



Date: 1-11-2002



 







Weston Commons



Location Map



Amended



Section 28, Township 50S, Range 40E



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(A)(2)   In keeping with the conditions of the DRI and
subsequent related Development Orders, this subsection sets out design
guidelines for the project, and accompanies the Site Development Plan .



   124.28(A)(3)   The DRI specifically addresses the tone of
Development for the PECD:  “The property shall be developed in such a
manner as to assure the physical integration of the retail Uses with the
other permitted Uses .” The guidelines for achieving this physical
integration shall be accomplished by complying with the following design
criteria, by way of example and not limitation:



   124.28(A)(3)(a)   A unified and well-organized arrangement of
Buildings , service areas, parking, pedestrian and Landscaped Common Areas
for the maximum comfort and convenience of visitors and occupants. Buildings
shall be grouped in relation to parking areas and one another so that after
visitors arriving by automobile enter the walkway system, establishments can
be visited conveniently with a minimum of internal automobile movements;



   124.28(A)(3)(b)   Shared vehicular access, shared parking, unified
signage, and Landscaped pedestrian access ways between Buildings ;



   124.28(A)(3)(c)   Facilities and access routes for retail
deliveries, servicing and maintenance located and arranged so as to prevent
interference with pedestrian Traffic;



   124.28(A)(3)(d)   Architectural and Landscape design elements that
will create a harmonious relationship between and amongst the natural site
characteristics and the various Building units that may be of a different
design style. This will allow for individual expression in design style,
while providing harmony through the Use of common design elements;



   124.28(A)(3)(e)   The Applicant shall submit a site Development Plan
and design guidelines with the rezoning application that shall specify, at a
minimum, Setbacks or yards, plot coverage, Height , Landscaping , Perimeter
Buffering (which may include fences), Common Areas , drainage, internal
circulation and signage. The Applicant shall also submit the Site Development
Plan and design guidelines to the Emerald Estates Community Association for
review and comment.



   124.28(A)(3)(f)   The Site Development Plan and Design Guidelines,
as shown in Ord. 2007-05, have been evolved using the above guidelines as the
focus.







Weston Commons Site Development Plan Amended



Section 28, Township 50S, Range 40E



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(A)(4)   Detailed site planning for individual parcels or
groups of parcels will be through the City’s site plan approval process.
The site plan(s) shall be subject to the City Code in effect at the time of
site plan review.



   124.28(A)(5)   All proposed Uses , paving, parking and roadways will
be designed considering the highest and best Use of the land, ease of access
and community needs. The plan will integrate all required stormwater
facilities and Utility /infrastructure systems.



   124.28(A)(6)   Critical to the success of Weston Commons is the
provision of Independent and Assisted Congregate Living Facilities. The City
at present lacks any similar facilities, making this project of even more
benefit to the community. Determination of the final layout of the Special
Residential sections shall be through the City’s site plan approval process.



   124.28(A)(7)   Permitted Uses within Parcels B and C, as shown on
the Site Development Plan , and north of Emerald Park Circle, shall be
limited to those Uses permitted within the Commercial District (C-1).



   124.28(A)(8)   The following shall be prohibited within 482 feet of
the north property line of Parcel B:



   124.28(A)(8)(a)   Restaurants ;



   124.28(A)(8)(b)   Outdoor speakers, music or intercom systems.



   124.28(A)(9)   The following shall be prohibited within 100 feet of
the west boundary of Parcel C:



   124.28(A)(9)(a)   Outdoor speakers, music or intercom systems;



   124.28(A)(9)(b)   Open air, OutdoorRestaurant seating.



   124.28(A)(10)   With the exception of a grocery store which may
contain up to 55,000 gross square feet, no individual retail Use shall have a
floor area in excess of 30,000 gross square feet, unless approved by the City
Commission at the time of site plan approval for such retail Use .



   124.28(A)(11)   Gas station Use shall not be permitted within the
Employment Center.



   124.28(A)(12)   Retail delivery times will be addressed at the time
of site plan approval.



   124.28(A)(13)   Subsequent sections of this document set out
detailed design guidelines for Development.



   124.28(B)   Development standards.  To provide for a coordinated
image within Weston Commons, standards for Weston Commons and individual Uses
have been established. Adherence to these standards will provide a high level
of Development quality that will ensure the perpetuation of Weston Commons
standards for all future Development. The following items are to be
specifically addressed:



   124.28(B)(1)   Setback requirements.



   124.28(B)(1)(a)   Building Setback from the property line on Weston
Road shall be as follows:



   124.28(B)(1)(a)1.   Special Residential:  75 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(a)2.   Retail:  75 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(b)   Building Setback from the property line on Emerald
Park Circle shall be as follows:



   124.28(B)(1)(b)1.   Special Residential:  40 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(b)2.   Retail:  50 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(c)   Building Setback from the property line on south
property line abutting the South New River (C-11) Canal shall be as follows:



   124.28(B)(1)(c)1.   Special Residential:  N/A.



   124.28(B)(1)(c)2.   Retail:  28 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(d)   Building Setback from the property line on the
west property line shall be as follows:



   124.28(B)(1)(d)1.   Special Residential:  40 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(d)2.   Retail:  75 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(e)   Building Setback from the property line on the
north property line shall be as follows:



   124.28(B)(1)(e)1.   Special Residential:  40 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(e)2.   Retail:  100 feet.



   124.28(B)(1)(f)   A separation of 75 feet shall be maintained
between Buildings in the Special Residential Parcels A-1 and A-2. Special
Residential Parcel A-2 shall provide a ten-foot Setback from the west
property line within Parcel A-2.



   124.28(B)(1)(g)   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet
from internal driveways, with the exception of service areas.



   124.28(B)(1)(h)   Any Building in excess of the maximum Height shown
in subsection 124.28(B)(2)(f) of these guidelines, as measured from the
first-floor finished grade of the Building to the highest visible point (with
the exception of Architectural Detail), shall be set back an additional one
foot for every one foot, or fraction thereof in additional Height ; provided,
however, this requirement shall be limited to the north and south Setbacks
within Special Residential Parcel A-2 and shall not apply to the east and
west Setbacks within Special Residential Parcel A-2.



   124.28(B)(1)(i)   Building separations between individual Buildings
shall be as follows:



   124.28(B)(1)(i)1.   Special Residential: Ten feet minimum.



   124.28(B)(1)(i)2.   Retail: Ten feet minimum.



   124.28(B)(2)   Buffer requirements.



   124.28(B)(2)(a)   Perimeter Buffer areas within the boundary of
Weston Commons shall be as follows and depicted in the diagrams below:



   124.28(B)(2)(a)1.   A minimum of 25 feet adjacent to residential
Uses .



   124.28(B)(2)(a)2.   A minimum of 30 feet on the west side of the
Retail parcel (‘C’).



   124.28(B)(2)(a)3.   A minimum of 40 feet along Weston Road and
Emerald Park Circle; provided that an easement in favor of Broward County
shall be permitted within the buffer along Weston Road. In the event Weston
Road is ever widened, the required buffer may be reduced by no more than 6.5%
as depicted on the Weston Commons Plat .



   124.28(B)(2)(a)4.   A minimum of 20 feet on the south property line
adjacent to the South New River (C-11) Canal Right-Of-Way .



   124.28(B)(2)(b)   Required buffers along Weston Road and Emerald
Park Circle shall have continuous earth berms with a minimum Height (measured
from the crown of the adjacent Street ) of four feet, except at driveway
openings. Berms shall have a maximum slope of one vertical to three
horizontal.



   124.28(B)(2)(c)   Continuous screening shall be provided except at
driveways, and shall consist of berms and plantings, including a continuous
Hedge, with shade Trees a maximum of 35 feet on center; where feasible, Trees
shall be planted with triangular spacing with separations of 25 feet on
center. Ficus Trees are excluded from Right-Of-Way buffers due to
availability of other Tree species to provide a filtered view of Weston
Commons architecture.



   124.28(B)(2)(d)   A ten-foot-wide Landscape buffer shall be provided
between the Special Residential Parcel A-2 and the Retail Parcel B, with the
exception of service area and fire access points. Terraces and balconies may
encroach into the service area. A fence six feet in Height consistent with
the design of the project on the Special Residential Parcels as approved by
the City Commission shall be installed in the Landscape buffer to separate
the Special Residential Parcels and the Retail Parcel B.



   124.28(B)(2)(e)   A ten-foot-wide buffer shall be provided along the
west property line between Special Residential Parcel A-1 and Special
Residential Parcel A-2.



   124.28(B)(2)(f)   The Landscape buffer on the north corner between
Special Residential Parcel A-1 and Special Residential Parcel A-2 shall be a
minimum of 30 feet overall between the edge of the parking and access road
with 12 feet on Special Residential Parcel A-1 and 18 feet (consisting of a
ten-foot terminal Landscape island and eight-foot Landscape buffer) on
Special Residential Parcel A-2 with the exception of the two vehicular entry
lanes, one hammerhead maneuvering area, one exit lane, and the one fire
access exit lane.







 



Weston Commons



Site Development Plan



Amended



Section 28, Township 50S, Range 40E



Date: 1-11-2002



 







Weston Commons



Landscape Buffer Key Map



Date: 1-11-2002



 







Parcel A2 Buffers and



Setback Diagram



Date: 1-11-2002



 







Weston Common Business Center



Landscape Buffer Sections



Date: 1-11-2002



 







Weston Common Business Center



Landscape Buffer Sections



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(2)(g)   In order to establish variation in the plantings,
clusters of large palm species (Royals, Bismarks, Phoenix) with minimum seven
feet of wood can be used at regular intervals to replace plantings.



   124.28(B)(2)(h)   The Perimeter Buffers shall be installed pursuant
to the following:



   124.28(B)(2)(h)1.   Prior to the issuance of a Certificate Of
Occupancy for any Use within Parcels A-1, A-2, B, or C, install all the
buffers along the boundary of these Parcels, with the exception of
Construction access points which buffer areas shall be installed prior to
issuance of the last Certificate Of Occupancy within these Parcels.



   124.28(B)(2)(h)2.   Prior to the issuance of a Certificate Of
Occupancy within Parcel C, install all the buffers along the boundary of this
Parcel, with the exception of Construction access points which buffer areas
shall be installed prior to issuance of the last Certificate Of Occupancy
within this Parcel.



   124.28(B)(2)(i)   Within the Landscape buffer along the western
perimeter of Parcel C, a shade Tree shall be installed in lieu of the center
sabal palm within each grouping of sabal palms.



   124.28(B)(3)   Site coverage and greenspace.



   124.28(B)(3)(a)   Site Coverage.  Maximum site coverage shall be as
follows:



 


PARCEL

 

USE

 

SITE AREA

 

BUILDING AREA

 

COVERAGE

 

HEIGHT



Parcel A-1
 

Special Residential

 

23.89 Acres

 

382 Adult Units

 

30%

 

See Design Guidelines



Parcel A-2
 

Special Residential

 

7.55 Acres

 

326 Adult units

 

35%

 

See Design Guidelines



Parcel B
 

Retail

 

8.46 Acres

 

50,000 square feet

 

35%

 

See Design Guidelines



Parcel C
 

Retail

 

19.82 Acres

 

175,000 square feet

 

30%

 

See Design Guidelines



Total
 



 

60 +/- Acres

 



 



 






 



   124.28(B)(3)(b)   Greenspace/Pervious requirements.



   124.28(B)(3)(b)1.   Special Residential Parcels:  30% of Gross
Parcel Area; Phased Developments within gross parcel areas may have
individual site plans approved with a minimum of 20% greenspace.



   124.28(B)(3)(b)2.   Retail Parcels:  30% of Gross Parcel Area
Phased Developments within gross parcel areas may have individual site plans
approved with a minimum of 20% greenspace.



   124.28(B)(3)(c)   Building coverage may be maximized, provided that
Utility and maintenance easements and sufficient parking can be provided
within these limits, and established Setbacks and buffers are adhered to.



   124.28(B)(3)(d)   Building coverage and greenspace/ Pervious Area
shall be as governed by the Site Development Plan and these design guidelines.



   124.28(B)(4)   Entrance drives and curb cuts.



   124.28(B)(4)(a)   Parcel entries shall provide for Landscaped areas
on either side of the driveway. A change of pavement at the driveway
consistent with materials used within Weston Commons shall be provided.



   124.28(B)(4)(b)   All undivided driveways shall have a width of 24
feet, except that all undivided driveways in the Special Residential Parcels
A-1 and A-2 may have a width of 22 feet provided that 90 degree curves shall
have a width of 24 feet. Divided driveways with medians shall have individual
lanes of no more than 16 feet in width. Landscaped driveway medians shall be
a minimum of eight feet in width and planted to the end in compliance with
applicable codes.



   124.28(B)(5)   Sidewalks/pedestrian linkage.



   124.28(B)(5)(a)   A Sidewalk and pedestrian linkage system shall be
designed to connect parking areas with various land Uses in Weston Commons,
in a manner that encourages pedestrian circulation between Buildings , and
thus reducing the use of vehicles. Pedestrian walks shall be constructed from
brick pavers or other decorative material. Pedestrian walks for Special
Residential Parcels A-1 and A-2 shall be constructed from brick pavers,
concrete, or other decorative materials with a brushed finish to be
determined prior to final site plan approval.



   124.28(B)(5)(b)   In order to encourage the pedestrian use,
Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide. Sidewalks will conform in
color, finish and jointing to be established during Site Plan Review.
Consistency throughout the Project shall be provided by the following
criteria:



   124.28(B)(5)(b)1.   Surface texture/finish:  ASTM C-33 and C-150.



   124.28(B)(5)(b)2.   Color:  ASTM C-936-82.



   124.28(B)(5)(b)3.   Jointing:  Butt tight, sanded and vibrated.



   124.28(B)(5)(c)   Two-percent maximum cross slope shall be used on
Sidewalks .



   124.28(B)(6)   Building Height.



   124.28(B)(6)(a)   Building Heights shall comply with the following
maximums. Heights shall be defined as the highest visible point on the
Building (with the exception of non-structural architectural detail):



   124.28(B)(6)(a)1.   Special Residential:



   124.28(B)(6)(a)1.a.   Two stories, 30 feet max. Height at Setback
line.



   124.28(B)(6)(a)1.b.   Four stories, 60 feet max. Height , with
additional Setback. [See Setback requirements in subsection 124.28(B)(2)(a).]



   124.28(B)(6)(a)2.   Retail:  One Story, 38 feet max. Height, unless
greater Height and/or multi-Story is approved by the City Commission at the
time of site plan approval.



   124.28(B)(6)(b)   Non-structural architectural detailing may extend
above the maximum roof Heights stated above.



   124.28(B)(7)   Roadways/driveways.



   124.28(B)(7)(a)   Driveway spacing will conform to the City’s
current land Development regulations with the possible exception of delivery
vehicle areas, which will be segregated from other vehicle circulation when
feasible. Gaining access to such loading areas may require special design
considerations that are not specifically addressed in the City Code , however
any special design consideration shall be made in the City’s sole
discretion at the time of site plan approval.



   124.28(B)(7)(b)   At the north access road, the driveway area shall
conform to the cross-section as shown below. Continuous screening of the
residential areas north of the north property shall be provided by plantings
and, as approved by the Opal Creek Homeowners’ Association , a fence shall
be installed on the Weston Commons side of the common property line of Opal
Creek and Parcels A-1, A-2, and B of the Development.



   124.28(B)(7)(c)   Planned project access locations are shown below.
Detailed design and locations shall be determined through the City’s site
plan approval process.







 



Weston Commons



Existing Project Access Locations



Amended



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(8)   Parking.



   124.28(B)(8)(a)   Parking areas shall be sufficient to serve each
Use .



   124.28(B)(8)(b)   No parking area or driveway shall be less than
five feet from the front or side of any Building , excluding loading and
service areas. For areas less than ten feet in width, layered Landscape
material shall be used, to transition from the vertical Building face to the
driveway.



   124.28(B)(8)(c)   Cross slopes in parking area shall be 1% minimum
and 4% maximum.



   124.28(B)(8)(d)   All parcel parking lots, drives and vehicular
service areas are to be curbed, internally drained and paved.



   124.28(B)(8)(e)   Parking in the Special Residential parcels shall
be for the exclusive use of residents and visitors. All valet parking within
Special Residential Parcel A-2 shall be continuous.



   124.28(B)(8)(f)   The required number of parking spaces for retail
Use shall be in accordance with the City Code . The required number of
parking spaces for the Special Residential Use shall be in accordance with
the City Code provided, however, that simultaneous with the approval of a
site plan for a Special Residential Use , the City Commission may approve an
alternative parking standard applicable to said site plan if the City
Commission determines such an alternative standard is justified in
consideration of the unique parking needs of Adult communities and Special
Residential facilities in general, the parking requirements of other Adult
communities and Special Residential facilities owned by the Applicant , the
transit and other On-Site services to be provided by the Adult community and
Special Residential facilities, and such other supporting data as may be
deemed appropriate by the City Commission. In the event the City Commission
elects to approve an alternative parking standard, no variance shall be
required. The Special Residential Use (Parcels A-1 and A-2) and Retail Use
(Parcels B and C) shall meet these parking requirements without regard to the
spaces within the other parcels or shared parking offsets.



   124.28(B)(8)(g)   Parking Lot layouts shall conform to the following
dimensions:



   124.28(B)(8)(g)1.   Parking Aisles shall, whenever possible, be
oriented perpendicular to the front of the Buildings . This shall apply to
all parcels except Special Residential. When not located perpendicular to
Buildings , islands with Sidewalks shall be located in parking rows for
pedestrian cross Traffic.



   124.28(B)(8)(g)2.   Ninety-degree parking is encouraged with a
minimum Stall size of nine feet by 18 feet.



   124.28(B)(8)(g)3.   Handicap parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12
feet by 18 feet, with a five-feet-wide alighting aisle per Florida
Accessibility Code and ADA regulations.



   124.28(B)(8)(g)4.   Two-way parking area driveways and cross aisles
must have a minimum width of 24 feet.



   124.28(B)(8)(h)   Parking Lot layouts shall provide Landscaping in
accordance with the following:



   124.28(B)(8)(h)1.   Parking areas shall include a Landscape area at
the perimeter. These Landscape areas may include Sidewalks , pavers,
plantings and grass in order to encourage pedestrian circulation.



   124.28(B)(8)(h)2.   Internal islands shall be a minimum of 11 feet
wide by 17 feet long, provided for every ten parking stalls.



   124.28(B)(8)(h)3.   Terminal islands, 11 feet wide, are to be
provided for each parking row.



   124.28(B)(8)(h)4.   Terminal islands with walkways shall be 15 feet
wide with a minimum of ten-foot-wide planting area.



   124.28(B)(8)(h)5.   Interior islands with walkways shall be 16 feet
wide with a minimum ten-foot-wide planting area.



   124.28(B)(8)(i)   In order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular
safety, posted speed limits within Weston Commons shall be 15 mph.



   124.28(B)(9)   Exterior Lighting.



   124.28(B)(9)(a)   Site lighting.



   124.28(B)(9)(a)1.   Site lighting is intended to be subtle, and to
establish a consistency and hierarchy of lighting types. Exterior lights
shall be used to accent entrances and special features. Light intensity shall
be no greater than required for automobile and pedestrian safety. To minimize
the number of lighting standards, wherever possible overflow light from
inside the Building shall be used. The lighting source of fixtures and flood
lighting shall be screened from view, if it is of such intensity as to be
deemed a source of glare. Off-site spillage shall comply with the City Code .



   124.28(B)(9)(a)2.   Lighting shall be designed to reflect the
architectural style of the Building , be appropriate in scale, light quality,
coloration, and light level for the intended purpose it is to serve. Lighting
for parking shall be compatible with the lighting present on adjacent Streets
and peripheral parcels.



   124.28(B)(9)(b)   Location and type.



   124.28(B)(9)(b)1.   All lighting for parking within Weston Commons
shall be metal halide with a maximum 35-foot pole Height . Light poles within
250 feet of residentially zoned properties shall be limited to a Height of 24
feet. Pole and luminaire shall be shoebox style. Light levels shall be
maintained at a minimum of one Footcandle and a maximum uniformity ratio of
12:1. Off-site spillage shall comply with the City Code .



   124.28(B)(9)(b)2.   Pedestrian walkway and internal drive lighting
will be provided by freestanding pole with globe-like luminaire with
refractors. The Height of these fixtures will be no greater than 24 feet so
as to promote a pedestrian scale.



   124.28(B)(9)(b)3.   Low level Street lighting for the north driveway
shall be of the same Height as that existing on Emerald Park Circle.



   124.28(B)(9)(c)   Sign lighting shall be required for all signage,
except for the Directional Signs. Sidewalk , roadway and parking area
lighting is mandatory.



   124.28(B)(9)(d)   Flood lighting fixtures on Buildings are only
allowed in service areas. Flood lighting of any Building is prohibited.
However, up or down lighting of specific architectural elements of a Building
shall be permitted. Balcony and soffit down lighting is permitted.



   124.28(B)(9)(e)   Flood lighting may be used to illuminate key
architectural and identification elements and will be recessed at ground
level.



   124.28(B)(9)(f)   Fixture and lamp standards. To create a uniformity
of look, the manufacturer’s and model numbers of site lighting fixtures to
be used for the Streets will be furnished to parcel developers upon request.



   124.28(B)(9)(g)   Accent lighting. To enhance on site art,
architecture and Landscaping , accent lighting will be used within Weston
Commons. Accent lighting will include up-lighting, moonlighting,
ribbon-lighting and spotlighting and will be recessed at ground level.



   124.28(B)(10)   Signage and graphics.



   124.28(B)(10)(a)   Signage and graphics within this PECD shall be as
follows:



   124.28(B)(10)(a)1.   Weston Commons signage will conform in style
and materials, and the use of uniform colors and font types will be required.
Location of signage will be a major element in establishing the design theme
continuity within Weston Commons. All signage shall conform to all applicable
clear sight and clear recovery zone requirements.



   124.28(B)(10)(a)2.   Details of signage including location, type,
size, illumination and quantity have been developed in a series of graphic
depictions as shown below, which are consistent with the Weston Commons PECD
Guidelines as previously approved. Most of the Signs in Weston Commons shall
be consistent with the signage regulations of the City Code , except for a
few deviations as described herein. Permit drawings of final graphics,
dimensioning and engineering may create minor discrepancies with the
depictions shown below; however the design intent, size, proportion and
consistency with the Weston Commons aesthetic theme shall remain constant.



   124.28(B)(10)(a)3.   For quick reference, the Sign Performance table
and the Master Sign Location Plan is found at the end of subsection
124.28(B)(10)(m.)2.



   124.28(B)(10)(b)   Existing identity feature signage - Sign ‘A.’



   124.28(B)(10)(b)1.   The existing identity feature signage is to be
modified for the P.E.C.D.’s business and facilities. Existing Wall Signs at
the intersection of Weston Road and Emerald Park Circle will be rehabilitated
and retrofitted with architectural detailing consistent with Weston Commons
aesthetic. The existing Sign wall panel is to be replaced. The replacement
will be a primary identification Sign constructed at 45 degrees to the
roadway and be located totally within the existing feature Sign Structure .
Block lettering will be 24 inches tall, solid polished metal, Times New Roman
font, on metal picket fencing, atop a masonry base. Modifications to the
entry signage shall not exceed overall Height of existing Sign panel, will
retain the existing flanking walls, will retain existing large date palms and
replace Shrubs and Ground Covers surrounding the entry feature as proposed on
the retail Landscape plans. The feature lighting will be replaced and
supplemented with both ground mounted and in-ground lights that emit white
light, concealed in the planting beds.



   124.28(B)(10)(b)2.   All signage Landscaping shall be connected to
Landscape beds on the parcel. In-ground lighting that emits white light will
illuminate the parcel Landscape . The parcel signage shall be set no less
than ten feet from the front and side property lines and shall require
five-foot Setbacks on all sides from Buildings and/or parking areas.







 



Weston Commons



Sign ‘A’



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(c)   Emerald Estates, Emerald Park Circle - Sign
‘B.’ The Emerald Estates identification Sign is located in the Landscape
buffer at the southwest corner of “The Palace” site, adjacent to Emerald
Park Circle and Emerald Estates Plat , Parcel B. One Sign only shall be
positioned to be viewed on a direct line of sight from the westbound lane of
Emerald Park Circle, unobstructed by buffer Landscaping . Design will be
consistent with Monument Sign criteria, incorporating Weston Commons
aesthetics. The face area of the Sign will not exceed 32 square feet and the
Sign Height will not exceed eight feet from the crown of road. The Sign will
have ground lights that emit white light concealed in the planting beds
located at the base of the Sign .



   124.28(B)(10)(d)   Retail entry signage. An entry signage feature is
to be located along Weston Road and Emerald Park Circle.



   124.28(B)(10)(d)1.   Retail entry - Sign ‘C.’ The entry Sign for
Weston Commons at Weston Road will consist of a freestanding masonry and
stucco architectural Monument Sign, one double-faced Sign at the parcel
entry. The Sign will contain the name of the project and informational text
and shall establish the design theme for all signage located within Weston
Commons. The Signage Face Area will be limited to 36 square feet with a
maximum overall Height of this entry Sign not to exceed six feet in Height
from adjacent finished grade, 15-foot Setback from the Right-Of-Way and
outside required clear sight distance triangles. The entry Sign will have a
required background Landscape of two gray wood palms and three accent Trees
or palms. A minimum of 500 square feet of LandscapeShrubs and groundcovers
not exceeding 30 inches in Height must surround the entry Signs . The entry
Sign will have ground lights that emit white light concealed in the planting
beds located at the base of the entry Sign . Flanking Landscapes of a minimum
of three large palms and five accent Trees each side are required; minimum
Heights found in subsection 124.28(B)(12)(g)5., Landscape and Irrigation .
Accent lights or Tree up-lights must be “in-ground” type that emit white
light. In addition, the Landscape may be further expanded utilizing planter
walls with accent Landscaping and may be located at the corners of the
intersections.







 



Weston Commons Business Center



Retail Entrance Sign ‘C’



Date: 1-11-2002



 







Weston Commons Business Center



Entry Feature Modifications



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(e)   Monument signage.



   124.28(B)(10)(e)1.   Monument Signs are to be located along Weston
Road within ten feet of the Right-Of-Way line.



   124.28(B)(10)(e)2.   Freestanding OutparcelBuildings - Sign ‘D.’
The Monument Signs for Weston Commons will consist of freestanding masonry
and stucco architectural Monument Signs, one double-faced Sign for each
freestanding commercial OutparcelBuilding . The Signage Face will be limited
to 36 square feet, with a maximum overall Height not to exceed six feet in
Height from adjacent finished grade. These Signs shall be placed no closer
than ten feet from the Weston Road Right-Of-Way and will be inside the
Landscape buffer of Weston Commons.







 



Weston Commons Business Center



Outparcel Monument Sign ‘D’



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(f)   Directory signage for retail - Sign ‘E.’
Directory Monument signage will be ground mounted adjacent to an interior
drive aisle or access way. Directory Sign Face Area shall be limited to 24
square feet and up to six anchor Tenants and/or outparcels and indicate
general direction to destination. The Directory Sign shall be no more that
five feet in Height from adjacent finished grade. Directory signage will be
designed with detailing consistent with Weston Commons aesthetic and be in a
Landscape bed surrounding the Sign , minimum five-foot width and/or adjacent
Landscape . The Monument Sign will have ground lights that emit white light
concealed in the planting beds located at the base of the entry Sign .



   124.28(B)(10)(g)   The Palace.



   124.28(B)(10)(g)1.   The Palace entry Signs /feature - Sign ‘F.’
The entry Signs /feature is a unique composition of Sign walls and metal
picket fencing and security gates submitted in a separate site plan
application. The schematic graphics and dimensioning as shown below, is
consistent with the architectural styling of the Special Residential area and
detailing also consistent with the Weston Commons aesthetic. The Sign Area
shall not exceed 32 square feet and have a maximum Height of six feet from
the adjacent crown of the road. Permit drawings of final graphics,
dimensioning and engineering may create minor discrepancies; however the
design intent, size, proportion and consistency with the Weston Commons
aesthetic theme shall remain constant.







 



Weston Commons



Sign ‘F’



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(g)2.   The Palace boundary marker - Sign ‘G.’
Located off the Arterial Roadway , The Palace requires a Freestanding marker
Sign on the north boundary to direct services and newcomers to their main
entrance and sharing the private accessway with future commercial office
Development. The marker will consist of one double-sided Monument Sign with
The Palace identified, not exceeding three-and-a-half feet in Height,
six-and-a-half feet in length, 32 square feet in face area. The boundary
marker shall conform to all applicable clear-sight and clear-recovery zone
requirements. Modification to the existing boundary marker shall be permitted
to allow additional text, provided the total face area does not exceed 32
square feet.







 



Boundary Signage - Sign G



Date: 1-11-2002



 







Weston Commons



City Bunker Sign Location ‘H’



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(g)3.   The Palace at Weston Senior Living entry Sign
/feature - Sign ‘I’. Located off Emerald Estate Drive, The Palace
requires an identifying Sign to alert residents and visitors to the entrance
drive. The style and proportion of the Sign shall be consistent with the
styling of the Sign for the existing Special Residential facility on Tract
A-1. The Sign Face shall not exceed 32 square feet and the design of the Sign
shall be submitted and approved by the City Commission.







 



Entry Signage - Sign ‘I’



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(g)4.   At the time of Site Plan approval for the
Special Residential Facility, the City Commission may approve additional Sign
text on Sign ‘A’ on the north side of Emerald Park Circle for “The
Palace” provided the overall Sign Face area shall not exceed 50 square feet.



   124.28(B)(10)(h)   Wall mounted Building signage (refer to
architectural elevation drawings as shown below).



   124.28(B)(10)(h)1.   All Tenants will be permitted to have a primary
ID Sign on the Building elevation above the principal entry/courtyard
consisting of the company name and corporate Logo , consistent with
subsection 124.28(B)(10)(h)2. through 124.28(B)(10)(h)7., as follow.



   124.28(B)(10)(h)2.   Retail “in-line” Tenant identification
signage shall each be permitted one Sign located above the principal entry to
the Tenant space, on the Building entrance feature, entrance panel or within
a banded signage area. Retail names, shall be reverse channel, metal letters
in one color that conforms to the Sign performance table for Weston Commons.
Logos and insignias shall not exceed 10% Sign Area. Reverse channel lighted
letters shall emit white light.



   124.28(B)(10)(h)3.   Retail ‘D’ & ‘E’ retail Buildings
identification signage are permitted not more than two Wall Signs .
Freestanding Buildings include Restaurants and banks. Primary Sign shall be
located: (i) within a signage banded area above the principal entry to the
Tenant space and (ii) secondary Sign of the same configuration may be mounted
on a Building elevation below the Parapet efface line of the Building facing
an adjacent roadway. All Building wall signage shall not exceed 50% of the
store Frontage . The maximum face area of each Sign for Outparcels shall not
exceed 40 square feet. Logos and insignias shall not exceed 10% of Sign Area.
Retail Sign lettering shall be reverse channel that emit white light and
conforms to the Sign performance table for Weston Commons. No Sign shall
extend above the roofline or Parapet efface.



   124.28(B)(10)(h)4.   Freestanding (Outparcel) Buildings including
banks and Restaurants shall be allowed one wall mounted Sign not to exceed 40
square feet of Sign Area and shall be located at the top floor level of a
single or multi-story Building , on Building elevation or within a signage
banded area above the principal entry to the freestanding Building .



   124.28(B)(10)(h)5.   Tenant door Signs shall be permitted which
identify the business or activity by name or symbol. Vinyl die/laser cut
postal address numbers four inches in Height, in white, shall be provided for
each Tenant space. These shall be centered on entry door with bottom edge
five feet from the threshold of the door.



   124.28(B)(10)(h)6.   Wall mounted signage for corporate licensing,
branding and equity ownership is prohibited.



   124.28(B)(10)(h)7.   Handmade artistic Signs are prohibited.







 



Weston Commons



Date: 1-11-2002



 



 







Weston Commons



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(i)   Traffic signage. TrafficSigns and StreetSigns
both within Weston Commons as well as outlying parcels shall conform to
design, number and approved location requirements as per the City Code . All
information shall use international symbols and will be designed to
complement all other Weston Commons signage. Traffic signage may be fitted
with custom theme detailing consistent with a Weston Commons aesthetic if the
developer so chooses.



   124.28(B)(10)(j)   Directional signage. Directional signage for
business Tenants with curb-side service shall be no more than three feet in
Height from adjacent finished grade, maximum of three square feet of Sign
Face area and limited to one Sign per Building . Ground-mounted Directional
Signs will have architectural detailing consistent with the Weston Commons
aesthetic if the developer so chooses.



   124.28(B)(10)(k)   Platted Tracts B-1 and B-2 Non-Retail signage.



   124.28(B)(10)(k)1.   Non-retail Buildings and Special Residential
identification signage shall be located on the Building entrance feature,
entrance panel or within a signage banded area above the principal entry to
the property. Names, Logos and insignias shall be reverse-channel style that
emit white light; of the same font type and color coating as the Weston
Commons main identifier. No Sign shall extend above the roof eave or Parapet
line. All Building wall signage shall not exceed 12 inches in Height, or 12
feet in length with a total coverage area less than 12 square feet. All
lettering shall be reverse channel, metal letters in one color that conforms
to the signage performance standards for Weston Commons. Logos, trademarks
and insignias shall not exceed 10% of the Sign Area. Reverse channel lighted
letters shall emit white light. Located adjacent to the principal entry door,
a suite Directory Sign shall not exceed 16 inches by 20 inches.



   124.28(B)(10)(k)2.   If the non-retail Building has more than one
Tenant , its parcel Sign may display the name of the Building or the names of
the Tenants occupying 30% or greater of the Building . Tenant names shall all
be in the same style and size of letters as approved. All information shall
be contained within the approved Sign Face area.



   124.28(B)(10)(k)3.   Non-retail Tenant identification Signs shall
not exceed six inches by 16 inches indicating the hours of operation and
phone number and are limited to one per Tenant .



   124.28(B)(10)(k)4.   Non-retail Street signage shall conform to
design, number and approved location requirements as per the City Code . It
shall not exceed six inches in Height, or two feet in length. All Street
signage shall conform to design, number and approved location requirements as
per the City Code . All information shall use international symbols and will
be designed to complement all other Weston Commons signage. Traffic signage
may be fitted with custom theme detailing consistent with a Weston Commons
aesthetic if the developer so chooses.



   124.28(B)(10)(l)   Platted Tract B-1 Retail signage.



   124.28(B)(10)(l)1.   Freestanding (Outparcel) Buildings including
banks, Restaurants and drug stores shall be allowed one wall mounted Sign not
to exceed 40 square feet of Sign Area and shall be located at the top floor
level of a single or multi-story Building , on Building elevation or within a
signage banded area near the principal entry of the front door. Each Building
shall be allowed one Monument Sign and shall be consistent with Sign ‘D’
of the Sign Performance Table for Weston Commons.



   124.28(B)(10)(l)2.   Retail “in-line” or multi- TenantBuilding
identification signage shall be permitted one Sign located above the
principal entry to the Tenant space, on the Building entrance feature,
entrance panel or within a banded signage area. Retail names shall be reverse
channel, metal letters in one color that conforms to the Sign performance
table for Weston Commons. Logos and insignias shall not exceed 10% of the
Sign Area.



   124.28(B)(10(l)3.   Platted Tract B-2 signage shall be determined at
submittal to the City of the first site plan application for that particular
Development.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)   Additional landmarks.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)1.   If proposed, additional landmark architectural
elements, such as a bell tower, beacon, waterfalls or pergola, attached to,
but not displaying signage, are permitted at a single location having greater
than 300 feet of Frontage on Weston Road north and south of Emerald Park
Circle; not exceeding 65 feet Height from crown of road, not more than 30
feet in length and width, and 25 feet Setback from Right-Of-Way . Such
elements must be approved by the City Commission under separate permit.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.   All ground-mounted Sign Heights are calculated
from the adjacent finished grade. All Sign Monument reverse channel
lettering, and ground lighting, and “in-ground” Landscape lighting shall
emit white light.



 


WESTON COMMONS SIGN PERFORMANCE TABLE




SIGNS

 

NUMBER

 

FACE AREA

 

SIGN HEIGHT

 

FONT STYLE

 

TYPE/ COLOR

 

ILLUMINATION





‘A’ Entry Feature
 
Existing Structures to remain -1 per corner
 
Single face Max. 50 sq. ft.
 
Match existing Structure
 
Times New Roman bold
 
Solid metal, polished brass or bronze
 
Ground-mounted white and in-ground white


‘B’ Emerald Estates
 
1 only
 
Single face Max. 32 sq. ft.

Max. 18 in. Letters
 
Max. 8 ft.
 
Times New Roman bold
 
Solid metal, polished brass or bronze
 
Ground-mounted white and in-ground white


‘C’ Retail Monument
 
1 only
 
Max. 36 sq. ft.
 
Max. 6 ft.
 
Times New Roman bold
 
Reverse channel, coated black or anodized bronze
 
Reverse channel white and ground-mounted white


‘D’ Out Parcel Monuments
 
1 per out parcel
 
Max. 36 sq. ft.
 
Max. 6 ft.
 
Times New Roman bold
 
Reverse channel, coated black or anodized bronze
 
Reverse channel white and ground mounted white


‘E’ Directory
 
1 per Building
 
Max. 18 sq. ft.
 
Max. 3 ft.
 
Times New Roman bold
 
Reverse channel, coated black or anodized bronze
 
Ground-mounted white


‘F’ Palace entry
 
2 Sign walls per Street front
 
Single face Max. 32 sq. ft.
 
Max. 8 ft.
 
Stylized Times Roman
 
Banded area, w/stylized font, reverse channel
 
Ground-mounted white


‘G’ Palace and Commerce Svc
 
1 only
 
Double- sided

Max. 5 sq. ft. per side
 
Max. 4 ft.
 
Stylized Times Roman
 
Banded area, w/stylized font, reverse channel
 
Ground-mounted white and in-ground white


‘H’ City bunker Sign location
 
N.A.
 
N.A.
 
N.A.
 
N.A.
 
N.A.
 
N.A.


‘I’ Palace senior living entry
 
1 only
 
Max. 32 sq. ft.
 
Max. 8 ft.
 
Stylized Times Roman
 
Banded area, w/stylized font, reverse channel
 
Ground-mounted white


Retail in-line Wall- Mounted
 
1 each Tenant
 
50% store front not exceed 20 L.F.

Max. 18 in. Letters Logo 10% Sign max
 
Above principal entry, not above roof line
 
Times New Roman Bold
 
Reverse channel, coated black or anodized bronze
 
Reverse channel white


Outparcel Retail Wall Mounted
 
1 each Tenant
 
Max. 40 sq. ft.

Logo 10% Sign max
 
N.A.
 
Times New Roman bold
 
Reverse channel, coated black or anodized bronze
 
Reverse channel white


Retail D & E Wall- Mounted
 
1 interior V.A., primary, 1 rear secondary
 
50% store front not exceed 20 L.F. Max. 18 in. Letters
 
N.A.
 
Times New Roman bold
 
Reverse channel, coated black or anodized bronze
 
Reverse channel white




 







 



Weston Commons



Master Sign Location Plan



Date: 1-11-2002



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.a.   All loading spaces shall have a minimum
14-foot vertical clearance.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.b.   All loading spaces shall conform to the City
Code regarding size, location and quantity.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.c.   Loading areas shall be screened from Streets
and Building entrances and shall be designed as an integral part of the
Building architecture.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.d.   The maneuvering of trucks and trailers shall
be confined insofar as possible to the rear parking areas of a parcel.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.e.   No articles, goods, materials, fixed
machinery or equipment, vehicles, trash, Animals or similar items shall be
stored or kept in the open or exposed to view from adjacent parcels, Streets
and Sidewalks .



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.f.   Vehicles shall be parked in approved parking
areas only. No vehicles are to be stored for more than 24 hours.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.g.   Loading, service and trash collection can be
carried out in shared locations. This shared Use will provide additional
space for buffering and Landscape areas.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.h.   Solid waste facilities for Restaurants shall
be enclosures attached to the main Building , and screened in accordance with
this Section. Solid waste for all other types of Building shall be deposited
into dumpsters in freestanding enclosures designed in accordance with City
standards.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.i.   All freestanding dumpster enclosures,
transformers, mechanical equipment and other Utility equipment or enclosures
shall be buffered utilizing Hedges , flowering Shrubs and/or vines equal in
Height at time of installation without impacting accessibility or service.



   124.28(B)(10)(m)2.j.   The west face of the supermarket (Publix)
covered loading area shall be stuccoed to match the rear elevation of the
supermarket (Publix) Building .



   124.28(B)(11)   Architectural criteria.



   124.28(B)(11)(a)   General intent and provisions.



   124.28(B)(11)(a)1.   Architectural design of all Weston Commons and
parcel Buildings shall be designed to be compatible with one another.
Superior design and quality materials are required. The design of Buildings
adjacent to lakes and StormwaterDetention Areas shall address the impact on
views from across the water. All service area walls and other screening
elements must be compatible with the Building architecture. Large Façades
with no architectural delineation shall be prohibited.



   124.28(B)(11)(a)2.   All Buildings must be designed by a
Florida-registered architect.



   124.28(B)(11)(a)3.   Rooftop equipment, antennas, and similar
protrusions shall not project above the Parapet or screening. The Building
shall include Parapet walls, individual screens or other architectural
Building elements to completely screen the offensive elements from view. All
screening elements shall relate to the Building ’s style of architecture
and where at grade shall be Landscaped. Solar collectors, satellite dishes
and the like shall only be permitted at locations approved by the City.



   124.28(B)(11)(a)4.   Downspouts, roof ladders, and related elements
shall be designed to be compatible with the Building architecture and avoid
staining the BuildingFaçade .



   124.28(B)(11)(a)5.   No walls may be constructed within the
Landscape easements or nearer than 25 feet from the side or rear property
line. All walls shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture. Walls
shall not be constructed in front yards or on site areas visible from major
project Streets, except within the retail areas, where buffer walls may be
constructed to reduce visibility of Utilities .



   124.28(B)(11)(a)6.   All Buildings shall be reviewed and approved by
the City Commission for site plan approval.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)   Design strategies.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)1.   A relatively wide variety of architectural
design and materials is permitted. However, it is intended that a basic
harmony of architecture shall prevail among the several Buildings so that a
consistent style is achieved within Weston Commons.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)2.   The basic architectural style of Weston Commons
shall be modern and unembellished except for articulation by Building form,
window treatment, and roof or entrance features.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)3.   In general, the following shall apply to the
design of Building exterior appearance in order to promote harmonious
Building design:



   124.28(B)(11)(b)3.a.   The Height of Buildings shall be visually
reduced by the use of Landscape , texture, materials and color.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)3.b.   Building shall be designed to be attractive
from all road Frontages they are adjacent to.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)3.c.   No portion of the rooftop equipment may
project above the Parapet or screening including all mechanical, electrical
equipment, vents and stacks.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)3.d.   Colors, materials and finishes shall be
coordinated on all exterior elevations to achieve total continuity of design
throughout Weston Commons. Weston Commons and parcels shall incorporate a
color palette of no less than three distinct colors.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)3.e.   All service courts and loading areas shall be
screened from view of project roadways and driveways so as to be an integral
part of the design of the Building architecture or by location on the site to
the rear of public areas. Mature Landscape materials, which complement the
Building architecture, may also be used in screening these Uses .



   124.28(B)(11)(b)3.f.   Buildings shall be separated within and
between parcels according to Setback requirements established in the Design
Guidelines. Building massing within Weston Commons shall conform to the
overall intent conveyed in the Site Development Plan .



   124.28(B)(11)(b)4.a.   Roofs shall be tiled and contain a minimum of
three but not more than four colors blended to create a roof color.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)4.b.   Inclined roof pitches, when used, are to be
minimum 4-in-12 pitch and should vary in Height to create movement and
elevation interest across not less than 50% of the Façade . The use of
features such as clocks, towers, canopies, colonnades, loggias, balconies,
cloth awnings and other architectural projections of aesthetic quality are
encouraged.



   124.28(B)(11)(b)4.c.   Roof projections such as, but not limited to:
A/C equipment, exhaust hoods, refrigeration, vents and vent shafts shall be
hidden from view by means of parapets or roof designs. No other screening
devices shall be allowed.



   124.28(B)(12)   Landscape and Irrigation.



   124.28(B)(12)(a)   Landscape design standards.



   124.28(B)(12)(a)1.   Landscape design standards have been
established to create and perpetuate the quality, character and image of
Weston Commons. A complementary series of perimeter Landscaping and open
space will be constructed to form a system of green spaces linking the
various Uses within Weston Commons. Unity of design shall be achieved through
the repetition of plant materials and other Landscape and hardscape materials
throughout Weston Commons.



   124.28(B)(12)(a)2.   All planting area widths shall be inclusive of
adjacent type “D” curbing.



   124.28(B)(12)(a)3.   All requirements of the CityLandscape Code not
specifically addressed in this Section shall conform to the CityLandscape
Code.



   124.28(B)(12)(a)4.   A Tree Survey shall be provided at the time of
site plan review.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)   Landscape design.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)1.   Landscape plans and specifications shall be
prepared by a licensed Landscape Architect registered in the State of Florida.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)2.   Landscape design at intersections within Weston
Commons Rights-Of-Way shall be formal. Shade or large palm Trees shall be
installed on both sides of parcel entrance drives/roads. Individual Trees
should be a maximum of 35 feet on center to provide a major impact statement.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)3.   Loose, informal arrangements of Trees in
general open areas should be clustered to provide a natural appearance.
StreetTrees shall be spaced a maximum of 35 feet on center.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)4.   Required visibility shall be provided at all
intersections. Berms, Ground Cover and Shrubs shall not exceed a maximum
Height of two feet within visibility zones at intersections as defined by
local or State codes. Trees shall be positioned to not impede visibility.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)5.   Evergreen Shrubs and/or berms shall be provided
to screen parking and service Use areas. Planting for the purpose of
screening shall be a minimum of 24 inches in Height at the time of
installation and reach a minimum Height of 36 inches within a 12-month period
from time of installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)6.   Landscaping of adjacent residential parcels
shall be considered in the Development of a Landscape design to provide
continuity within Weston Commons. Parcels shall not be Landscaped to have an
“individual” character at the property line of adjacent existing
Landscaping . Single Hedge rows along property lines are discouraged.
Massings of Trees , palms and Shrubs are encouraged.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)7.   Landscape material, especially Shrubs , Ground
Cover and seasonal color shall be spaced to provide 50% coverage at time of
planting and 100% in six months.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)8.   Landscape plans shall indicate all proposed
Utilities , site lighting, fire hydrants, backflow preventers, stop Signs ,
meter banks, and proposed contours.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)9.   All Landscape plans and specifications shall
meet or exceed minimum standards as required herein.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)10.   The use of uniform seasonal color throughout
Weston Commons shall be implemented.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)11.   Sod shall account for no more than 50% of the
provided Pervious Area within the Weston Commons.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)12.   Twenty-five percent of the Vehicular Use Area
within the Weston Commons shall be provided as Landscaped area.



   124.28(B)(12)(b)13.   Fifty percent of the required planting areas
within Weston Commons shall be native Florida species. The existing On-Site
native plant communities shall be used to meet the native plants requirement
for the Weston Commons.



   124.28(B)(12)(c)   Landscape standards for Vehicular Use Area. 
Vehicular Use Areas shall be Landscaped to reduce the scale of large paved
areas and provide climate control of parking lots.



   124.28(B)(12)(c)1.   Berms, Trees and evergreen Hedges are required
within all perimeter planting areas adjacent to Rights-Of-Way as outlined in
the Use Standards to provide screening and pedestrian directional flow.



   124.28(B)(12)(c)2.   A minimum of one Tree and 25 one-gallon plants
shall be provided in each island.



   124.28(B)(12)(c)3.   All Landscape islands shall be a minimum of 165
square feet and contain at least one shade Tree.



   124.28(B)(12)(d)   Drainage Retention Areas.  Drainage
retention/Detention Areas are to be planted and sloped to blend into the
adjacent Landscape area.



   124.28(B)(12)(e)   Landscape lighting.  Landscape accent lighting
of Tree canopies, pathways and general illumination is encouraged.



   124.28(B)(12)(e)1.   Above-ground Landscape lights must be screened
within planting beds and mounted at grade.



   124.28(B)(12)(e)2.   Above-ground Landscape lights are prohibited in
Lawn areas.



   124.28(B)(12)(e)3.   Well lights only are approved for use in Lawn
areas.



   124.28(B)(12)(e)4.   Landscape lights shall be aesthetically
compatible with Building and site lights.



   124.28(B)(12)(e)5.   Well lights in Tree grates will be used to
uplight Trees in pedestrian areas of Weston Commons.



   124.28(B)(12)(f)   Landscape Irrigation system.  All Landscape
areas shall be irrigated with an automatic Irrigation system of approved
design to provide proper plant growth.



   124.28(B)(12)(f)1.   The automatic controlled Irrigation system
shall be provided for 100% coverage with 100% overlap of all Landscaped areas.



   124.28(B)(12)(f)2.   The Irrigation system shall utilize rust-free
water.



   124.28(B)(12)(f)3.   The system shall be maintained in optimum
operating condition at all times.



   124.28(B)(12)(f)4.   Operation of Irrigation systems shall be timed
to operate during evening and early morning hours to minimize evaporation and
disruption to vehicular and pedestrian Traffic. The system will include a
rain sensor.



   124.28(B)(12)(f)5.   No Irrigation shall overspray walk-ways.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)   Plant material.  All parcels within Weston
Commons shall provide a well-defined, maintained and dense Landscape
appearance.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)1.   All plant material for Weston Commons will be
Florida Fancy or Florida grade no. 1 as defined by the “Florida State Plant
Board Standards for Nursery Stock” and “Grades and Standards for Nursery
Plants,” State of Florida, Department of Agriculture. Exception: large
relocated specimen Trees in excess of six-inch caliper shall be required only
to meet the approval of Butters Development Corporation’s Landscape
Architect and City staff.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)2.   Plant material shall be installed in accordance
with sound horticultural practices.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)3.   All plant material shall have a minimum
one-Year guarantee beginning at final completion of installation of 100% of
all plant material as per plans and specifications.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)4.   Installation of 100% of Landscape material and
Irrigation to be complete by opening of Building for TenantUse .



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.   Trees .



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.a.   All Trees are to be specimen quality, with
vigorous growth and in a healthy condition.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.b.   The canopy of Trees is to be dense, and
full-headed 360 degrees at the time of installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.c.   Shade Trees shall be used in pedestrian areas:



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.c.i.   All shade Trees shall be 12 to 14 feet
overall in Height with a minimum two-and-one-half inch DBH and a minimum
six-foot spread at time of installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.c.ii.   All shade Trees shall have a minimum
four-and-one-half feet of Clear Trunk , unless otherwise noted and approved.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.c.iii.   Shade Trees shall reach a minimum Height
of 30 feet and a minimum canopy spread of 20 feet at maturity.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.d.   Accent Trees .



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.d.i.   All accent Trees shall be 10 to 12 feet in
overall Height with a minimum two-inch DBH and spread of five feet at the
time of installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.d.ii.   All accent Trees shall have three-feet
Clear Trunk minimum at time of installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.e.   Palm Trees .



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.e.i.   Large Palm Species: Royal Palms, Bismark
Palms, Date Palms, Coconut Palms, Foxtail Palms and the like. When used as an
overstory Tree, the Tree shall have a minimum ten feet of wood. These palms
shall be equivalent to a shade Tree for calculation of required plantings.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.e.ii.   All other palm Trees used as an overstory
plant in non-paved areas shall be a minimum of eight feet clear-trunked,
clustered a minimum of three per planting in planting beds, and spaced so as
not to inhibit the normal growth characteristic of the palms. In locations
where Tree grates are used, individual palms are permitted. Tree grates shall
be provided in all pedestrian areas.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.e.iii.   Due to the urban pedestrian context of
the retail, palm Trees can make up 25% of the City-required Tree requirements.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.f.   Buffer shade Trees .



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.f.i.   All buffer shade Trees shall be 16 feet
overall in Height with a minimum two-and-one-half inch DBH and a minimum
six-foot spread at time of installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.f.ii.   All buffer shade Trees shall have a
minimum four-and-one-half feet of Clear Trunk , unless otherwise noted and
approved.



   124.28(B)(12)(g)5.f.iii.   All buffer shade Trees shall reach a
minimum Height of 30 feet and a minimum canopy spread of 20 feet at maturity.



   124.28(B)(12)(h)   Shrubs.



   124.28(B)(12)(h)1.   All Shrubs to be minimum three-gallon
containerized, dense, 24-inch Height by 24-inch spread minimum, at time of
installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(h)2.   All Shrubs used as Hedges shall be installed at
no more than 24 inches on center and shall be touching at installation.



   124.28(B)(12)(i)   Ground cover and vines.  All Ground Cover to be
dense, one-gallon containers minimum at time of installation, and planted at
30 inches minimum spacing.



   124.28(B)(12)(j)      Grass.  All grass areas to be sodded with
St. Augustine Floritam (Stenotaphrum secundatum).



   124.28(B)(12)(k)   Seasonal color.  At the time of installation,
all seasonal color to be a minimum of two-and-one-quarter-inch containers,
with the exception of bulbs.



   124.28(B)(12)(l)      Plant palette.



   124.28(B)(12)(l)1.   At least 70% of all required Trees and plant
materials shall be from the recommended plant palette. However, no more than
25% of required Trees shall be of a palm species.



   124.28(B)(12)(l)2.   At least 15% of entry Landscape planting at
parcel signage and 5% of plantings adjacent to front of parcel Buildings
shall incorporate the approved seasonal color plant material. The following
plant list is the recommended plant palette.



 


Botanical Name

 

Common Name





Shade trees:
 



   Bulnesia arborea
 
Verawood


   Bursera simaruba
 
Gumbo Limbo


   Calophyllum brasiliense
 
Beautyleaf


   Calophyllum inophyllum
 
Mastwood


   Cassia grandis
 
Pink Shower


   Cassia javanica
 
Apple Blossom Shower


   Elaeocarpus decipiens
 
Japanese Blueberry


   Ilex attenuata
 
‘East Palatka’ Holly


   Ilex cassine
 
Dahoon Holly


   Lagerstroemia indica
 
Crepe Myrtle


   Magnolia grandiflora
 
‘Little Gem’ Magnolia


   Magnolia grandiflora
 
‘DD Blanchard’ Magnolia


   Noronhia emarginata
 
Madagascar Olive


   Quercus virginiana
 
Live Oak


   Quercus virginiana
 
‘Cathedral’ Live Oak


   Quercus virginiana
 
‘Highrise’ Live Oak


   Tamarindus indica
 
Tamarind


   Taxodium distichum
 
Common Bald Cypress


Accent trees:
 



   Capparis cynophallophora
 
Jamaican Caper


   Clusia guttifera
 
Small Leaf Pitch Apple


   Cordia boissieri
 
White Geiger


   Filicium decipiens
 
Japanese Fern Tree


   Guaiacum sanctum
 
Lignum-vitae


   Ilex ‘Nellie Stevens’
 
Holly


   Krugiodendron ferreum
 
Black Ironwood


   Ligustrum japonicum
 
‘Recurvifolium’ Japanese Privet


   Myrcianthes fragrans
 
Simpson Stopper


   Senna polyphylla
 
Desert cassia


   Sideroxylon salicifolium
 
Willow Bustic


Palms:
 



   Bismarckia nobilis
 
Bismarck


   Carpentaria acuminata
 
Carpentaria


   Cocos nucifera
 
Coconut


   Livistona chinensis
 
Chinese Fan


   Phoenix canariensis
 
Canary Island Date


   Phoenix dactylifera
 
Date


   Phoenix sylvestris
 
Sylvester


   Ptychosperma elegans
 
Alexander


   Ptychosperma macarthurii
 
Macarthur


   Roystonea elata
 
Florida Royal


   Roystonea regia
 
Royal


   Sabal palmetto
 
Sabal


   Veitchia montgomeryana
 
Montgomery


   Veitchia winin
 
Winin


   Wodyetia bifurcata
 
Foxtail


Shrubs:
 



   Bougainvillea spp.
 
Bougainvillea


   Capparis cynophallophora
 
Jamaican Caper


   Chrysobalanus icaco
 
Cocoplum


   Codiaeum variegatum
 
Croton


   Conocarpus erectus
 
Green Buttonwood


   Conocarpus erectus sericeus
 
Silver Buttonwood


   Duranta repens
 
Golden Dewdrop


   Eugenia axillaris
 
White Stopper


   Eugenia foetida
 
Spanish Stopper


   Eugenia rhombea
 
Red Stopper


   Ficus microcarpa
 
‘Green Island’; Green Island Ficus


   Galphimia gracilis
 
Thryallis


   Hamelia patens
 
Firebush


   Hibiscus spp.
 
Hibiscus


   Ilex vomitoria
 
Yaupon Holly


   Ixora spp
 
Ixora


   Jasminum multiflorum
 
Downy Jasmine


   Jasminum volubile
 
Wax Jasmine


   Muhlenbergia capillaris
 
Muhly Grass


   Myrcianthes fragrans
 
Simpson Stopper


   Philodendron selloum
 
Philodendron


   Philodendron ‘Xanadu’
 
Xanadu


   Plumbago auriculata
 
Plumbago


   Podocarpus macrophyllus
 
Podocarpus


   Psychotria nervosa
 
Wild Coffee


   Rapanea punctata
 
Myrsine


   Rhaphiolepis indica
 
Indian Hawthorne


   Schefflera arboricola
 
Dwarf Schefflera


   Schefflera arboricola
 
‘Trinette’Trinette


   Trachelospermum jasminoides
 
Confederate Jasmine


   Tripsacum dactyloides
 
Fakahatchee


   Tripsacum floridana
 
Dwarf Fakahatchee


   Viburnum odoratissimum
 
Sweet Viburnum


Seasonal Color:  Submit proposal for review and approval.




 



   124.28(B)(12)(m)   Prohibited plant species.  The following plant
species are prohibited from Use:



   124.28(B)(12)(m)1.   Acacia auriculaeformis (a/k/a earleaf acacia).



   124.28(B)((12)m)2.   Araucaria heterophylla (a/k/a Norfolk Island
pine).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)3.   Ardisia solanecea (a/k/a shoebutton ardisia).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)4.   Bischofia javanica (a/k/a toog).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)5.   Brassaria actinophylla (a/k/a schefflera).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)6.   Casuarina Trees (a/k/a Australian pine).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)7.   Cupaniopsis anacardiodes (a/k/a carrotwood).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)8.   Dalbergia sisoo (a/k/a rosewood).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)9.   Grevillea robusta (a/k/a silk oak).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)10.   Hibiscus tiliaceus (a/k/a mahoe).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)11.   Lucaena leucocephala (a/k/a lead Tree or
jumbie bean).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)12.   Melaleuca quinquenervia (a/k/a punk Tree or
paper bark).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)13.   Metopium toxiferum (a/k/a poisonwood).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)14.   Rhodomyrtus tomentosa (a/k/a downy rose
myrtle).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)15.   Schinus terebinthifolius (a/k/a Brazilian
pepper or Florida holly).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)16.   Bucida buceras (a/k/a black olive).



   124.28(B)(12)(m)17.   Callistemon viminalis (a/k/a/ weeping
bottlebrush).



   124.28(B)(13)   Landscape, grading and drainage.



   124.28(B)(13)(a)   Site grading shall be done to preserve and
enhance the topographic features and to provide positive drainage.



   124.28(B)(13)(b)   No slope of any type shall be steeper than 3:1.
Where space limitations demand, terracing with approved retaining walls shall
be utilized. Where retaining walls are required, materials shall be
compatible with the site standards and shall be approved at time of Site Plan
review. Utilities locations must be integrated with the Landscape plan.



   124.28(B)(13)(c)   Berms, channels, Swales , and the like shall be
graded as to be an integral part of the grading, and designed with smooth
transitions between changes in slope. Berms should not interrupt Swale
drainage.



   124.28(B)(13)(d)   Surface drainage shall be collected on site and
connected to underground storm drains. Drainage is to be conveyed in
accordance with the master drainage plan.



   124.28(B)(13)(e)   Run-off should be directed away from Building
pads at a minimum slope of 2% in Landscape areas.



   124.28(B)(13)(f)   Drainage from roof tops shall not directly
outfall into planted or pedestrian areas.



   124.28(B)(14)   Landscape construction procedures and precautions.



   124.28(B)(14)(a)   The following measures are to be incorporated to
minimize soil erosion by water and wind.



   124.28(B)(14)(a)1.   Remove all invasive plant materials referred to
in subsection 124.28(B)(12)(m), but no more other vegetation than necessary.



   124.28(B)(14)(a)2.   Install temporary Mulching on areas to be left
bare of plant material for an extended period of time.



   124.28(B)(14)(a)3.   Provide temporary ditches, dikes, desilting
basins and/or vegetation to remove sediment from run-off water during
Development.



   124.28(B)(14)(b)   The Construction personnel are responsible for
knowing the location of existing Utilities and must protect existing
Utilities during the Construction .



   124.28(B)(14)(c)   Construction sites shall be maintained in a neat
and orderly manner. All trash shall be kept in enclosed containers and
removed frequently.



   124.28(B)(14)(d)   Construction access shall be coordinated with the
Developer. Special care shall be taken to protect existing pavements and
Landscaping from damage.



   124.28(B)(14)(e)   Approval shall not be required for the temporary
storage of materials, equipment and supplies needed for the Construction of
permanent improvements upon a site, provided they are completely removed
immediately upon completion of Construction .



   124.28(B)(15)   Landscape maintenance.  Landscape maintenance shall
be of highest quality to provide at all times a clean, orderly, and manicured
appearance. The party responsible for maintenance will be identified in the
Association Documents.



   124.28(B)(15)(a)   All dead or dying plant material shall be removed
immediately.



   124.28(B)(15)(b)   Replacements of removed plant material shall be
made within a 15-day period of beginning at date of removal.



   124.28(B)(15)(c)   Sites shall be policed regularly to eliminate
On-SiteLitter .



   124.28(B)(15)(d)   A seasonal color program shall accompany the
Landscape maintenance proposal.



   124.28(B)(15)(e)   Seasonal color shall be provided continually in
winter, spring, summer, and fall. “Spent” plant material shall be
replaced immediately.



   124.28(B)(15)(f)   All Landscape areas shall be kept weed free.



   124.28(B)(15)(g)   Landscape areas shall be watered, fertilized,
cut, Pruned, and treated for insects regularly to maintain a healthy,
vigorous, and well-kept appearance.



   124.28(B)(15)(h)   Landscape maintenance of parcels is the
responsibility of the respective owners.



   124.28(B)(15)(i)   Landscape maintenance of all Rights-Of-Way ,
common open space, and conservation areas are the responsibility of the
developer or its designee.



   124.28(B)(15)(j)   Maintain Mulch in a clean and neat condition with
a minimum three-inch cover in all planting beds. Restore as necessary with
clean Mulch of the same type as that at installation.



   124.28(B)(15)(k)   Fertilization shall be a part of the required
maintenance activities. Fertilizer shall be applied following
manufacturer’s specifications. Any evidence of nutrient deficiency shall be
addressed during fertilization.



   124.28(B)(15)(l)   The Irrigation system will be a required portion
of the maintenance activities to ensure Lawns and plantings receive
sufficient water to maintain healthy growing conditions.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.29  ISLES AT WESTON PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   Development of property within the Isles at Weston Planned Development
District shall be governed by, and comply with, the Design Guidelines set
forth. Those aspects of the Development that are not regulated by the Design
Guidelines shall be governed by the underlying zoning district provisions.
See Appendix B for the Isles at Weston Planned Development District Design
Guidelines.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.30  FLORIDA NATURE AND CULTURE CENTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   Development of property within the Florida Nature and Culture Center
Planned Development District shall be governed by, and comply with, the
Design Guidelines set forth. Those aspects of the Development that are not
regulated by the Design Guidelines shall be governed by the underlying zoning
district provisions. See Appendix C for the Florida Nature and Culture Center
Planned Development District Design Guidelines.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.31  ESTATES OF SWAN LAKE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   Development of property within the Estates of Swan Lake Planned
Development District shall be governed by, and comply with, the Design
Guidelines set forth. Those aspects of the Development that are not regulated
by the Design Guidelines shall be governed by the underlying zoning district
provisions. See Appendix D for the Estates of Swan Lake Design Planned
Development District Guidelines.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 124.32  DUMPSTERS AND DUMPSTER ENCLOSURES.



   124.32(A)   Dumpsters and dumpster enclosures - multi-family
Development and nonresidential Development.



   124.32(A)(1)   Residential plots containing four or more Dwelling
Units shall not be required to provide and maintain dumpsters and dumpster
enclosures so long as there are either carports, garages, or other enclosed
areas suitable for storage of waste containers and provided that the
residents utilize the enclosed storage areas to store their waste containers
when not being made accessible for trash pickup.



   124.32(A)(2)   All other multi-family residential Developments
shall, at a minimum, have one four-cubic-yard garbage container and one set
of recycling containers for every 25 Dwelling Units , unless provisions are
made with the franchised collector for increased frequency of collection in
lieu of additional or larger containers in accordance with all provisions of
this Section.



   124.32(A)(3)   Nonresidential Development shall, at a minimum, have
one garbage container and one set of recycling containers to service the
Buildings in accordance with all provisions of this Section. The maximum
walking distance from any egress point of the Buildings to any such dumpster
enclosure shall be no greater than 100 feet.



   124.32(A)(4)   Dumpsters and dumpster enclosures shall be located in
a position accessible for collection by the equipment of the franchised
collector.



   124.32(A)(5)   Dumpsters and dumpster enclosures are not permitted
within any Public or Private Rights-Of-Way .



   124.32(B)   Design specifications - multi-family Development and
nonresidential Development.



   124.32(B)(1)   Permits shall be applied for and obtained from the
City in accordance with the Building Code . The Applicant shall have obtained
all other required permits from other agencies prior to obtaining a permit
from the City.



   124.32(B)(2)   The perimeter of the dumpster pad shall be enclosed
on three sides by an enclosure no less than six feet in Height. The enclosure
must provide a visual barrier between the interior and exterior of the
dumpster area. At no time shall any portions of the dumpster be visible. The
enclosure shall be constructed of masonry and finished to match the Building
that it serves. The remaining side of the dumpster enclosure shall be
enclosed with gates constructed in accordance with requirements set forth in
this Section



   124.32(B)(3)   The minimum inside dimensions of the enclosure shall
be no less than 12 feet by 12 feet.



   124.32(B)(4)   Each dumpster enclosure shall have at least a 36-inch
pedestrian opening on one side to enable a Person to walk into the enclosure
to deposit trash, garbage, refuse, or recyclable materials.



   124.32(B)(5)   The gates of the enclosure shall be constructed of a
frame with opaque or translucent walls affixed thereto, and both frame and
walls shall be of a material of sufficient strength to withstand normal use.
Gates constructed with wood are prohibited. Gates shall be attached to metal
posts at least four inches in diameter with at least two hinges. Each gate
shall have a wheel at the bottom to prevent sagging and shall have drop pins
or rods to hold the gates in place in both open and closed positions.



   124.32(B)(6)   The base of the enclosure shall be six-inch thick
poured concrete, as required by the Building Code , raised above the
surrounding grade so not to collect stormwater. The concrete base shall
extend six feet beyond the front opening of the enclosure as an apron, and
shall be level with the surrounding grade.



   124.32(B)(7)   All dumpster pads shall be at least two feet larger
than the dumpster on all sides. Wheel stops or posts shall be permanently
affixed to the pad at least one foot inside the perimeter of the pad to
prevent the dumpster from striking the enclosure during the collection
process.



   124.32(C)   General requirement.



   124.32(C)(1)   The above requirements are minimum standards that
shall be shown on all site plans.



   124.32(C)(2)   Any enclosures provided for the Use of food-handling
establishments shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Broward
County Health Department relative to can-wash facilities, floor drains, etc.,
currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time.



   124.32(C)(3)   Any dumpsters used to deposit food waste from
establishments preparing and serving food shall be emptied not less than
every other day.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-08, passed 3-3-2014)



§ 124.33  FENCES AND WALLS.



   124.33(A)   Residential property.  Fences and walls may be erected
within or abutting any property line on a residentially zoned property.
Fences or walls shall not exceed six feet in Height on residentially zoned
property, and eight feet in Height when abutting nonresidentially zoned
property.



   124.33(B)   Nonresidential property.  Fences and walls may be
erected within or abutting any property line on a nonresidentially zoned
property. Fences or walls shall not exceed eight feet in Height.



   124.33(C)   Right-Of-Way Frontage.  Fences and walls that abut a
Right-Of-Way shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the Right-Of-Way
line and shall have a continuous Hedge of a minimum of four feet of Height at
the time of planting and shall thereafter be maintained at a minimum Height
of four feet and a maximum Height equal to the top of the fence or wall. 
The Hedge shall be planted between the Right-Of-Way and the fence or the
wall. The hedge shall be planted contemporaneous with the erection of the
fence or wall.  The hedge shall be shown on the plans for the fence or wall.



   124.33(D)   Prohibitions.



   124.33(D)(1)   No fence or wall shall be erected on a property in
front of the principal Structure .



   124.33(D)(2)   No fence or wall shall be erected on the side(s) of a
property that extends beyond the front of the principal Structure on the side
where the fence or wall is located.



   124.33(D)(3)   No barbed wire, electrified, barbed or razor-wire
topped fences or walls shall be erected on any property.



   124.33(D)(4)   No fence or wall shall encroach upon any drainage,
water and sewer, lake access or lake maintenance easement.



   124.33(D)(5)   No fence or wall shall impede or impair drainage to
or from the adjacent property.



   124.33(E)   Chain link fences.  Chain link fences shall be black or
green vinyl coating, knuckled at the top and bottom and shall have both a top
and bottom rail.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-01, passed 3-4-2019)



§ 124.34  SWIMMING POOLS.



   124.34(A)   All swimming pools shall comply with the barrier
requirements as provided for in the Florida Building Code, with the exception
that the top of the barrier, if used as a component of a perimeter yard area
fence, shall be at least 60 inches above grade. All barriers, including
perimeter yard area fences, shall be located on the property on which the
swimming pool is located, and may not connect to a barrier or fence on an
abutting property.



   124.34(B)   Swimming pool Setbacks in required side or rear yards
may be reduced to five feet for Single-Family homes provided no encroachment
onto a recorded easement would be created. For all other swimming pools,
Setbacks in required side or rear yards may be reduced to five feet except
where they abut Single-Family residential Development. In such cases, the
Setback for the swimming pool shall be 25 feet. For the purpose of this
Section, the minimum Setback is from the outer edge of the pool deck for
fenced pools and from the exterior of the screen enclosure for
screen-enclosed pools.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-07, passed 2-18-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-25, passed 12-5-2016)



§ 124.35  HOME-BASED PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES.



   124.35(A)   The standards set forth in this subsection shall apply
to any proposed or existing assembly Use within Single-Family Residential
Districts (SF) and Multi- Family Residential Districts (MF).



   124.35(B)   Home-based assembly Uses.  Home-based assembly Uses at
Single-Family and multi-family residential Dwelling Units are permitted,
whether for social, religious, or other reasons, as an incidental Accessory
Use to the principal residential Use, provided that assemblies do not occur
more than four times per month for two consecutive months, or result in more
than ten vehicles being parked near the Dwelling Unit at each home-based
assembly. Vehicles parked legally on the site of the home-based assembly
shall not be counted toward the ten vehicles.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.36  ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS.



   Accessory Uses shall comply with the following:



   124.36(A)   They shall be located on the same Lot as the main
permitted Use .



   124.36(B)   They shall be subordinate to, incidental to and
customarily associated with the main permitted Use .



   124.36(C)   The Use is consistent with the purpose of the zoning
district in which it is located;



   124.36(D)   The necessary safeguards will be provided for the
protection of surrounding property, persons and neighborhood values;



   124.36(E)   The public health, safety, and general welfare of the
community will not be materially and adversely affected; and



   124.36(F)   Enclosed Accessory Uses , such as but not limited to
cabanas, mother-in-law quarters, patios, storage sheds, and recreational
Structures may occupy no more than a total of 25% of the space occupied by
the main permitted Use and shall have the same roof profile, materials and
color and exterior finish, materials, color and architectural style as the
main Structure .



   124.36(G)   The maximum Impervious Area on a Single-Family
residential Lot shall not exceed 60%.



   124.36(H)   In making a determination of an Accessory Use , the City
Manager may require the Applicant to provide evidence that said Use meets all
of the criteria above.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.37  PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINICS.



   Pain Management Clinics are prohibited from On-Site dispensing of
controlled substances that are identified in Schedules II, III, or IV in F.S.
§§ 893.03, 893.035 or 893.0355, unless otherwise expressly permitted by law.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.37.1  ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.



   124.37.1(A)   Location.



   124.37.1(A)(1)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations installed as an
accessory structure shall be permitted in all zoning categories, in
accordance with the requirements below.



   124.37.1(A)(2)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in Single-
Family Residential Districts (SF) shall be limited to personal use and shall
not be used for purposes of wholesale or retail sales. All components of the
Electric Vehicle Charging Station shall be completely concealed from view,
located inside the residential garage and shall be limited to Electric
Vehicle Charging Level 1 or Level 2 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations only.



   124.37.1(A)(3)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in Multiple
Family Districts (MF) shall be limited to personal use and shall not be used
for purposes of wholesale or retail sales and shall be limited to Electric
Vehicle Charging Level 1 or Level 2 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations only.



   124.37.1(A)(4)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in the
Industrial District (I-1) shall be limited to Electric Vehicle Charging Level
2 or Level 3 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations only.



   124.37.1(A)(5)   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in all zoning
districts other than those provided above shall be limited to Electric
Vehicle Charging Level 2 Electric Vehicle Charging Stations only.



   124.37.1(B)   Required Parking.  Five percent of the required
parking spaces may be designated an Electric Vehicle Charging Station.



   124.37.1(C)   Battery Charging Station Requirements.  Battery
Charging Stations shall:



   124.37.1(C)(1)   be silver or black in color;



   124.37.1(C)(2)   be no higher than 72 inches from the finished
floor/grade;



   124.37.1(C)(3)   contain a retraction device, coiled cord, or a
place to hang cords and connectors above the ground surface;



   124.37.1(C)(4)   include, except in Single- Family Residential
Districts (SF), the following: (a) voltage and amperage levels; (b) usage
fees, if any; (c) safety information; and (d) contact information to report
issues relating to the operation of the equipment;



   124.37.1(C)(5)   be elevated or designed so that all electrical
components are 12 inches above the 100 year flood plain; and



   124.37.1(C)(6)   be listed by a nationally recognized testing
laboratory in compliance with Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 2202 “Standard
for Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging System Equipment,”  Florida Building
Code, Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Standards for Charging Stations:
J1772, “Electrical and Mechanical Aspects of the Cord Set,” J2293
“Standard for the Electric Vehicle Energy Transfer System,” and National
Electrical Code (NEC)  Standards for Battery Charging Stations.



   124.37.1(D)   Signage.  A sign may be posted at the Electric
Vehicle Charging Station stating “Electric Vehicle Charging Station”
except in Single-Family Residential (SF) Districts. Signs shall be 24 inches
wide by 18 inches high. Color and letter size specifications shall meet the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) requirements for sign
designation D9-11bP (Electric Vehicle charging).



   124.37.1(E)   Process for review.  Prior to the installation of an
Electric Vehicle Charging Station the property owner shall obtain the
required permit(s) from the City.



(Ord. 2012-13, passed 8-20-2012; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 4-4-2016)



§ 124.37.2  OUTDOOR STORAGE.



   The storage of materials, or storage for work in progress, finished
products, machinery or equipment outside of an enclosed Building may be
allowed as an accessory use by special exception. All Outdoor storage shall
be indicated on a site plan and buffered from adjacent properties in
accordance with the requirements of the Code. If Outdoor storage is present
but not reflected on an approved site plan or added to an existing Building,
a new site plan or site plan amendment is required.



   124.37.2(A)   Generally.  The establishment of Outdoor storage may
be permitted as an accessory use by special exception when it can be done in
harmony with the surrounding properties. To provide for its appropriateness,
site standards are identified for Outdoor storage. The objectives of these
standards are as follows:



   124.37.2(A)(1)   To minimize the impact of the proposed storage
area; and



   124.37.2(A)(2)   To maintain architectural compatibility with the
main Structure.



   124.37.2(B)   Standards.



   124.37.2(B)(1)   Must be fully screened from view;



   124.37.2(B)(2)   Screening must be architecturally compatible with
the main Structure;



   124.37.2(B)(3)   Height of screening may not exceed main Structure;



   124.37.2(B)(4)   Parking must be provided for the enclosure at the
same rate as required for the Use of the main Structure; and



   124.37.2(B)(5)   All Setback requirements of the district where the
Use is located apply.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-13, passed 6-20-2016)



NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 124.38  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.



   124.38(A)   Non-conforming Use of a conforming Structure.  The
lawful non-conforming Use of a Structure may be continued, although such Use
does not conform to the regulations of an applicable zoning district within
which the Building is located. Any such use shall only be changed to a
permitted Use. A non-conforming Use shall not be expanded. If the
non-conforming Use is Abandoned, any further use of said Building shall
conform to the regulations of the applicable zoning district.



   124.38(B)   Conforming Use of a non-conforming Structure.  A lawful
non-conforming Structure may be utilized for any Use that conforms to the
regulations of the applicable zoning district within which the Structure is
located. Structural alterations may only be made when they do not increase
the degree of non-conformity of the Building.



   124.38(C)   Non-conforming Use of a non-conforming Structure.  The
lawful non-conforming Use of a lawful non-conforming Structure may be
continued although such Use and Structure do not conform to the regulations
of the applicable zoning district within which the Structure is located.
However, neither the Use nor the Structure shall be expanded. If the
non-conforming Use is Abandoned, any further Use of said Structure shall
conform to the regulations of the applicable zoning district.



   124.38(D)   Non-conforming Use of land. The lawful non-conforming
Use of land may be continued although such Use does not conform to the
regulations of the applicable zoning district within which the land is
located. However, no such Use shall be enlarged, intensified or extended to
occupy a greater area of land, nor shall the Use be reinstated following
abandonment. Any such Use shall only be changed to a permitted Use within the
applicable zoning district. A non-conforming Use shall not be moved in whole
or part to an adjacent property not already containing such Use. In addition,
the land which contains the non-conforming Use shall not be subdivided in
order to continue such a Use.



   124.38(E)   Maintenance.  Necessary maintenance may be made to any
non-conforming Structure, provided no structural alterations are made.
Further, such work in any 12-month period shall not exceed 25% of the value
of such Structure as shown on the Broward County tax assessment records or as
established by an independent appraiser who is a designated member of a
nationally recognized professional appraiser’s organization.



   124.38(F)   Repair of damage.  Any non-conforming Structure that
becomes damaged to an extent of 50% or more of the number of Structures on
site or of its value as shown on the Broward County tax assessment records,
by fire, flood, explosion, wind, war, riot or any other act of God or man,
shall not be reconstructed or used or occupied except as provided in the
applicable zoning district. In addition, if any non-conforming Structure
becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance,
and is declared by the duly authorized City official to be unsafe or unlawful
by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored,
repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.



   124.38(G)   Compliance with regulations.  Nothing in this Section
shall diminish the responsibility of an Owner to maintain his or her Use or
Structure in full compliance with all other City, county, State or federal
regulations or licensing procedures.



   124.38(H)   Establishment of non-conformity.  For the purpose of
this Section, the mere possession of a valid approval to Use land or
Buildings or valid license to do so without actual demonstrable Use of such
land or Structure is an insufficient basis to establish lawful non-conformity.



   124.38(I)   Abandonment of a non-conforming Structure or Use.  If a
non-conforming Structure or Use is Abandoned, removed, discontinued, or
ceases (except when government action impedes access to the Premises), then
any and every future Use of the Structure or land shall be in conformity with
the applicable land Development regulations. All material and equipment
associated with the Abandoned non-conformity shall be completely removed from
the Premises by its Owner. A non-conforming Structure or Use shall be
considered Abandoned or having ceased when the Use has been discontinued for
a period of 180 consecutive days.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 124.40  TENTS.



   124.40(A)   No tent shall be erected, used, or maintained except for
temporary recreational activities.



   124.40(B)   Tents for special events shall require a permit in
accordance with §§ 100.06 et seq.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.41  OUTDOOR SALES.



   All display or sale of merchandise must be conducted within a
completely enclosed Building except where specifically permitted or pursuant
to a special event permit issued pursuant to Chapter 100 of this Code of
Ordinances. Except where specifically permitted, the display or sale of
merchandise shall not be conducted within any Public or Private Right-Of-Way
, required parking or Traffic circulation area, fire lane or any Landscaped
area. Permits may not be issued more often than once each six months and may
not be for a duration greater than 14 days.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.42  OUTDOOR MANUFACTURING AND SERVICES.



   The manufacturing, assembly and/or repair of goods are prohibited from
being performed outside of a permanent fully enclosable Structure .



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.43  TEMPORARY SALES/RENTAL/LEASING OFFICES.



   124.43(A)   Temporary sales/rental/leasing offices may be erected
and used on the plot of a residential or nonresidential project during
Construction of the project. Such temporary sales/rental/leasing offices
shall be removed within 30 days after the earliest of:



   124.43(A)(1)   The permanent sales/rental/leasing office has
received a Certificate Of Occupancy ;



   124.43(A)(2)   The certificate of completion has been issued for the
last nonresidential Building on the site of a nonresidential project;



   124.43(A)(3)   The last unit within a residential Development has
received a Certificate Of Occupancy ;



   124.43(A)(4)   Two years from the Building Permit issuance date for
the sales/rental/leasing office; or



   124.43(A)(5)   The expiration of the Building Permit .



   Time extensions may be granted by the City Commission in its sole
discretion.



   124.43(B)   Any permit application for a temporary
sales/rental/leasing office shall require site plan approval.



   124.43(C)   A temporary sales/rental/leasing office that is located
within a permanent Structure , i.e., model home, may remain on the site until
the sale of the property.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.44  TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS AND STORAGE UNITS.



   Temporary Construction trailers and temporary storage units for
materials to be used for On-SiteConstruction may be placed on a property
after issuance of a Development Order , subject to the following limitations:



   124.44(A)   The location of all trailers, access to the trailers,
size of trailers parking and other information shall be submitted to the City
Manager for approval.



   124.44(B)   No sales or leasing shall be conducted from these
trailers.



   124.44(C)   All trailers shall be removed prior to the issuance of
the certificate of completion or the first Certificate Of Occupancy ,
whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



REGULATIONS



§ 124.47  LOT SIZE, HEIGHT AND SETBACKS.



   124.47(A)   Dimension requirements.



 

Single-Family     



Zoning District

 

Min. Lot Size

 

Min. Lot Frontage

 

Max. Height

 

Front

 

Rear

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Minimum S.F.






R1

 

4,000 s.f.

 

25 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

5 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

1,200




R2

 

7,150 s.f.

 

35 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

5 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

1,200




R3

 

7,500 s.f.

 

35 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

7.5 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

1,200




R4

 

Lot of record

 

Lot of record

 

35 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

7.5 ft. (5 ft. for lots less than 60 ft. in width)

 

25 ft.

 

1,200




RE

 

10,000

 

45 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

1,200




RZ

 

4,000 s.f.

 

25 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

0/10 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

1,200



Multi-Family     



Zoning District

 

Min. Lot Size

 

Min. Lot Frontage

 

Max. Height

 

Front

 

Rear

 

Side

 

Min. Unit S.F.

 

Building Separation




MF1

 

5 acres

 

-

 

35 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

1 br 750 s.f., 2 br 900 s.f., 150 s.f. each add. br

 

15 ft.




MF2

 

5 acres

 

-

 

50 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

1 br 750 s.f., 2 br 900 s.f., 150 s.f. each add. br

 

15 ft.




MF3

 

5 acres

 

-

 

100 ft.

 

45 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

1 br 750 s.f., 2 br 900 s.f., 150 s.f. each add. br

 

15 ft.




MF4

 

10 acres

 

-

 

150 ft.

 

45 ft.*

 

40 ft.*

 

15 ft.*

 

1 br 750 s.f., 2 br 900 s.f., 150 s.f. each add. br

 

15 ft.



* For any Lot within the MF4 district that has Frontage on two Streets, the
Front Setback shall be measured from the shorter of the property lines
abutting a Street and the Side Setback shall be measured from the longer of
the property lines abutting a Street. Lots within the MF4 district having
Frontage on two Streets shall be exempt from the double Frontage requirements
provided in § 124.48(B) and § 124.50.




 



 

Nonresidential



Zoning District

 

Min. Lot Size

 

Max. Height

 

Front

 

Rear

 

Side






I-1

 

2 acres

 

35 ft.

 

50 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.




O-1

 

1 acre

 

65 ft.

 

50 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.




C-1

 

1 acre

 

35 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.




CF

 

1 acre

 



 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.




GC

 

Existing

 

42 ft.

 

100 ft.

 

100 ft.

 

100 ft.




CV

 

Existing

 

Existing

 

Existing

 



 






AE

 

Existing

 

Existing

 

35 ft.

 



 







 



   124.47(A)(1)   Platted lots.  Properties platted prior to January
21, 2003 shall be deemed to meet the minimum lot size requirements of the
applicable zoning district.



   124.47(B)   Setback Encroachments.  Every part of every required
yard Setback shall be open and unobstructed except as hereinafter provided or
as otherwise permitted in this Code.



   124.47(B)(1)   Mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to
air conditioning units, Irrigation and swimming pool equipment, may not
project over 60 inches from the Building wall into a required minimum yard
Setback, except generators. Generators may encroach no more than 50% from the
building wall into a required minimum rear or side yard Setback and shall be
prohibited within five feet of the adjacent front plane of the house. 
Setbacks from the Building and any operable openings shall be governed by the
Florida Building Code. All generator fuel tanks shall be located below ground.



   124.47(B)(2)   Unenclosed and unroofed patios or decks may be
located in a required side or rear yard to within five feet of a plot line or
dedicated easement in accordance with §§ 120.01 and 120.02.



   124.47(B)(3)   Accessory Buildings and Uses shall require the same
Setbacks as principal Buildings except as follows:



   124.47(B)(3)(a)   Side and rear yard Setbacks for Single-Family and
Duplex Lots, on Lots not on a Corner, may be reduced to five feet for
Accessory Buildings and Uses when located on the rear half of the plot behind
the principal Structure provided no encroachment onto a recorded easement
would be created.



   124.47(B)(3)(b)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code,
in agricultural and estate zoning districts Accessory Buildings and
Structures for the housing or shelter of Animals shall require a minimum
Setback of 50 feet from all plot lines.



   124.47(B)(4)   In residential districts accessory Structures may not
exceed 12 feet in Height.



   124.47(B)(5)   Roof overhangs may not project more than 18 inches
into a required yard (24 inches if the distance to the property line is ten
feet or greater).



   124.47(C)   Rooftop Equipment.  No portion of any Rooftop equipment
may project above the Parapet or screening including all mechanical,
electrical equipment, vents and stacks.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-12, passed 6-18-2012; Am. Ord,
2014-19, passed 8- 18-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord.
2016-14, passed 7-5-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-17, passed 9-12-2016; Am. Ord.
2018-05, passed 6-4-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 7-2-2018; Am. Ord.
2018-14, passed 11-19-2018)



§ 124.48  SUPPLEMENTAL SETBACK REGULATIONS.



   124.48(A)   Determination of yards.  When the definitions of yards
do not clearly determine the front, side or rear yard, the City Manager shall
be guided by the pattern of Development in the vicinity of the Lot and the
platting of the lots in question in determining what is the applicable yard.



   124.48(B)   Double Frontage lots.  The required front yard shall be
provided on each Street Frontage.



   124.48(C)   Establishment of setbacks for Single-Family and Duplex
units.  The required front yard, rear yard and side yard setbacks shall be
those specified in § 124.47(A), unless the existing structure as of June 18,
2012 has lesser setbacks.  In those instances, the required setback shall be
the plane of the house.  This section shall apply to all principal or
accessory structure additions.  In the event the entire structure is
rebuilt, the replacement structure shall be constructed on the same
foundation footprint that exists or to the requirements of 124.47(A),
whichever is less restrictive.  In all cases, such structures shall be of
the same style and character of the neighborhood.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-12, passed 6-18-2012)



§ 124.49  EXCLUSION FROM HEIGHT LIMITS.



   Non-illuminated and non-moving architectural features, vertical
attachments above the Height of the Structure , and Flagpoles, all of which
are not a part of the Structure , may exceed the permissible Height limit in
any nonresidential district by not more than 25%.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.50  DOUBLE FRONTAGE REGULATIONS.



   Double Frontage lots shall be subject to the following requirements:



   124.50(A)   All fronts of Buildings shall face the same direction;



   124.50(B)   No vehicular access from the rear of the Building ;



   124.50(C)   The Rear Setback shall be the same as the required Front
Setback; and



   124.50(D)   All Accessory Structures shall be screened.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.51  LAND USE SEPARATION.



   124.51(A)   Generally.  It is the intent of these provisions to
establish suitable minimum separation between residential and nonresidential
Uses in order to accomplish the following:



   124.51(A)(1)   To better reinforce compatible Development with
adjacent residential and nonresidential land Uses , particularly low-density
residential Uses through proper land Use transitions and separation
techniques.



   124.51(A)(2)   To provide more adequately for the proper siting of
nonresidential Accessory Uses such as loading, refuse storage, parking,
mechanical equipment, and Exterior Lighting that can be the cause for noise,
dust, glare, and other nuisances or inconveniences in proximity to
low-density residential areas.



   124.51(A)(3)   To provide unobstructed minimal space for fire
access, driveways, and service roads to service nonresidential activities.



   124.51(A)(4)   To provide unobstructed space for adequate
Landscaping to screen Uses that adjoin residential settings.



   124.51(B)   Separation characteristics.



   124.51(B)(1)   Separations shall be provided between all residential
and nonresidential Uses . Nonresidential Uses shall include, but not be
limited to, office, Commercial, Institutional, industrial, and other like
types of Uses that generate Traffic, noise, glare, or other nuisance-like
activities. Where a nonresidential Use is allowed in a multi family district,
this separation requirement is not applicable.



   124.51(B)(2)   Separations shall be a minimum of 100 feet wide on
all adjacent sides exclusive of Street facings. When a MF4 zoned property
abuts a Single-Family zoned property, separation shall also be a minimum of
100 feet wide to be measured from the nearest multi family Building to the
nearest Single Family zoned property line. Landscaping in separations shall
be a minimum of 50 feet in width to permit minimum space for the creation of
Landscape berms, mounds, and the planting of vegetation including shade Trees
and Hedge materials. The width of the separation shall increase five feet for
every ten feet, or fraction thereof, the Height of the Building exceeds 30
feet.



   124.51(B)(3)   The City may require other means of separation
including masonry walls to ward off noise and/or visually screen
nonresidential properties from residential, after review of and in accordance
with the guidelines set forth in subsection 124.51(A) of this Section. All
Landscape areas shall be established beyond any and all required Utility ,
drainage, or other easements that would compromise the establishment of dense
Landscaping without interfering with Utilities .



   124.51(B)(4)   The following are permitted only in areas that lie
beyond the required Landscaped portions of the separation area:



   124.51(B)(4)(a)   Fences, walls, and Hedges .



   124.51(B)(4)(b)   Parking.



   124.51(B)(4)(c)   Service drives.



   124.51(B)(4)(d)   Utility easements.



   124.51(B)(4)(e)   Drainage easements.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-17, passed 9-12-2016)



§ 124.52  LIGHTING STANDARDS.



   124.52(A)   General provisions.  Lighting shall not be used as
advertising nor shall it draw more attention to the area at night than during
the day. Lighting shall be compatible with the neighborhood.



   124.52 (B)   Measurement.  Footcandles shall be measured with a
direct reading portable low range light meter having an accuracy range of
within plus or minus 8% at 1.2 Footcandles. The accuracy of the meter shall
be certified by an independent commercial photometric laboratory within one
Year of the date of its Use. The horizontal illuminance readings shall be
taken at the surface of the roadway.



   124.52(C)   Standards.  All parking facilities, exterior site
areas, and private roadways to be developed in the future shall be
illuminated according to the standards contained herein:



   124.52(C)(1)   Intensity of illumination.  The current edition of
the IESNA Lighting Handbook, published by the Illuminating Engineering
Society, is the standard to be used by the architect or engineer as a guide
for the design and testing of lighting. The standards contained therein shall
apply unless standards developed and adopted by this Section or subsequent
amendments are more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive standards
shall apply.



   124.52(C)(1)(a)   For exterior parking facilities, the intensity of
illumination shall provide an average maintained illumination of not less
than one Footcandle equal to one lumen per square foot at grade level, and
shall be well distributed in the pavement areas; however, at no point shall
illumination be less than one-half Footcandle of light measured at grade
level. The maximum to minimum Footcandle level shall not exceed a 12 to one
(12:1) ratio and the average to minimum Footcandle level shall not exceed a
four to one (4:1) ratio.



   124.52(C)(1)(b)   Garage parking facilities shall provide an average
intensity of illumination of not less than 50 Footcandles at the entrance
area (the drive aisle and any adjacent parking stalls, and from the portal or
physical Building line to 60 feet inside the Structure ), ten Footcandles in
Traffic lanes, and five Footcandles in storage areas.



   124.52(C)(1)(c)   Automatic teller machines (ATMs) shall be provided
with a maintained minimum 15 Footcandles at the face and ten Footcandles on
all horizontal surfaces within ten feet of the face of the ATM. An average
horizontal illumination of three Footcandles at grade level shall be provided
within a 60-foot radius of exterior units.



   124.52(C)(1)(d)   Along private roadways serving a new Development
where inadequate or no lighting exists, developers shall be required to
install Street lights with a maintained minimum of one-half Footcandle of
light measured at grade level. The maximum to minimum Footcandle level shall
not exceed a 12 to one (12:1) ratio and the average to minimum Footcandle
level shall not exceed a four to one (4:1) ratio.



   124.52(C)(2)   Parking facility lighting plan.  All site plans for
Buildings to be constructed after the effective date of this Section must be
accompanied by a parking facility lighting plan. The lighting plan shall be
certified by a licensed architect or a licensed professional engineer as
providing illumination in accordance with the applicable minimum standards
set forth in subsection 124.52(C)(1) above. Subsequent Construction must
comply with said lighting plan.



   124.52(C)(3)   Automatic devices required; hours of illumination. 
All required illumination shall be controlled by automatic devices:



   124.52(C)(3)(a)   For business Uses with exterior or garage parking
facilities, the required illumination shall be provided at least 30 minutes
after sunset until sunrise.



   124.52(C)(3)(b)   Any parking facility that serves a residential Use
must maintain the minimum levels of illumination established by this Section
through the use of natural or artificial light 24 hours per day.



   124.52(C)(4)   Metal halide or Light Emitting Diodes (LED) lighting
only.  The only lighting permitted shall be metal halide or LED.



   124.52(C)(5)   Shading and screening.  In order to minimize
offensiveness to persons on neighboring property and to eliminate
distractions to and temporary blinding of drivers of vehicles passing
illuminated property, all artificial parking Lot or site area lighting shall
either be shaded, recessed, or screened in a manner that eliminates spillover
of lighting onto adjacent property and public Rights-Of-Way. Spillover,
measured at the property line, shall not exceed one-half Footcandle vertical
or horizontal illumination onto adjacent properties, light measured at grade
level, and shall measure zero Footcandle vertical or horizontal ten feet into
adjacent property. In no case shall lighting, either pole-mounted or
Building-mounted, be pointed toward the perimeter of the area being
illuminated. Roof mounted lighting is prohibited.



   124.52(C)(6)   Parking lot lighting.  All parking lot lights shall
be dark sky compliant and shall be horizontal to the ground.



   124.52(C)(7)   Letters of compliance required.  The lighting
installation shall not be placed in permanent Use until a letter of
compliance from a licensed professional engineer or architect has been
provided stating that installation has been field-checked and meets the
requirements as stated above.



   124.52(C)(8)   Compliance time limits.  All properties that have
illumination standards that do not comply with this Section shall be required
to be in compliance within 180 days of its adoption.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord.
2017-13, passed 9-25-2017)



§ 124.53  STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED.



   No Lot may be built upon unless it is accessible by a designated public
or private Right-Of-Way that is paved for vehicular and pedestrian Use and
complies with the City’s Engineering Standards.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.54  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.



   124.54(A)   Off-street parking required.



   124.54(A)(1)   Every Building , Use , or Structure instituted or
erected shall be provided with off-street parking facilities in accordance
with the provisions of this Section for the Use of occupants, employees,
visitors, or patrons.



   124.54(A)(2)   All existing off-street parking facilities and all
off-street parking facilities instituted shall be maintained and continued as
an Accessory Use as long as the BuildingUse with which the off-street parking
facilities are associated continues to exist.



   124.54(A)(3)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code,
when any Building is modernized, altered, or repaired, and provided there is
no net increase in floor area, capacity, density, or change of any use, no
additional parking space shall be required.



   124.54(A)(4)   When any Building or Use , either existing prior to
the effective date of this Section or constructed or instituted subsequent to
the effective date of this Section is changed in Use or occupancy, or is
increased in capacity, floor area, or density, the minimum amount of
off-street parking spaces required by this Section shall be provided for the
Gross Floor Area occupied by any new Use or occupancy and for any increased
floor area or capacity or overall density. Any such change in Use or
occupancy or increase in floor area, capacity, or density shall also comply
with requirements of the City Code and land Development regulations. If a
site plan was approved under a prior Code that required a lesser amount of
off-street parking than is currently required but excess parking was
provided, then the excess parking spaces can be applied to meet the current
code requirements for a proposed change of Use on all or a portion of the
site plan. A tabulation of the allocation of the excess spaces will be
maintained by the City. When all of the original excess spaces have been
allocated, no Uses that require additional parking may be permitted without a
shared parking analysis and agreement or variance is approved by the City
Commission.



   124.54(A)(5)   It shall be unlawful for any Owner or operator of any
Building , Structure , or Use affected by this Section to discontinue,
change, or dispense with the required parking facilities, apart from the
discontinuance, sale, or transfer of such Structure or Use , without
establishing alternative vehicle parking facilities which meet the
requirements of this Section. It shall be unlawful for any Person, firm, or
corporation to occupy such Building or Structure for any purpose without
providing the off-street parking facilities to meet the requirements of and
be in compliance with this Section. Failure to maintain the required
off-street parking facilities in accordance with this Section shall
constitute grounds for revocation of any certificate of Use issued for Use of
the premises.



   124.54(B)   Location, character, and size.



   124.54(B)(1)   Location.  The off-street parking facilities
required by this Section shall be located on the same plot or Parcel Of Land
such facilities are intended to serve. No parking space is permitted to be
located beneath any portion of a nonresidential Building that is occupied, or
capable of being occupied, unless such parking space is completely enclosed
by walls that match the Building face that each wall is a part of.



   124.54(B)(2)   Size.  Each parking space and aisle width shall not
be less than the parking dimension standards depicted in the table below,
“Minimum Space Requirements at Various Parking Angles for Self-Parking
Facilities.” If a Parking Aisle requires access for Emergency vehicles,
garbage trucks, or trucks moving to or from a loading area, that Parking
Aisle shall be at least 20 feet wide.



   124.54(B)(3)   Access.  All required parking spaces shall not be
directly accessible from a public or private Street, alley, or recorded
ingress and egress easement. All off-street parking areas shall be designed
to permit safe maneuvering of vehicles, and each space shall be accessible
without driving over or through any other parking space, loading area, or
fire lane except for Single-Family detached Dwellings , Duplex Dwellings ,
Villas, and Townhouses having a carport or garage as part of the Dwelling
Unit. No parking space shall be designed to permit backout parking onto a
Public Right-Of-Way or across a Sidewalk, pedestrian crosswalk, or other area
of high pedestrian concentration. This provision shall not apply to
Single-Family detached Dwellings , Duplex Dwellings , or Villas and
Townhouses which have an attached carport or garage as part of the Townhouse
unit.



   124.54(B)(4)   Dead end parking.  Dead end Parking Aisles in excess
of 50 linear feet shall be prohibited unless a turnaround or cul-de-sac
adequate for Public Right-Of-Way is provided. This requirement shall not
apply to residential Development .



   124.54(B)(5)   Parking space designation.  All required off-street
parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by four-inch-wide, painted
striping (white on asphalt, pavers and concrete), except for Single-Family
detached and Duplex Dwellings , and Villa and TownhouseDwellings which have
an attached carport or garage as part of the Villa or Townhouse unit.
Nonresidential Uses in rural and agricultural districts shall require bumper
guards or wheel stops in lieu of striping where unpaved parking areas are
permitted. Parking stalls which abut Landscaped areas, Sidewalks, Structures
, or property lines shall be designed with bumper guards, wheel stops, or
contiguous curbing. The required bumper guards, wheel stops, or curbing shall
be located a minimum of two and one-half feet from any Landscaped area,
Sidewalk , or property line. Where wheel stops are not utilized, the concrete
curbing must be FDOT Type “D” or Type “F” curbing.



   124.54(B)(6)   Garage entrances.  No required off-street parking
space may be located in front of any garage entrances or other loading area
in a nonresidential Building, except self-storage Warehouses. Such area may,
however, be used to satisfy off-street loading requirements of this Section,
providing sufficient driveway or aisle width according to the table below is
provided adjacent to such Off-Street Loading Area.



   124.54(B)(7)   Setbacks.



   124.54(B)(7)(a)   Nonresidential.  All driveways and Parking Aisles
shall be at least five feet from any main or Accessory Buildings or
Structures if curbed, and at least ten feet if uncurbed. Parking areas at the
rear of industrial Uses which include or are adjacent to loading areas may be
permitted if adequate protection is provided by bollards.



   124.54(B)(7)(b)   Residential. All driveways and parking spaces for
one-family attached and detached Dwellings on separate plots or lots of
record shall be set back at least two and one-half feet from any side
property line. Where the driveway is flared with a radius, the Setback shall
be measured from the commencement of the flare to the property line.



   124.54(B)(8)   Drainage.  All off-street parking facilities
required by this Section shall be drained and contained within the property
so as not to cause any nuisances on adjacent or public property and shall be
in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate enforcing agency.



   124.54(B)(9)   Identification of parking lots.  Signage shall
comply with the U.S.D.O.T. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and all
applicable sections of the City Code governing signage.



   124.54(B)(10)   Tables and diagrams.



 


MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS AT VARIOUS PARKING ANGLES FOR SELF-PARKING
FACILITIES




A

 

B

 

C

 

D

 

E

 

F

 

G




Parking Angle

 

Stall Width

 

Stall Depth

 

Aisle Width*

 

Curb Length

 

Half Bay

 

Full Bay






*0 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

9.0 ft.

 

12.0 ft.

 

23.0 ft.

 

21.0 ft.

 

30.0 ft.




2.0 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

14.6 ft.

 

11.0 ft.

 

26.3 ft.

 

25.6 ft.

 

40.2 ft.




22.5 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

15.2 ft.

 

11.0 ft.

 

26.3 ft.

 

25.6 ft.

 

41.4 ft.




30 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

16.8 ft.

 

12.0 ft.

 

18.0 ft.

 

28.8 ft.

 

45.6 ft.




40 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

18.5 ft.

 

12.0 ft.

 

14.0 ft.

 

30.5 ft.

 

49.0 ft.




45 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

19.1 ft.

 

15.0 ft.

 

12.7 ft.

 

34.1 ft.

 

53.2 ft.




50 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

19.6 ft.

 

15.0 ft.

 

11.7 ft.

 

34.6 ft.

 

54.2 ft.




60 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

20.1 ft.

 

18.0 ft.

 

10.4 ft.

 

38.1 ft.

 

58.2 ft.




70 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

20.0 ft.

 

19.0 ft.

 

9.6 ft.

 

39.0 ft.

 

59.0 ft.




75 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

19.7 ft.

 

22.0 ft.

 

9.3 ft.

 

41.7 ft.

 

61.4 ft.




80 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

19.3 ft.

 

24.0 ft.

 

9.1 ft.

 

43.3 ft.

 

62.6 ft.




90 degrees

 

9.0 ft.

 

18.0 ft.

 

24.0 ft.

 

9.0 ft.

 

42.0 ft.

 

60.0 ft.



*   Dimensions are for one-way direction movement. Two-way direction
movement requires a minimum of 24 feet in width regardless of parking angle
and dimensions given.




 







 



Fig. 4  Parking Spaces



 







 



Fig. 5  Parallel Parking



   124.54(C)   Drive-Through Facilities.



   124.54(C)(1)   Stacking within any Public Right-Of-Way or primary
accessway shall be prohibited.



   124.54(C)(2)   Egress from a Drive-Through lane onto a Public
Right-Of-Way shall be prohibited.



   124.54(C)(3)   Businesses that provide a Drive-Through service are
required to provide Drive-Through service lanes or stacking spaces for
stacking or queuing, as separate and distinct lanes from the circulation
lanes necessary for entering or exiting the plot.



   124.54(C)(4)   Each Drive-Through lane or stacking space shall be
separated from other On-Site lanes or aisles. Each such Drive-Through lane or
stacking space shall be curbed, striped, marked, or otherwise distinctly
delineated.



   124.54(C)(5)   Drive-Through lanes leading to or from gasoline pumps
or pump islands shall provide a minimum width of 16 feet for one-way entrance
and exit. All Drive-Through lanes which lead to two gasoline pump islands
shall provide a minimum of 24 feet from curb to curb between pumps or pump
islands.



   124.54(C)(6)   All Drive-Through bank facilities shall provide a
minimum nine-foot wide vehicular service position between each Drive-Through
teller facility.



   124.54(C)(7)   A separate and distinct escape lane shall be provided
if necessary to prevent entrapment of vehicles on that portion of the site if
no other reasonable point of egress is available other than through the
Drive-Through Facility. An escape lane shall not be required if the Drive-
Through lane is designed and located in such a way as to be segregated from
the normal Traffic flow of the site, and signed appropriately to prevent
accidental entry.



   124.54(C)(8)   Drive-Through lanes or stacking spaces shall not
conflict or otherwise hamper access to or from any parking space or loading
space.



   124.54(C)(9)   Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly separated from
Drive-Through lanes or stacking spaces.



   124.54(C)(10)   Except for Drive-Through bank facilities and
gasoline pump island Drive-Through lanes as specified above, any other
drive-through lane or stacking space is hereby defined as being ten feet wide
by 22 feet in length.



   124.54(C)(11)   Inbound Drive-Through lanes or stacking spaces shall
be counted from the first stopping point. Outbound Drive-Through lanes or
stacking spaces shall be counted from the last stopping point.



   124.54(C)(12)   The required amount of stacking spaces shall be as
described in subsection 124.54(J). Any business not listed in the subsection
“Amount of off-street parking” shall have the same requirements as the
most similar Use described therein as determined by the City.



   124.54(D)   Plans.  Engineering plans signed and seated by a
Florida registered professional Engineer shall be submitted with every
application for a permit or Development Order for a new Building, an addition
to an existing Building, or for a change in the Use of any existing Building
or plot of land required to provide off-street parking under this Section,
which plan shall clearly and accurately designate the required parking
spaces, access aisles and driveways, and relation to the Uses or Structures
these off-street parking facilities are intended to serve. An off-street
parking data box on the site plan shall list the project’s off-street
parking provided in reference to the satisfaction of all off-street parking
regulations of this Section including proposed Building and site usage and
parking totals showing required versus provided.



   124.54(E)   Calculating required parking.



   124.54(E)(1)   Uses not specifically mentioned.  The parking
requirements for Uses not specifically mentioned shall be the same as
provided in this Section for the most similar Use as determined by the City.



   124.54(E)(2)   Fractional spaces.  When units or measurements
determining the total number of required off-street parking spaces result in
a fractional space, any such fraction shall require a full off-street parking
space.



   124.54(E)(3)   Mixed Uses.  In the case of mixed Uses, the total
requirement for off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the various
Uses computed separately.



   124.54(E)(4)   Gross Floor Area Measurement.  Gross Floor Area
shall mean the Gross Floor Area inside the exterior walls. In stadiums,
sports arenas, religious facilities, bars, and other places of assembly in
which occupants utilize benches, pews, stools, chairs, or other similar
seating facilities, every 24 lineal inches of such seating shall be counted
as one seat for the purpose of computing off-street parking requirements.



   124.54(F)   Shared parking.



   124.54(F)(1)   Properties owned by a single entity or subject to a
cross access/cross parking agreement may apply to the City for approval of
shared parking. The application for shared parking shall include an
independent parking study in a form acceptable to the City which includes but
is not limited to information indicating that the Uses are such that a
sufficient disparity in peak demand for parking spaces exists to support the
concept of shared parking.



   124.54(F)(2)   Required parking spaces may be permitted to be
utilized for meeting the parking requirements of two or more separate
permitted Uses when it is clearly established by the Applicant that the two
or more Uses will utilize the spaces at different times of the day, week,
month, or Year. A recordable covenant, with the correct legal description,
shall be submitted by the owners of the property and the two or more
businesses or Tenants involved in a form acceptable to the office of the City
Attorney. The covenant shall be recorded in the Public Records of Broward
County at the Applicant ’s expense, and shall run with the land. The
covenant shall provide that the Use or portion of a Use that requires the
shared parking in order to obtain the necessary permits or licenses shall
cease and terminate upon any change in their respective schedules of
operation that results in conflicting or overlapping usage of the parking
facilities, and no nonresidential Use may be made of that portion of the
property until the required parking facilities are available and provided.
The covenant shall also provide that the City may collect attorneys’ fees
if litigation is necessary to enforce the requirements of this Section.



   124.54(F)(3)   No part of an off-street parking area required for
any Building or Use by this Section shall be included as a part of an
off-street parking area similarly required for another Building or Use unless
the type of Use indicates that the periods of usage will not overlap or be
concurrent with each other as determined by the City.



   124.54(F)(4)   Site plan amendments that involve a change in Use .
In order to ensure that there is adequate parking within the City, certain
development are required to prepare a shared parking analysis prior to site
plan approval. If such a development submits an application for a site plan
amendment, which proposes to change 20% or more of the square footage of the
approved Uses within the development to a more intense Use , a new shared
parking analysis shall be required prior to approval of the site plan
amendment.



   124.54(G)   Combined off-street parking.  Nothing in this Section
shall be construed to prevent collective provision for, or joint Use of,
off-street parking facilities for two or more Buildings or Uses by two or
more owners or operations, provided that the total of such parking spaces
when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of the
requirements of the several individual Uses computed separately in accordance
with this Section. In such cases, a recorded agreement shall be executed at
the Applicant’s expense.



   124.54(H)   Parking for disabled persons.  All applicable State and
federal laws relating to parking spaces for certain disabled persons in all
public and private parking areas, including minimum dimensions, requirements,
location, and posting of Signs, shall be adhered to on all proposed
developments and parking facilities which require revisions.



   124.54(I)   Amount of off-street parking.



   124.54(I)(1)   The following minimum amounts of off-street parking
shall be provided for all Buildings and Uses :



 


Use

 

Minimum Parking Spaces Required





Adult Bookstore/Adult Novelty Store/Adult Video Store
 
1/200 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area (GFA)


Adult Dancing Establishment
 
1/30 sq. ft. of GFA serving public plus 1/50 sq. ft. of remaining floor area


Adult Theater
 
1/50 sq. ft. of GFA


Adult domination/submission parlor/massage establishment/"encounter
studio/modeling studio
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


Amusement Arcade, game room, billiard center
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


Amusement Center
 
1/400 sq. ft. of GFA


Animal hospital
 
1/150 sq. ft. of GFA


Auto repair
 
4 per service position plus 1 per 600 sq. ft. of separate parts storage floor
area plus 1/50 sq. ft. of all other square footage


Bar, lounge, tavern
 
1/30 sq. ft. of GFA serving public plus 1/50 sq. ft. of remaining floor area


Bowling center
 
5 per lane plus one-half the requirement for any Restaurant, bar, or lounge
area


Cemetery chapel
 
1/50 sq. ft. of GFA


Child Care Facility
(freestanding building only)
 
1 per 400 sq. ft. of GFA not part of any classroom and additional parking at
the rate of 10% of the maximum occupancy of students and one parking space
per child care personnel shall be provided based on the following staff to
student ratio:

 

1. For children from birth or older, but under one year of age, there must be
one child care personnel for every four children.

 

2. For children one year of age or older, but under two years of age, there
must be one child care personnel for every six children.

 

3. For children two years of age or older, but under three years of age,
there must be one child care personnel for every 11 children.

 

4. For children three years of age or older, but under four years of age,
there must be one child care personnel for every 15 children.

 

5. For children four years of age or older, but under five years of age,
there must be one child care personnel for every 20 children.

 

6. For children five years of age or older, there must be one child care
personnel for every 25 children.


Community Center, library
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


Convenience Store
 
1/50 sq. ft. of GFA


Food processing or bottling establishment
 
1/500 sq. ft. of GFA


Funeral home
 
1 space for each 4 seats, minimum 25 spaces


Golf course, private (play limited to members and their guests only
[$1,000.00/yr. minimum membership fee])
 
4 per golf green 1 space per practice tee plus 1/200 sq. ft. of GFA for
clubhouse, pro shop, Restaurant, (all other Accessory Uses per Code
requirements for particular Use)


Golf course, public
 
4 per golf green 1 space per practice tee plus 1/200 sq. ft. of GFA for
clubhouse, pro shop, (all other Accessory Uses per Code requirements for
particular Use)


Government office, bank, financial institution
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


Gym, fitness center
 
1/150 sq. ft. of GFA


Hospital
 
1 per patient bed plus 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA


Hotel/Motel
 
1.1 per room plus 65% of the required amount of parking specified in this
Section for other Uses operated in conjunction with and as part of a
Hotel/Motel


Manufacturing, assembly, general industrial
 
1/400 sq. ft. of GFA plus 1/250 sq. ft. for accessory offices or showroom


Medical, dental, chiropractic, and similar, excluding psychiatrist or
psychologist
 
1/150 sq. ft. of GFA


Movie Theater
 
1 parking space for each 3 seats


Nursing home, residential care facility
 
1 space per 2 beds plus 1/250 sq. ft. for office and administration


Office, Business and professional
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


Office, Cubicle
 
1/50 sq. ft. of GFA


Office, Executive Suites
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA not within a conference room

1/50 sq. ft. of GFA of conference rooms


Office, Real Estate
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


Places of public assembly
 
1 per 3 fixed seats plus 1/150 sq. ft. of area not having fixed seats OR, if
no fixed seats are provided, 1 per 100 sq. ft. of GFA


Plant nursery, free form or other crops
 
3 spaces minimum


Post office, courier service
 
1/50 sq. ft. of customer service area plus 1/200 sq. ft. of remaining floor
area


Private club or lodge
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


Psychiatrist or psychologist office
 
1/200 sq. ft.


Research or testing laboratory
 
1/400 sq. ft. of GFA


Residential, Multi-Family
 
1 space per bedroom + 1 additional space per unit


Residential, One-Family detached
 
2 per unit


Residential, Duplex Dwelling
 
2 per unit


Restaurant (no Bar Area)
 
Greater of 1/100 sq. ft. of GFA or 1 per 2 seats (applies to both indoor and
Outdoor seating areas)


Restaurant with Bar Area
 
Greater of 1/30 sq. ft. of total Bar Area


1/100 sq. ft. of remaining Restaurant GFA or 1 per 2 seats plus 1/30 sq. ft.
of total Bar Area (applies to both indoor and Outdoor areas)


Retail plant nursery, open air produce market
 
1/1,000 sq. ft. of display area open to public


Retail stores, personal service shops not otherwise specified
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


School, Art, musical, dance, or martial arts,
 
1/200 sq. ft. of GFA


School, colleges public or private, trade or vocational
 
2 per classroom, plus 1 per each student of max. design capacity, plus 1 per
200 sq. ft. of GFA not accounted for in classroom or hallway areas


School, preschool, elementary and middle
 
1 per classroom, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. of GFA not accounted for in classroom
or hallway areas


School, Senior high
 
1 per classroom


1 per each 3 students of maximum design capacity plus 1/400 sq. ft. of
auditorium or assembly area


Self storage Warehouse
 
1/1,500 sq. ft.


Sports court
 
2 per court plus parking as required for other Uses on-site


Storage and distribution Warehouse
 
1/750 sq. ft. of GFA under 40,000 sq. ft.


1/1,000 sq. ft. of GFA over 40,000 sq. ft.


(plus accessory offices @ 1/250 sq. ft. for all office finish over 20% of GFA)


Supermarket/grocery store
 
1/150 sq. ft. of retail sales area


Swimming pool facilities
 
1/50 of water area plus 1/100 sq. ft. of all other GFA


Take out Restaurant
 
1/150 sq. ft. of GFA


Telephone exchange, other Buildings housing equipment where no customers are
served
 
1/500 sq. ft. of GFA


Time-share
 
1.5 per unit plus 1 per 10 units for staff




 



   124.54(J)   Stacking spaces necessary per service position or
drop-off point for the provision of this Section shall be determined using
the following table:



 


Type of Facility

 

Inbound Vehicles

 

Outbound Vehicles





Bank
 

6

 

1



Beverage, food
 

6

 

1



Dry cleaning
 

3

 

1



Attendant car wash
 

10

 

6



Automatic car wash
 

6

 

4



Automatic car wash as Accessory Use
 

3

 

2



Gasoline/diesel fuel pump island
 

4

 

1



Elementary, middle, or high school
 

6

 

4



All other facilities
 

4

 

2





 



   124.54(K)   Off-street loading.



   124.54(K)(1)   On the same plot with every Structure or Use
specified herein which is hereafter erected or created, there shall be
provided and maintained adequate space for loading and unloading of
materials, goods, or things, and for delivery and shipping, so that vehicles
for these services may Use this space without interfering with the public Use
of Streets, alleys, and off-street parking areas by pedestrians and vehicles.



   124.54(K)(2)   Where any Structure is enlarged or any Use is
extended so that the size of the resulting occupancy comes within the scope
of this Section, the full amount of off-street loading space shall be
provided and maintained for the Structure or Use in its enlarged or extended
size. Where the Use of a Structure or land or any part thereof is changed to
a Use requiring off-street loading space under this Section, the full amount
of off-street loading space shall be provided and maintained to comply with
this Section.



   124.54(K)(3)   For the purpose of this Section, an off-street
loading space shall be an area at the grade level at least 12 feet wide by 45
feet long with a 14-foot vertical clearance, except that for plots containing
an aggregate amount of less than 10,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area of
Buildings , and except for office Buildings and banks, an off-street loading
space may be 12 feet in width by 25 feet long. Each off-street loading
without crossing or entering any other required off-street loading space
shall be clearly marked as to purpose, and shall be arranged for convenient
and safe ingress and egress by motor truck and/or trailer combination.
Off-street loading spaces shall not be located in a Parking Aisle and shall
not be more than 30 feet from the Building which the off-street loading space
serves. Any pedestrian walkway crossing ingress and egress to an off-street
loading space shall be clearly marked.



   124.54(K)(4)   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and
maintained in accordance with the following schedule:



   124.54(K)(4)(a)   For each retail complex, storage Warehouse
excluding self-storage Warehouses , wholesale establishment, industrial
plant, factory, freight terminal, Restaurant , mortuary, laundry, office
Building , dry cleaning establishment, bank or similar Use which has an
aggregate Gross Floor Area of:



 


Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)

 

Spaces




2,000 but not over 20,000

 

1




20,001 but not over 60,000

 

2




60,001 but not over 120,000

 

3




120,001 but not over 200,000

 

4




200,001 but not over 290,000

 

5




Plus one for each additional 90,000 sq. ft. (or portion thereof) over 290,000
sq. ft.

 

1




 



   124.54(K)(4)(b)   For each auditorium, convention hall, exhibition
hall, museum, hotel, sports arena, stadium, hospital, or similar Use which
has an aggregate Gross Floor Area of:



 


Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)

 

Spaces




Over 20,000 but not over 40,000

 

1




Plus one for each additional 40,000 sq. ft. (or portion thereof) over 40,000
sq. ft.

 

1




 



   124.54(K)(4)(c)   For any Use not specifically mentioned in this
Section, the requirements for off-street loading for a Use which is so
mentioned and to which the unmentioned Use is similar shall apply. Single-
Family and Duplex Dwellings and multiple- FamilyDwellings are not required to
provide off-street loading facilities.



   124.54(K)(5)   Off-street loading facilities supplied to meet the
needs of one Use shall not be considered as meeting off-street loading needs
of any other Use .



   124.54(K)(6)   No area or facility supplied to meet the required
off-street parking facilities for a Use shall be utilized for or be deemed to
meet the requirements of this Section for off-street loading facilities.



   124.54(K)(7)   Nothing in this Section shall prevent the collective,
joint, or combined provision of off-street loading facilities for two or more
Buildings or Uses on the same site, provided that such off-street loading
facilities are equal in size and capacity to the combined requirements of the
several Buildings or Uses and are so located and arranged as to be usable
thereby.



   124.54(K)(8)   Plans for Buildings or Uses requiring off-street
loading facilities under the provisions of this Section shall clearly
indicate the location, dimensions, clearances, and access of all such
required off-street loading facilities.



   124.54(K)(9)   All off-street loading facilities shall be located on
the plot which they are intended to serve.



   124.54(L)   Bicycle Parking.



   124.54(L)(1)   All bicycle racks shall comply with the Association
of Pedestrian and Bicycle Professionals (APBP) bicycle parking provisions.



   124.54(L)(2)   All new non-residential development shall provide end
of trip bicycle facilities. End of trip bicycle facilities may include either
bicycle racks or bicycle lockers. The end of trip bicycle facilities shall be
located at a reasonable location on-site. The minimum number of bicycle
parking spaces shall be the greater of one bicycle parking stall per ten
vehicle parking stalls or four bicycle parking stalls.



   124.54(L)(3)   All new non-residential development and 
redevelopment may substitute up to 5% of the required vehicle parking stalls
for bicycle lockers spaces if indoor shower facilities are provided.



   124.54(M)   Waiver.



   124.54(M)(1)   The City Commission may grant a petition for waiver
for off-street parking requirements for nonresidential properties, provided
the City Commission finds that the parking utilization study and parking
survey submitted by the Applicant demonstrates that adequate parking exists
given the projected and existing use of the Property.



   124.54(M)(2)   It is the responsibility of the Applicant to submit
the necessary documentation to support a petition for waiver pursuant to this
section. At a minimum, the Applicant shall submit the following:



   124.54(M)(2)(a)   Parking utilization study.  The parking
utilization study shall be certified by a Florida licensed Professional
Engineer and shall document the existence of certain facts related to the
projected use of the parking facility and its relationship to surrounding
rights-of-way and properties. The parking utilization study shall include an
inventory of spaces, counts of vehicles parked, the week and day the study
will be conducted, the number of days and duration of the study, the time
intervals for data collection, and an analysis of the results including, but
not limited to, average occupancy, average parking turnover and average
parking duration.  Prior to the submittal of the parking utilization study,
the methodology for conducting the study shall be submitted to the City for
review and approval by the City Traffic Engineer.



   124.54(M)(2)(b)    Parking survey.  The parking survey shall be
performed using the "License Plate Check" method in accordance with
procedures outlined in the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Manual of
Transportation Engineering Studies. Parking occupancy counts shall be
performed in 15-minute intervals unless otherwise approved by the City
Traffic Engineer.  The field data sheets utilized during the parking survey
shall be submitted as part of the parking utilization study.



   124.54(M)(3)   The Applicant shall have the burden of proof which
shall include the burden of going forward with the evidence and the burden of
persuasion on all questions of fact which are to be determined by the City
Commission.



   124.54(M)(4)   The maximum waiver permitted shall not exceed 20% of
the aggregate required parking including all valid waivers and variances
granted on the property.



   124.54(M)(5)   The City Commission may require appropriate
conditions, stipulations, and safeguards as conditions of granting any
waiver. A violation of these conditions, stipulations, and safeguards shall
be deemed a violation of the Code.



   124.54(M)(6)   A waiver granted pursuant to this section shall no
longer be valid upon the termination of the specific use and conditions for
which the waiver has been granted, and shall not run with the land.



   124.54(M)(7)   Whenever a waiver application has been denied, the
City Commission shall not consider any further request for substantially the
same waiver on the same part of the same property for a period of 12 months
from the date of such action. The above time limit may be waived by an
affirmative vote of the City Commission, when the City Commission deems such
action necessary due to changed circumstances to prevent an injustice or to
facilitate the proper Development of the City based upon evidence provided by
the Applicant.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-08, passed 4-2-2012; Am. Ord.
2012-13, passed 8-20-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-21, passed 10-20-2014; Am. Ord.
2015-16, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord.
2016-01, passed 1-19-2016; Am. Ord. 2016-15, passed 7-5-2016; Am. Ord.
2016-19, passed 10-17-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 2-6-2017; Am. Ord.
2017-11, passed 9-13-2017; Am. Ord. 2017-14, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 124.55  RESERVED.



§ 124.56  USE OF PREMISES WITHOUT BUILDINGS.



   Uses without Buildings shall maintain the required Setbacks in the
applicable zoning district.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.57  USE OF RESIDENTIALLY ZONED LAND FOR ACCESS.



   No residentially zoned land shall be used for driveway or vehicular
access purposes to any other plot that is nonresidentially zoned unless
specifically permitted by the City Commission following a public hearing.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 124.60  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   124.60(A)   Unless otherwise required by law, no license or permit
shall be issued by any department, agency or official of the City for the Use
of any premises or the operation of any business, enterprise, occupation,
trade, profession or activity that would involve or constitute a violation of
these zoning regulations.



   124.60(B)   New Construction or Use of land.  The construction of
any new Building or Structure or the initiation of any Use of presently
unused property shall conform to all of the applicable provisions of these
zoning regulations.



   124.60(C)   Additions to an existing Building.  Additions to an
existing Building shall comply with the provisions of these zoning regulations



   124.60(D)   Rehabilitation of existing Buildings.  The
rehabilitation of an existing Building shall comply with the provisions of
these zoning regulations.



   124.60(E)   Change of Use for existing Building and/or land.  Any
change of the Use of a Building or property shall comply with the provisions
of these zoning regulations.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.61  ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Manager shall assign the responsibility of enforcement and
implementation of the provisions of these zoning regulations to the
appropriate employees or agents of the City.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.62  PROCEDURES FOR A TEXT CHANGE OR ZONING DISTRICT CHANGE.



   124.62(A)   A petition for change of text or zoning district may be
submitted by any of the following:



   124.62(A)(1)   City Commission;



   124.62(A)(2)   City Manager;



   124.62(A)(3)   City Attorney; or



   124.62(A)(4)   An Owner of property in the City.



   124.62(B)   All petitions shall be on forms provided by the City
Manager.



   124.62(C)   Public notice shall be provided consistent with the
requirements stated in the Land Development Chapter.



   124.62(D)   Review criteria.  In order to approve a text amendment
or change of zoning district the City Commission must find that the petition
complies with each of the following criteria. The Applicant is required to
provide a report at the time the petition is filed which includes
documentation that the petition complies with each of the below criteria:



   124.62(D)(1)   The amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan;



   124.62(D)(2)   The proposed change will result in Development that
is consistent in scale and character with those within 300 feet of the site;



   124.62(D)(3)   The resulting boundaries of the zoning district are
logically drawn;



   124.62(D)(4)   The proposed change will not reduce property values
in the City;



   124.62(D)(5)   The proposed change will enhance the quality of life
in the City; and



   124.62(D)(6)   There are substantial and compelling reasons why the
proposed change is in the best interests of the City.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.63  ZONING AND PLANNING APPLICATION FEES.



   The City Commission is hereby authorized to impose fees for the filing
and processing of zoning and planning applications, including applications
for variances, special exceptions, razoring, appeals of administrative
interpretations and other zoning related services and all amendments thereto
provided by the City Manager. Such fees shall be set and may be amended from
time to time by resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.64  TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT TAKING OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OR VESTED
RIGHTS.



   124.64(A)   Nothing in this Chapter or Chapter 125 shall be
construed or applied to constitute a temporary or permanent taking of private
property without just compensation or the abrogation of vested rights. Any
property Owner alleging that this Chapter or Chapter 125, as applied,
constitutes or would constitute a temporary or permanent taking of private
property or of an abrogation of vested rights must affirmatively demonstrate
the legal requisites of the claim and may not pursue such a claim in court or
before the City Commission, unless he or she has first exhausted the remedies
as provided in this Section.



   124.64(B)   Prior to pursuing a claim in court or before any
argument is made or evidence is presented to the City Commission regarding an
alleged taking of private property or an abrogation of vested rights, the
property Owner shall file an application with the City Manager for a takings
or vested rights determination. The application shall be accompanied by a fee
as set by resolution of the City Commission and contain a sworn statement as
to the basis upon which the alleged taking or vested rights are asserted. The
City Commission, after a public hearing, shall make a written determination
as to whether the property Owner has established a temporary or permanent
taking of private property or an abrogation of vested rights.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.65  DETERMINATION OF USES NOT LISTED.



   When a requested Use is not specifically listed as either a permitted
Use , prohibited Use or special exception in a zoning district the City
Manager shall determine, based upon the character and intensity of the Use ,
to which listed Use (permitted, prohibited or special exception) it is most
similar and shall treat the requested Use in the same manner as the similar
Use .



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.66  BUILDING PERMITS.



   All applications for Building permits shall be accompanied by a survey
and plan drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the Lot to be built
upon, the size of the Structure to be erected, the Setback lines observed,
and such other information as may be requisite and necessary to provide for
the enforcement of these regulations. A survey required by this section shall
be dated less than one year from the date of the application for Building
permit and prepared by a Florida Professional Surveyor and Mapper, certified
as to meeting the requirements of the applicable section of the Florida
Administrative Code, reflecting existing natural features, such as
topography, vegetation, existing paving, existing Structures, and water
bodies. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant for a single-family home
Property may submit a survey that is dated over one year from the date of the
application for Building permit so as long as the Property has not changed
ownership and the Owner provides an affidavit that no changes occurred since
the date of the survey.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-15, passed 11-19-2018)



§ 124.67  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.



   No land shall be occupied or used and no Building erected or altered
shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever
until a Certificate Of Occupancy , a temporary Certificate Of Occupancy or
certificate of completion shall have been issued by the Chief Building
Official, stating that the premises or Building complies with all the
provisions of these regulations and the applicable codes.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.68  CERTIFICATES OF USE.



   124.68(A)   Generally.  No Use for which a Business Tax Receipt is
required shall be commenced in any zoning category or district unless a
certificate of Use has been issued indicating that the proposed Use is a
permitted Use within the district or zoning category, and that the proposed
occupancy is similar in nature, function or operation to the Uses as
categorized by the Florida Building Code as most recently adopted.



   124.68(B)   Inspections and Reviews.



   124.68(B)(1)   Required.  Zoning review and Building Code
inspections for each discipline within the Florida Building Code shall be
required prior to the issuance of a certificate of Use, unless otherwise
specified in § 124.68(B)(2) or 124.68(B)(3).



   124.68(B)(2)   Recent inspections and reviews completed.  No
additional zoning review or Building Code inspection shall be required for an
applicable Building Code discipline prior to the issuance of a certificate of
Use if a passed final inspection for the premises for the applicable Building
Code discipline was performed for a related Building Permit, certificate of
completion and/or Certificate Of Occupancy, and the certificate of Use for
the premises is applied for within 60 days after the issuance of the related
certificate of completion, Certificate Of Occupancy or closing out of the
Building Permit.



   124.68(B)(3)   Home Occupations.  No inspection shall be required
for a Home Occupation, provided that an affidavit affirming compliance with
§ 80.01 of the Code is submitted to the City, on a form approved by the City
Manager. It is a violation of this Section and punishable as provided in §
2.99 of this Code to falsify the affidavit.



   124.68(C)   Posting required. The original of the certificate of Use
shall be posted in a conspicuous location accessible to the public on the
business premises at all times.



   124.68(D)   Amended Certificate of Use.  A certificate of Use for a
premises may be amended if there is an expansion of the existing space, no
change of Use, and the expanded space then becomes a non-separated part of
the existing space for which the original certificate of Use was issued.



   124.68(E)   Fees.  Fees for certificates of Use shall be set by the
City Commission by resolution.



   124.68(F)   Revocation.  The City Manager shall notify the holder
of any certificate of Use, in writing, of the City’s intent to revoke a
certificate of Use for any of the following reasons:



   124.68(F)(1)   The City has reasonable grounds to believe that the
premises are being used in a manner that is inconsistent with, or contrary
to, the provisions of the City Code or any other applicable code or statute.



   124.68(F)(2)   In the event of a conviction of any Owner, operator,
manager, supervisor, or any employee acting at the direction or with the
knowledge of the Owner, operator, manager, or supervisor, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, for the violation of any criminal statute committed
in conjunction with the business operation.



   124.68(F)(3)   It has been ascertained that the holder of the
certificate of Use falsified any information on the application for the
certificate of Use .



   124.68(F)(4)   The holder of the certificate of Use , or the
holder’s designated manager, operator, or supervisor, refuses to permit an
authorized law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer to inspect the
premises during normal business hours for the purpose of investigating a
complaint which has been filed against the business operation.



   124.68(G)(1)   The notice shall state the following:



      THE HOLDER OF THE CERTIFICATE OF USE SHALL HAVE TEN (10) DAYS
FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTIFICATION TO EITHER BRING THE PREMISES INTO
COMPLIANCE OR TO REQUEST A HEARING, IN WRITING, BEFORE THE CITY COMMISSION.



      IF THE VIOLATION IS NOT CURED OR IF NO WRITTEN REQUEST FOR A
HEARING IS RECEIVED BY THE CITY OF WESTON WITHIN TEN (10) DAYS OF THE DATE OF
THIS NOTIFICATION BY THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER, THE CERTIFICATE OF USE SHALL BE
CONSIDERED REVOKED.



   124.68(G)(2)   If the holder of the certificate of Use requests a
hearing before the City Commission, the certificate of Use shall remain in
effect during the pendency of the action before the City Commission.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 124.69  APPEAL OF A CITY ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION.



   Any substantially affected Person may appeal an order, decision or
interpretation in the enforcement of the regulations of this Chapter and
Chapter 125 subject to the following:



   124.69(A)   The appeal shall be in writing, specifying the grounds
thereof on forms as provided by the City Manager.



   124.69(B)   The appeal shall be filled with the City Manager within
30 days of the date the administrative decision is made.



   124.69(C)   The City Commission shall hear and rule upon the appeal
after a public hearing.



   124.69(D)   Public notice, as required by § 125.06, shall be
provided of the hearing at which the appeal will be heard.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



VARIANCES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS



§ 124.80  VARIANCES.



   124.80(A)   In specific cases where the literal and strict
enforcement of the applicable provisions of these Land Use Regulations or
other regulations or provisions of this Code would result in undue or
unnecessary hardship, the City Commissionn may grant a petition for variance
from said regulations as will provide substantial justice and not be contrary
to the public interest reflected in said regulations, provided the City
Commission makes the following findings:



   124.80(A)(1)   The subject property has unique and special
conditions, not applying generally to other properties in the same zoning
district, which occasion the necessity for the petitioned variance.



   124.80(A)(2)   The Development resulting from the granting of such
variance shall be in harmony with the policies embodied within the City
Comprehensive Plan.



   124.80(A)(3)   The granting of such variance shall be consistent
with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district
regulations governing the property on which approval is granted.



   124.80(A)(4)   The granting of such variance shall not adversely
affect the Use or Development of neighboring properties in accordance with
the applicable zoning district regulations nor hinder or discourage
appropriate Development and Use of adjacent or nearby land and/or Buildings
or impair the value thereof.



   124.80(A)(5)   The literal and strict enforcement of the applicable
provisions of the Land Use Regulations or other provisions of the City Code
would result in undue or unnecessary hardship to the Applicant and would
deprive the Applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by the owners of other
property in the zoning district.



   124.80(A)(6)   The granting of the requested variance will provide
substantial justice and not be contrary to the public interest as reflected
in the applicable regulations.



   124.80(A)(7)   The need for the variance does not arise from
conditions that are personal to the Owner but instead relate to the
uniqueness of the property.



   124.80(A)(8)   The alleged hardship is not self-imposed by the Owner
, prior owners or by any Person having an interest in the property.



   124.80(A)(9)   The variance granted is the minimum variance
necessary for the Applicant to make reasonable Use of the property.



   124.80(B)   It is the responsibility of the Applicant to submit
documentation that addresses the above criteria. The Applicant shall have the
burden of proof which shall include the burden of going forward with the
evidence and the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to
be determined by the City Commission.



   124.80(C)   The City Commission may require appropriate conditions,
stipulations, and safeguards as conditions of granting any variances. A
violation of these conditions, stipulations, and safeguards shall be deemed a
violation of the Code .



   124.80(D)   A variance of the Use or density provisions of these
Land Use Regulations is prohibited.



   124.80(E)   A variance from the provisions of the Sign Chapter shall
be granted to the specific Sign for which the variance has been sought and
shall not run with the land. However, all other variances granted pursuant to
this Section shall run with the land and are not personal to the Owner of the
subject property, and conditions personal to said Owner and not relating to
the uniqueness of the subject property shall not be a valid basis for such
variances. Further, the lack of objections from surrounding property owners,
while persuasive, should be judged in light of the fact that all future
surrounding property will be subject to the permitted variance.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 124.81  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   124.81(A)   Certain Uses are listed as special exceptions and are
permitted in zoning districts subject to the approval of the City Commission.
These Uses are considered basically suitable for the districts in which
listed, but the character and nature of the Uses are such that they may
necessitate controls and safeguards on the manner of establishment and
operation which, by being determined by the City Commission at public
hearing, would better serve the interests of the community and the owners of
the property in question.



   124.81(B)   Applications for special exception shall be reviewed by
the City Commission. All special exceptions will be reviewed based on the
following criteria:



   124.81(B)(1)   The Use is compatible with the existing natural
Environment and other properties within the vicinity.



   124.81(B)(2)   There will be adequate provision for safe Traffic
movement, both vehicular and pedestrian, both internal to the Use and in the
area which will serve the Use .



   124.81(B)(3)   There will be adequate Setbacks , buffering, and
general amenities in order to control any adverse effects of noise, light,
dust, or other potential nuisances.



   124.81(B)(4)   The land area is sufficient, appropriate, and
adequate for the Use as proposed.



   124.81(B)(5)   The proposed special exception Use shall disclose the
square feet of Use sought for approval so that an adequate evaluation can be
made of the special exception Use in keeping with the standards and criteria
of this Chapter. Should any special exception Use seek to expand in size, the
extent of expansion shall undergo special exception Use review as provided in
this Chapter.



   124.81(B)(6)   It is the responsibility of the Applicant to submit
documentation that addresses the above criteria. The Applicant shall have the
burden of proof which shall include the burden of going forward with the
evidence and the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to
be determined by the City Commission.



   124.81(B)(7)   Conditions may be stipulated and made a requirement
in granting any application for a special exception when it is found by the
City Commission to be necessary to further the purpose of the zoning district
or compatibility with other property within the vicinity.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-21, passed 10-20-2014; Am.
Ord. 2017-14, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 124.82  RECORDATION AND EXPIRATION.



   124.82(A)   Approval and Recondition.  Any variance or special
exception approved under the terms of this subchapter shall be in the form of
a resolution adopted by the City Commission and shall be recorded, at the
Applicant’s expense, in the Public Records of Broward County, and shall
include verification by the enforcing official that all terms, conditions,
safeguards, and time limits of the approval have been satisfied.



   124.82(B)   Time limit.



   124.82(B)(1)(a)   When a site plan is required.  Any variance or
special exception authorized by the City Commission shall expire 180 days
after the date of the action on such variance or special exception by the
Commission unless a site plan is approved based upon and incorporating the
variance or special exception; and unless all terms, conditions, and
safeguards of the variance or special exception have been satisfied.
Thereafter, the variance or special exception shall expire when the site plan
expires.



   124.82(B)(1)(b)   When no site plan is required.  For those
variances or special exceptions not requiring an approved site plan, they
shall expire 180 days after the date of the action on such variance or
special exception by the Commission unless a Building permit has been issued
and unless all terms, conditions, and safeguards of the variance or special
exception have been satisfied.



   124.82(B)(2)   Whenever a special exception or variance application
has been denied, the City Commission shall not consider any further request
for substantially the same special exception or variance on the same part of
the same property for a period of 12 months from the date of such action. The
above time limit may be waived by an affirmative vote of the City Commission,
when the City Commission deems such action necessary due to changed
circumstances to prevent an injustice or to facilitate the proper Development
of the City based upon evidence provided by the Applicant .



   124.82(B)(3)   An Applicant seeking a waiver of the time limit for
replication shall submit documentation substantiating the bases for the
waiver of the time limitation, in a form acceptable to the City Manager,
together with the application for special exception or variance. In addition
to the applicable fees for the special exception or variance application,
there shall be an additional fee for the hearing on the waiver of time
limits. Upon receipt of all of the above by the City Manager, the request for
waiver of time limits shall be placed on the next available regular City
Commission agenda, but not earlier than 60 days after the original special
exception or variance application was heard. If the waiver of time limit is
granted, the special exception or variance application shall be heard no
earlier than the next regular City Commission meeting.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



APPENDIX A: TOWN CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT DESIGN GUIDELINES



MASTER PLAN CONCEPTS



The Master Plan developed for Town Center at Weston provides a unique and
pleasing environment for all proposed uses. This Master Plan was developed
through a series of charettes led by Arvida/JMB Partners, the developer of
Weston.



As part of this charette series, Arvida/JMB Partners involved local
architects, landscape architects, in-house land development and management
personnel, members of regional planning councils and local agencies, as well
as a nationally recognized planning consultant, RTKL International, Ltd. and
marketing consultants. The charettes were driven by a desire for Town Center
to be respectful of the adjacent communities, as well as to provide necessary
services to the community (Exhibits 1 & 2). This project would be developed
in a manner that would be both aesthetically pleasing and functionally
responsive within the economic parameters, which would make it a successful
venture for Arvida/JMB Partners. A conceptual design was the final work
product of this series of charettes (Exhibit 3). This conceptual plan
integrates compatible uses, vehicular circulation, pedestrian linkage, and
shared recreational areas to provide visual and functional continuity for the
implementation of Town Center.



Using this conceptual Master Plan and the integration of architectural
footprints as well as functionally responsive parking and service areas, an
illustrative Master Plan is being prepared for Town Center, and will be
submitted as part of the City of Weston’s site plan review process.



All proposed uses, paving, parking and roadways have been designed
considering the highest and best use of the land, ease of access and
community needs. The plan integrates all required stormwater facilities and
utility/infrastructure systems.



Key design criteria used to generate this Master Plan and critical to the
success of Town Center is the use of shared parking. This shared parking
criteria is important in order to minimize the amount of asphalt or
non-pervious areas within Town Center and to allow for the concentration of
green space to be used for buffering as well as both active and passive
public activities while providing the total number of functional parking
spaces required by a shared parking analysis.



USE STANDARDS



The Town Center Core has been divided into major use types (Exhibit 4). The
mix of uses has been established to provide a balanced approach to the
project. This balance will ensure a consistency of quality, provision for
market demand and a compatibility of function to protect and enhance the
Weston community and the development investment within Town Center.



The Town Center, comprised of the Town Center Core and the East and West
Parcels (Exhibit 5), has been analyzed for the location of buildings,
stormwater facilities, surface parking and ingress/egress. Restrictions noted
are in the form of setbacks and buffers from property and/or Right-Of-Way
lines.



   1.   Within parcels, the building setback shall be 20 feet. Within
the Town Center Core, the building setback is 15 feet from the property line,
except buildings along the existing lake shall be set back no less than ten
feet from water’s edge.



   2.   Service areas within parcels and Town Center Core shall be set
back a minimum of ten feet from property line.



   3.   Within the Town Center Core, buildings shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from internal streets.



   4.   Perimeter buffer areas within Town Center shall be:



      a.   A minimum of five feet of pervious area on each parcel
between adjacent parcel and a parking or vehicular use area.



      b.   A minimum of 20 feet within the Town Center Core adjacent
to the east parcel.



      c.   A minimum of 15 feet within the west parcel adjacent to
the Town Center Core.



      d.   A minimum of 25 feet along Bonaventure Boulevard.



      e.   A minimum of ten feet along Three Village Road at the
Town Center Core and 25 feet along Three Village Road at the east parcel.



      f.   A minimum of ten feet along Town Center Circle at the
Town Center Core and 20 feet along Town Center Circle at the west parcel.



   5.   All berm heights are calculated from the adjacent crown of road
elevation.



   6.   All Town Center required buffers along Three Village Road and
Bonaventure Boulevard, excluding the linear park, shall have continuous
screening and include a berm with an average height of three feet. Screen may
consist of berms and/or plantings with shade trees 35 feet on center. Maximum
berm height shall be five feet.



   7.   West service area of supermarket along Town Center Circle shall
have a five-foot or greater berm with continuous hedge and shade trees 25
feet on center.



   8.   Buffer adjacent to the Northwest Retail shall have large palms
or shade trees planted at a minimum 35 feet on center.



   9.   In order to establish a consistent and comprehensive theme,
large palm species (Royals, Bismarks, Phoenix) within minimum seven feet of
wood can be used for required street tree plantings.



   10.   Perimeter buffers shall be installed prior to first building
C.O.



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



To provide for a coordinated image within Town Center, standards for the Town
Center Core and individual parcels outside of the Town Center Core have been
established. Adherence to these standards will provide a high level of
development quality that will ensure the maintenance of Town Center’s
standards for all future development.



The following items are to be specifically addressed:



A.   Entry and Curb Cuts



Parcel entries shall provide for landscaped areas on either side of the
driveway. A change of pavement at the driveway consistent with materials used
within the Town Center Core shall be provided.



   1.   Cross parking and cross access may be provided for between the
Town Center Core and parcels.



   2.   All undivided driveways shall have maximum width of 24 feet.
Divided driveways with medians shall have individual lanes of no more than 15
feet in width. Landscaped driveway medians shall be a minimum of eight feet
in width and planted to the end in compliance with applicable codes.



B.   Sidewalks /Pedestrian Linkage



   1.   A sidewalk and pedestrian linkage system has been designed to
connect open space amenities with various land uses in Town Center. Sidewalks
will be provided by each parcel owner on their property in accordance with
the Master Plan.



   2.   In order to encourage the pedestrian context of Town Center all
parcel sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet wide. Along Main Street
within Town Center Core, sidewalks shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.
Sidewalks will conform in color, finish and jointing with established Town
Center Core standards.



   3.   Canopies for pedestrian zones are encouraged for shading and
scale.



   4.   Sidewalks may be sheet drained, but shall not be used as swales.



   5.   Two percent average maximum cross slope shall be used on
sidewalks.



C.   Roadways /Driveways



   1.   In order to provide a pedestrian friendly environment and
reduce vehicle operating speeds, 11-foot lanes (22-foot total) will be
utilized in areas of high pedestrian concentrations. Roadway transition areas
(from 24 feet to 22 feet) and areas of high pedestrian crossing will be
delineated with contrasting paver block treatment rather than asphalt.



   2.   Driveway spacing will generally conform to the City’s current
land development regulations with the possible exception of delivery vehicle
areas which will be encouraged to be segregated from other vehicle
circulation to the greatest extent possible. Access to such loading areas may
require special design considerations not specifically addressed in the Land
Development Chapter.



D.   On-Grade Parking



   1.   On street parking shall be provided only on Main Street within
the Town Center Core. This will help establish the pedestrian theme of the
Town Center Core.



   2.   No on-street parking is allowed within Town Center parcels.
Parking areas shall be sufficient to serve the business use conducted on each
parcel.



   3.   Within the Town Center Core, no parking area or driveway shall
be less than five feet from the front or side of any building. For areas less
than ten feet in width, landscape material shall be used to transition the
ground to vertical plane.



   4.   Within the parcels, no parking area or driveway shall be less
than ten feet from any building front or less than five feet from any
building side or rear. For areas less than ten feet in width, landscape
material shall be used to transition the ground to vertical plane.



   5.   Cross slopes in parking area shall be one-half percent minimum
and 4% maximum.



   6.   All parcel parking lots, drives and vehicular service areas are
to be curbed, internally drained and paved.



   7.   It is the intention that due to the unique multi-use concept of
Town Center, shared parking facilities will be an integral element of its
success, both functionally and aesthetically. Shared parking areas between
office, retail, restaurant and commercial uses will reduce the amount of open
unused parking areas during non-operating hours of the various uses.



      a.   An independent parking study in a form acceptable to the
City, which includes but is not limited to information indicating that the
uses are such that a sufficient disparity in peak demand for parking spaces
exists to support the concept of shared parking.



      b.   Required parking spaces may be permitted to be utilized
for meeting the parking requirements of two or more separate permitted uses
when it is clearly established that the two or more uses will utilize the
spaces at different times of the day, week, month or year. A recordable
Declaration of Covenants, with the correct legal description, shall be
submitted by Arvida/JMB in a form acceptable to the office of the City
Attorney. The Declaration of Covenants shall be recorded in the Public
Records of Broward County at Arvida/JBM’s expense, and shall run with the
land. The Declaration of Covenants shall provide that the use or portion of a
use, that requires the shared parking in order to obtain the necessary
permits or licenses, shall cease and terminate upon any change in their
respective schedules of operation that results in conflicting or overlapping
usage of the parking facilities, and no nonresidential use may be made of
that portion of the property until the required parking facilities are
available and provided. The Declaration of Covenants shall also provide that
the City may collect attorneys’ fees if litigation is necessary to enforce
the requirements of this section.



      c.   No part of an off-street parking area required for any
building or use by this section shall be included as a part of an off-site
parking area similarly required for another building or use unless the type
of use indicates that the periods of usage will not overlap or be concurrent
with each other as determined by the City.



   8.   Parking lot layouts shall conform to the following dimensions:



      a.   Parking aisles when not located perpendicular to building
entries should have islands with sidewalks located in parking rows for
pedestrian cross traffic.



      b.   Ninety-degree parking is encouraged with a minimum stall
size of nine feet by 18 feet.



      c.   Parallel parking is allowed with a minimum stall size of
nine feet by 23 feet for off-street and ten feet by 23 feet for on street
applications.



      d.   Handicap parking spaces shall be 12 feet by 18 feet.



      e.   Two-way parking area driveways and cross aisles must have
a minimum width of 24 feet.



      f.   Within the Core, 45 degree angle parking may be used with
a minimum stall size of nine feet by 18 feet.



   9.   Parking lot layouts shall provide landscaping in accordance
with the following:



      a.   Parking areas within the Town Center Core shall include a
landscape area at the perimeter. These landscape areas may include sidewalks,
pavers, plantings and grass in order to encourage pedestrian circulation.



      b.   Minimum of 11 feet by 15 feet in size, shall be provided
for every ten parking stalls.



      c.   In the Town Center Core internal landscape islands may
include hardscape, tree plantings and planters with tree and understory
plantings along pedestrian corridors within parking areas.



      d.   Terminal islands, 11 feet wide are to be provided at each
parking row.



      e.   Parcel interior islands shall be 11 feet wide by 15 feet
long separated by no more than ten parking spaces.



      f.   In parcels, terminal islands with walkways shall be 15
feet wide with a minimum nine- foot wide planting area.



      g.   Parcel interior islands with walkways shall be 16 feet
wide with a minimum nine-foot wide planting area.



      h.   Berms and plantings shall be used to screen parking areas.



   10.   In order to encourage pedestrian and vehicular safety; posted
speed limits within Town Center shall be 15 mph.



   11.   Valet parking may be provided so as to allow for pedestrian
flow without encumbering existing uses in compliance with the “shared
parking analysis.”  The  City Commission may revoke the ability to
utilize valet parking under this provision at any time for any reason in it
absolute discretion.



E.   Structured Parking



   1.   Parking structures shall be designed to be architecturally
compatible with the building(s) they service.



   2.   Structures are to be located and oriented on the site to have
the least visual impact to roadway and main approach traffic as is practical.



   3.   There are to be a minimum of two entrance/exits per garage.



   4.   At garage entry there must be adequate stacking area for cars.



   5.   All parking structures over one story shall have an elevator.



   6.   The sides of a parking structure facing a roadway or opposite a
face of a building shall be provided with planters over 50% of the face
length along each level. On façades without planters, the use of trees,
palms and understory plantings shall be used to compliment the architecture
and provide buffering.



   7.   Maximum height of structured parking shall be 40 feet.



F.   Exterior Lighting



   1.   Site lighting is intended to be subtle, and to establish a
consistency and hierarchy of lighting types. Exterior lights shall be used to
accent entrances and special features. Light intensity shall be no greater
than required for automobile and pedestrian safety. To minimize the number of
lighting standards, wherever possible overflow light from inside the building
shall be used. The lighting source of fixtures and flood lighting shall be
screened from view, if it is of such intensity as to be deemed a source of
glare. Lighting shall not illuminate adjacent parcels and uses.



Lighting shall be designed to reflect the architectural style of the
building, be appropriate in scale, light quality, coloration, and light level
for the intended purpose it is to serve. Lighting for parking shall be
compatible with the lighting present on adjacent streets and peripheral
parcels.



   2.   Location and Type



      a.   All lighting for parking within parcels shall be metal
halide with a maximum height of luminaire and pole of 24 feet. Pole and
luminaire shall be consistent with the established Town Center Core lighting.
Light levels shall be maintained at a minimum of one Footcandle with a
maximum uniformity ratio of 12:1.



      b.   All lighting for parking within the Town Center Core
shall be metal halide with a maximum 35-foot pole height. Light poles within
250 feet of residentially zoned properties shall be limited to a height of 24
feet. Pole and luminaire shall be shoebox style. Light levels shall be
maintained at a minimum of one Footcandle with no off-site spillage.



      c.   Pedestrian walkway and internal drive lighting will be
provided by freestanding pole with globe-like luminaire with refractors.
Height of these fixtures will be no greater than 24 feet so as to promote a
pedestrian scale.



   3.   Sign lighting shall be required for all signage, except for the
directional signs. Sidewalk , roadway and parking area lighting is mandatory.
Internally illuminated signage is to be used.



   4.   Flood lighting fixtures on buildings are only allowed in
service areas. Flood lighting of any building is prohibited. However, up or
down lighting of specific architectural elements of a building shall be
permitted. Balcony and soffitt down-lighting is permitted.



   5.   Flood lighting may be used to illuminate key architectural and
identification elements including but not limited to: belltower, art,
bandshell, trellis, entry monuments and signage.



   6.   Fixture and Lamp Standards: To create a uniformity of look, the
manufacturer’s and model numbers of site lighting fixtures to be used by
Arvida/JMB Partners for the streets will be furnished to parcel owner upon
request.



   7.   Accent Lighting: To enhance on site art, architecture and
landscaping, accent lighting will be used within Town Center. Accent lighting
will include; uplighting, moonlighting, ribbon-lighting and spotlighting.



G.   Signage



   1.   Town Center signage will conform in style and materials, but
use of multiple colors and print types will be encouraged. Location of
signage will be a major element in establishing the design theme continuity
within Town Center. All signage shall conform to all applicable clear sight
and clear recovery zone requirements.



Only approved wall signage will be provided for freestanding uses within Town
Center Core. Exception: The bank site adjacent to Bonaventure Boulevard shall
be permitted one Freestanding Sign meeting the parcel entry signage
requirements.



All signage heights are calculated from the adjacent crown of road elevation.



Details of signage including location, type, size, illumination and quantity
are shown in Exhibit 6.



   2.   Entry Signage



Entry signage features are to be located along Bonaventure Boulevard, Arvida
Parkway, Three Village Road and Town Center Circle. Two types of entry
signage will be incorporated for entries into Town Center (Exhibit 5).



      a.   Bonaventure Blvd./Arvida Pkwy. Entry Feature



   The entry features for Town Center at both Bonaventure Boulevard and
Arvida Parkway will include a freestanding stucco and metal architectural
feature with signage. In addition, planter walls with accent landscaping may
be located at the corners of the intersections. The feature, sign and walls
will be flood lit from the planting beds located at the base of the signs and
walls. The sign and the associated walls will contain the Town Center logo
and establish the design theme for all signage located within the Town
Center. The signage will be limited to 40 square feet. The maximum overall
height of these entry feature shall not exceed 12 feet from adjacent crown of
road.



      b.   Three Village Road/Town Center Circle Entry Feature



The entry feature at both Three Village Road and Town Center Circle will
consist of a feature similar to the Bonaventure and Arvida entries. The
corners of the intersection will however, not include planting walls but
rather planting beds of themed landscape material. The signage will be
limited to 40 square feet. This entry feature shall not exceed eight feet in
height from adjacent crown of road.



   3.   Building Signage



The ground floor tenant identification Northwest Retail Building signage
facing Town Center Circle or Bell Tower Lane shall be reverse channel style,
with white neon backlighting only. All other ground floor tenant
identification Town Center building signs, logos and insignias shall be
channel style and color neon backlit. On the side of the Northwest Retail
Building facing the parking area inside Town Center, each ground floor tenant
shall be permitted an additional tenant identification sign, channel style,
and color neon backlit.



Non-retail building identification signage shall be located at the top floor
level of a multi story building. No sign shall extend above the roof eave or
parapet line. All building wall signage shall not exceed 24 inches in height
and 18 feet in length. All illumination shall be white.



Freestanding building identification signage shall be located at the top
floor level of a multi story building. No sign shall extend above the roof
eave or parapet line. All building wall signage shall not exceed 24 inches in
height and 18 feet in length. All illumination shall be white. Freestanding
buildings include restaurants and banks.



One retail tenant identification sign shall be permitted per street frontage.
Retail tenant identification signage shall be limited to 18 feet in length
and 16 inches in height and shall be located on the building wall or
awning/canopy above the principal entry to the tenant space. In the event
there is a corner tenant space, a second retail tenant identification sign
may be located on the building wall or awning/canopy above the side street
tenant space, subject to the size and height regulations in this section.



Supermarket signage will be limited to one wall sign with lettering no more
than 60 inches in height and a total coverage area less than 110 square feet.



Retail building identification signage is prohibited.



   4.   Traffic Signage



Traffic signs and street signs both within the Town Center Core and within
parcels shall conform to design, number and approved location requirements as
per the City of Weston code. All information shall use international symbols
and will be designed to compliment all other Town Center signage.



   5.   Temporary Signage



Temporary construction signage shall be permitted during the construction of
a permanent facility only. One single-sided temporary project sign shall be
permitted per parcel and shall be located parallel to the street no less than
25 feet from the right of way line. Temporary signs shall not be lit or use
reflective tape or paint.



During construction, temporary signage shall be ground mounted or mounted to
a maximum height of eight feet (8'-0") above grade with maximum dimensions of
four feet (4'-0") by eight feet (8'-0") and shall be approved. The temporary
signs must be removed immediately upon completion of construction.



   6.   Directory Signage



Directory signage will be wall mounted on a building or as an integral part
of a freestanding kiosk. Wall mounted directory signs shall be no more than
48 inches) by 48 inches and limited to two signs per building. Kiosk
directory signage shall be limited to 48 inches by 48 inches. The kiosk shall
be no more that 12 feet in overall height.



   7.   Directional Signage



Directional signage for the Town Center Core shall be limited to five feet in
height by three feet in width. Directional signage may be post/column mounted
or at grade.



   8.   Non-Retail Tenant Signage



Maximum 16 inches by 20 inches suite identification signage and below it six
inches x 16 inches hours of operation, times and phone number adjacent to
entry door limited to one per tenant.



Non-retail street signage shall be cast bronze or brass and shall not exceed
six inches in height nor 12 feet in length and shall be limited to first
floor tenants. Non-retail tenant signage shall be located on the building
wall at a height no greater than 12 feet above the building finished floor
elevation.



   9.   Parcel Entry Signage



Parcel signage is intended to identify a parcel’s business and facilities.
Each parcel will be permitted one freestanding double-sided sign per street
frontage. This sign shall be a primary tenant/building identification sign
constructed perpendicular to the roadway and be located totally within the
parcel. Parcel entry signage shall not exceed six feet in overall height.



All parcel signage shall be located within landscape beds on the parcel. The
parcel signage shall be set no less than ten feet from the front and side
property lines and shall require five- foot setbacks on all sides from
buildings and/or parking areas. The parcel sign must be externally
illuminated by ground spotlights only.



Information shall be limited to the building number and name and its logo if
said logo is a lettering style logo. The company’s name and logo shall be
presented for approval relative to style, color, format and size.



If the building has more than one tenant, the parcel sign may set forth the
name of the building or the names of the tenants occupying 30% or greater of
the building. Tenant names shall all be in the same style and size of letters
as approved. All information shall be contained within the approved signage
area.



H.   Service Areas



   1.   Within the Town Center Core the number and size of loading
spaces are as follows:



      a.   Retail Sector: three 12-foot by 45-foot spaces and two
ten-foot by 25-foot spaces.



      b.   Office Sector: three ten-foot by 25-foot spaces.



      c.   Supermarket Sector: one service yard per supermarket
requirements.



      d.   Freestanding Restaurant : one ten-foot by 25-foot space.



      e.   Freestanding Plant Nursery: one ten-foot by 25-foot space.



All loading spaces shall have a minimum 14-foot vertical clearance.



   2.   No loading or servicing for parcels shall be conducted between
a building and any street. All loading spaces shall conform to applicable
City of Weston ordinances including size, location and quantity.



   3.   In order to provide for improved safety and aesthetics, a
segregated entry and exit for service vehicles have been provided for the
supermarket in the Town Center Core. The entry will be one way from Town
Center Circle and the exit will be one way onto Three Village Road.



   4.   Loading and servicing areas for parcels shall be designed so
that the entire operation is conducted within the confines of the parcel.



   5.   Loading and servicing areas for parcels shall be screened from
streets and building entrances and shall be designed as an integral part of
the building architecture.



   6.   The maneuvering of trucks and trailers shall be confined
insofar as possible to the rear parking areas of a parcel.



   7.   No articles, goods, materials, fixed machinery or equipment,
vehicles, trash, animals or similar items shall be stored or kept in the open
or exposed to view from adjacent parcels, streets and sidewalks.



   8.   Vehicles shall be parked in approved parking areas only. No
vehicles are to be stored for more than 24 hours.



   9.   Within the Town Center Core, loading/service and trash
collection can be carried out in shared locations. This shared use will
provide additional space for buffering and landscape areas. The
loading/service space will be measured from the dumpster enclosure.



   10.   All solid waste facilities and storage areas for restaurants
shall be maintained inside an air-conditioned space. Solid waste will be
permitted for deposit into dumpsters no more than eight hours prior to
collection. Collection times shall be scheduled and posted so as not to
conflict with the loading and unloading activities.



   11.   All freestanding dumpster enclosures, transformers, mechanical
equipment and other utility equipment or enclosures shall be buffered
utilizing hedges, flowering shrubs and/or vines equal in height at time of
installation without impacting accessibility or service.



I.   Architectural Criteria



   1.   General Intent and Provisions



      a.   Architectural design of all Town Center Core and parcel
buildings shall be designed to be compatible with one another. Superior
design and quality materials are required. The design of buildings adjacent
to lakes and stormwater detention areas shall address the impact on views
from across the water. All service area walls and other screening elements
must be compatible with the building architecture. Large façades with no
architectural delineation shall be prohibited.



      b.   All buildings must be designed by a Florida registered
Architect.



      c.   Rooftop equipment, antennas, and similar protrusions
shall not project above the parapet. The building shall include parapet
walls, individual screens or other architectural building elements to
completely screen the offensive elements from view. All screening elements
shall relate to the building’s style of architecture and where at grade
shall be landscaped. Solar collectors, satellite dish, etc., shall only be
permitted at approved locations.



      d.   Downspouts, roof ladders, and related elements shall be
designed to be compatible with the building architecture and avoid staining
the building façade.



      e.   No walls may be constructed within the landscape
easements or nearer than five feet from the side or rear property line. All
walls shall be compatible with the surrounding architecture. Walls shall not
be constructed in front yards or on site areas visible from major project
streets, except within the Core, where buffer walls may be constructed to
reduce visibility of utilities.



      f.   The creation of outdoor use areas incorporated into the
landscape and building design is encouraged to facilitate public activity.
These areas shall provide seating, outdoor dining and meeting space, formal
gardens consisting of courtyards, sculpture gardens or lawns featuring
fountains and pools, and shall provide exercise and other recreational uses.



      g.   In keeping with the intent to encourage pedestrian
activity and use of outdoor areas as described in paragraph “f” above,
moveable vendor(s) kiosks shall be incorporated in to the streetscape. 
These kiosks shall be as defined herein below:



         Vendor kiosks shall be defined as a moveable retail sales
cart of approximately four feet by eight feet in overall dimensions that are
conducive to the merchandising requirements and cohesive with the design of
Town Center.  Kiosks shall be placed at designated locations as indicated on
the amended “approved” site plan, with the total number of carts not to
exceed 12.  In order to facilitate the parking for the kiosk attendants, a
parking ratio of 1½ spaces per kiosk shall be provided.  Construction and
use of all kiosks shall be in accordance with all applicable codes and
regulations, and no use of propane shall be permitted on any kiosk.



   2.   Design Strategies



      a.   A relatively wide variety of architectural design and
materials is permitted. However, it is intended that a basic harmony of
architecture shall prevail among the several buildings so that a consistent
style is achieved within Town Center.



      b.   The basic architectural style of Town Center shall be
modern and unembellished except for articulation by building form, window
treatment, and roof or entrance features.



      c.   Building height within the Town Center Core shall not be
limited so as to allow for building massing that will create a captured
pedestrian experience. Elements such as cupolas and architectural features
are contemplated in the conceptual design (Exhibit 3) to be at a height of 50
feet. The main identification element of Town Center, the belltower, shall be
a maximum of 55 feet in overall height.



      d.   Building height within the west parcel shall be to a
maximum of or 46 feet in height. In order to allow for a vertical transition
to the Town Center Core, the third floor of any building on the west parcel
shall step away from the Town Center Core and lakefront park. This shall be
achieved by providing only 50% of the second floor area on the third floor
and that this area be provided along the west side of the building.



      e.   In general, the following shall apply to the design of
building exterior appearance in order to promote harmonious building design:



         1.   The height of buildings shall be visually reduced
by the use of landscape, texture, materials and color.



         2.   Buildings shall be designed to be attractive from
all road frontages they are adjacent to.



         3.   No portion of the rooftop equipment may project
above the parapet including all mechanical, electrical equipment, vents and
stacks.



         4.   Colors, materials and finishes shall be coordinated
on all exterior elevations to achieve total continuity of design throughout
Town Center. The Town Center Core and parcels shall incorporate a color
palette of no less than 12 distinct colors.



         5.   All service courts and loading areas shall be
screened from view of project roadways and driveways so as to be an integral
part of the design of the building architecture or by location on the site to
the rear of public areas. Mature landscape materials, which complement the
building architecture, may also be used in screening these uses.



         6.   Buildings shall be separated within and between
parcels according to Setback Requirements established in the Design
Guidelines.



         7.   Building massing within the Town Center Core shall
conform to the overall intent conveyed in the Conceptual Design Master Plan
(Exhibit 3). Recognizing that building mass will provide a sense of enclosure
and containment along the street which will define the pedestrian experience
being sought at Town Center, careful consideration to building height,
placement and volume is of extreme concern. Buildings shall complement the
pedestrian ways and address the ‘sidewalk to building’ intersection
through horizontal displacements so as to create areas for activities like
outdoor dining, window shopping and leisurely strolling within a more
‘urban’ setting than that which can be currently found in Weston.



   Building massing together with building height shall be used to define
views and streetscapes which will provide a “pedestrian experience” by
capturing vistas of features such as the Bell Tower and focusing on the
corporate office on the water.



      f.   Roofs , roof lines and roof materials are recognized to
create not only shelter, but to be possibly the single most important element
in contributing to the overall building elevation and aesthetics. Roofs
within the Town Center are to be a mix of flat decks (with parapets and tiled
mansards) and hipped and/or gabled roofs. Roof shall be of the Spanish
“S” style tile (or barrel) or standing seam metal, with a consistency of
colors blends from roof to roof that will give uniformity through
compatibility to the overall look of the Town Center.



   Roof colors are to be chosen from a minimum color palette of eight
colors (for tiled roofs) or four colors in the case of metal roofs. For tiled
roofs, a minimum of three but not more than four colors will be blended to
create a roof color.



   Inclined roof pitches are to be minimum four in 12 pitch and should
vary in height to create movement and elevation interest across not less than
50% of the façade. The use of features such as clocks, towers, canopies,
colonnades, loggias, balconies, cloth awnings and other architectural
projections of aesthetic quality are encouraged.



   Roof projections such as, but not limited to: A/C equipment, exhaust
hoods, refrigeration, vents and vent shafts shall be hidden from view by
means of parapets or roof designs. No other screening devices shall be
allowed.



   3.   Building Coverage



      a.   Building coverage may be maximized, provided that utility
and maintenance easements and sufficient parking can be provided within these
limits and established setbacks are adhered to.



      b.   Building coverage and impervious surface coverage shall
be as governed by the City of Weston Ordinances.



J.   Landscape and Irrigation



   1.   Landscape Design Standards



Landscape design standards have been established to create and perpetuate the
quality, character and image of Town Center. A complimentary series of
perimeter landscaping and open space, with a linear park will be constructed
to form a system of green spaces linking the various uses within Town Center.
Unity of design shall be achieved through the repetition of plant materials
and other landscape and hardscape materials throughout Town Center.



All planting area widths shall be inclusive of adjacent type “D” curbing.



All requirements of the City of Weston Landscape Code not specifically
addressed in this ordinance shall conform to the City of Weston Landscape
Code.



   2.   Landscape Design



      a.   Landscape plans and specifications shall be prepared by a
licensed Landscape Architect registered in the State of Florida.



      b.   Landscape design at intersections within Town Center
Rights-Of-Way shall be formal. Shade or large palm trees shall be installed
on both sides of parcel entrance drives/roads. Individual trees should be a
maximum of 35 feet on center to provide a major impact statement.



      c.   Loose, informal arrangements of trees in general open
areas should be clustered to provide a natural appearance. Transplanting of
shade trees six inches to ten inches in caliper is encouraged. Street trees
shall be spaced a maximum of 35 feet on center.



      d.   Required visibility shall be provided at all
intersections. Berms, ground cover and shrubs shall not exceed a maximum
height of two feet within visibility zones at intersections as defined by
local or state codes. Trees shall be positioned to not impede visibility.



      e.   Evergreen shrubs and/or berms shall be provided to screen
parking and service use areas. Planting for the purpose of screening shall be
a minimum of 24-inch height at time of installation and reach a minimum
height of 36 inches within a 12-month period from time of installation.



      f.   Landscaping of adjacent parcels shall be considered in
the development of a landscape design to provide continuity within Town
Center. Parcels shall not be landscaped to have an “individual” character
at the property line of adjacent existing landscaping. Single hedgerows along
property lines are discouraged. Massings of trees, palms and shrubs are
encouraged.



      g.   Landscape material, especially shrubs, ground cover and
seasonal color shall be spaced to provide 50% coverage at time of planting
and 100% in six months.



      h.   Non-white decorative stone may be used but shall not be
accepted as a substitution for groundcover or mulch.



      i.   A minimum of one tree per 375 square feet of landscaped
buffer area on the West Parcel adjacent to the Town Center Core shall be
required. The required landscape buffer between the Town Center Core and the
east parcel will be provided as part of the Town Center Core requirements.



      j.   Landscape plans shall indicate all proposed utilities,
site lighting, fire hydrants, backflow preventers, stop signs, meter banks,
and proposed contours.



      k.   All landscape plans and specifications shall meet or
exceed minimum standards as required herein.



      l.   The use of uniform seasonal color throughout Town Center
shall be implemented.



      m.   The use of freestanding, movable planters with evergreen
plants and seasonal color shall be used throughout pedestrian areas of the
Town Center Core. A minimum of one 24-inch diameter planter shall be provided
for every 25 linear feet of Main Street .



      n.   Excluding the linear park, sod shall account for no more
than 50% of the provided pervious area within the Town Center Core.



      o.   20% of the vehicular use area (excluding the linear park)
within the Town Center Core shall be provided as landscaped area.



      p.   50% of the required planting areas within Town Center
shall be native Florida species. The existing on-site native plant
communities (littoral shelves) shall be used to meet the native shrubs
requirement for the Town Center Core.



      q.   All required ecological community plantings required for
Town Center have been provided for in the existing littoral shelf located in
the existing lake adjacent to Arvida Parkway, Bonaventure Boulevard and Town
Center Boulevard.



   3.   Berms



      a.   Slopes of all berms shall not exceed 2:1.



      b.   Berms shall be undulating both vertically and
horizontally.



   4.   Landscape Standards for Vehicular Use Areas



Vehicular use areas shall be landscaped to reduce the scale of large paved
areas and provide climate control of parking lots.



      a.   Berms, trees and evergreen hedges are required within all
perimeter planting areas adjacent to Rights-Of-Way as outlined in the Use
Standards to provide screening and pedestrian directional flow.



      b.   A minimum of one tree shall be provided in each island.



      c.   In parcels, landscape islands between parking spaces
shall be a minimum of 165 square feet and contain at least one shade tree.



   5.   Drainage Retention Areas



Drainage retention/detention areas are to be planted and sloped to blend into
the adjacent landscape area.



   6.   Landscape Lighting



Landscape accent lighting of tree canopies, pathways and general illumination
is encouraged.



      a.   Above ground landscape lights must be screened within
planting beds.



      b.   Above ground landscape lights are prohibited in lawn
areas.



      c.   Well lights only are approved for use in lawn areas.



      d.   Landscape lights shall be aesthetically compatible with
building and site lights.



      e.   Well lights in tree grates will be used to uplight trees
in pedestrian areas of the Town Center Core.



   7.   LandscapeIrrigation System



All landscape areas shall be irrigated with an automatic irrigation system of
approved design to provide proper plant growth.



      a.   The automatic controlled irrigation system shall be
provided for 100% coverage with 100% overlap of all landscaped areas.



      b.   The irrigation system shall be of similar equipment and
standards as the existing irrigation system within Arvida’s Weston and
utilize rust free water.



      c.   The system shall be maintained in optimum operating
condition at all times.



      d.   Operation of irrigation systems shall be timed to operate
during evening and early morning hours to minimize evaporation and disruption
to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The system will include a rain sensor.



      e.   No irrigation shall overspray walk-ways.



   8.   Plant Material



All parcels within Town Center shall provide a well-defined, maintained and
dense landscape appearance.



      a.   All plant material for Town Center will be Florida Fancy
or Florida grade no. 1 as defined by the “Florida State Plant Board
Standards for Nursery Stock” and “Grades and Standards for Nursery
Plants”, State of Florida, Department of Agriculture. Exception; large
relocated specimen trees in excess of six-inch caliper shall be required only
to meet the approval of Arvida/JMB’s landscape architect and City staff.



      b.   Plant material shall be installed in accordance with
sound horticultural practices.



      c.   All plant material shall have a minimum one-year
guarantee beginning at final completion of installation of 100% of all plant
material as per plans and specifications.



      d.   Installation of 100% of landscape material and irrigation
to be complete by opening of building for tenant use.



      e.   Trees



         1.   All trees are to be specimen quality, with vigorous
growth and in a healthy condition.



         2.   The canopy of trees is to be dense, and full headed
360 degrees at time of installation.



         3.   Shade Trees



            a.   All shade trees shall be 12 feet overall
height with a minimum two- and one-half inch DBH and a minimum six-foot
spread at time of installation.



            b.   All shade trees shall have a minimum four-
and one-half foot of clear trunk, unless otherwise noted and approved.



            c.   Shade trees shall reach a minimum height of
30 feet and a minimum canopy spread of 20 feet at maturity.



         4.   Accent Trees



            a.   All accent trees shall be ten feet over all
height with a minimum two inches DBH at time of installation.



            b.   All accent trees shall have three feet clear
trunk minimum at time of installation.



         5.   Palm Trees



            a.   Large Palm Species: (Royal Palms, Bismark
Palms, Date Palms, etc.) When used as an overstory tree shall have a minimum
seven feet of wood. These palms shall be equivalent to a shade tree for
calculation of required plantings.



            b.   All other palm trees used as an overstory
plant in non-paved areas shall be a minimum of eight feet clear trunked,
clustered a minimum of three per planting in planting beds, and spaced so as
not to inhibit the normal growth characteristic of the palms. In locations
where tree grates are used, individual palms are permitted.



            c.   Due to the urban pedestrian context of the
Core, palm trees can make up 40% of the City required tree requirements.



   9.   Shrubs



      a.   All shrubs to be minimum three-gallon containerized,
dense, 24-inch height by 15-inch spread minimum, at time of installation.



      b.   All shrubs used as hedges shall be installed at no more
than 24 inches on center and shall be touching at installation.



   10.   Ground Cover and Vines



      a.   All ground cover to be dense, one-gallon containers
minimum at time of installation.



   11.   Grass



      a.   All grass areas to be sodded with St. Augustine
“Floritam” (Stenotaphrum secundatum).



   12.   Seasonal Color



      a.   All seasonal color to be two- and one-fourth inch
containers minimum (except bulbs) at time of installation.



   13.   Plant Palette



At least 70% of all required trees and plant materials shall be from the
recommended plant palette. However, no more than 40% of required trees shall
be of a palm species.



At least 15% of entry landscape planting at parcel signage and 5% of
plantings adjacent to front of parcel buildings shall incorporate the
approved seasonal color plant material.



The following plant list is the recommended plant palette:



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Shade Trees:
 



   Acer rubrum
 
Red maple


   Bauhinia spp
 
Orchid tree


   Bursera simaruba
 
Gumbo limbo


   Conocarpus erectus
 
Green buttonwood


   Delonix regia
 
Royal poinciana


   Peltophorum ptercarpum
 
Yellow poinciana


   Quercus laurifolia
 
Laurel oak


   Quercus virginiana
 
Live oak


   Swietenia mahagoni
 
Mahogany


Accent trees:
 



   Callistemon viminalis
 
Weeping bottlebrush


   Cassia surattensis
 
Glaucous cassia


   Calophyllum brasilense
 
Beauty leaf


   Hibiscus spp
 
Hibiscus standards


   Lagerstroemia indica
 
Crape myrtle


   Ligustrum japonicum
 
Wax privet


   Tabebuia caraiba
 
Silver trumpet


   Tabebuia heterophylla
 
Pink trumpet tree


Palms:
 



   Bismarkia nobilis
 
Silver bismark palm


   Phoenix canariensis
 
Canary Isl. date palm


   Phoenix roebelenii
 
Pygmy date palm


   Roystonea elata
 
Florida royal palm


   Sabal palmetto
 
Cabbage palm


   Syagrus romanzofiana
 
Queen Palm


   Washingtonia robusta
 
Washington Palm


Shrubs:
 



   Bougainvillea spp.
 
Bougainvillea


   Chrysobalanus icaco
 
Cocoplum


   Ixora ‘Nora Grant’
 
Ixora


   Jasminum volubile
 
Wax jasmine


   Myrica cerifera
 
Wax myrtle


   Philodendron selloum
 
Philodendron


   Philodendron ‘Xanadu’
 
Xanadu philodendron


   Podocarpus macrophyllus
 
Yew podocarpus


   Schefflera arboricola
 
Dwarf schefflera


   Viburnum odoratissimum
 
Sweet viburnum


Seasonal Color:  Submit proposal for review and approval.




 



   14.   Prohibited Plant Species.



The following plant species are prohibited from use because of their invasive
growth characteristics:



 

Casuarina equisetifolia
 
Australian Pine


Melaleuca quinquenervia
 
Punk Tree


Schinus terebinthifolius
 
Brazilian Pepper



 



K.   Landscape , Grading and Drainage



   1.   Site grading shall be done to preserve and enhance the
topographic features and to provide positive drainage.



   2.   No slope of any type shall be steeper than 2:1. Where space
limitations demand, terracing with approved retaining walls shall be
utilized. Where retaining walls are required, materials shall be compatible
with the site standards.



   3.   Berms, channels, swales, etc. shall be graded as to be an
integral part of the grading, and designed with smooth transitions between
changes in slope. Berms should not interrupt swale drainage.



   4.   Surface drainage shall be collected on site and connected to
underground storm drains. Drainage is to be conveyed in accordance with the
master drainage plan.



   5.   Run-off should be directed away from building pads at a minimum
slope of 2% in landscape areas.



   6.   Drainage from roof tops shall not directly outfall into planted
or pedestrian areas.



   7.   Grade bottom of landscape swale: 1% minimum slope; side slopes:
6:1 or 7:1 preferred.



L.   LandscapeConstruction Procedures and Precautions



   1.   The following measures are to be incorporated to minimize soil
erosion by water and wind.



      a.   Remove no more vegetation than necessary.



      b.   Install temporary mulching on areas to be left bare of
plant material for an extended period of time.



      c.   Provide temporary ditches, dikes, desilting basins and/or
vegetation to remove sediment from run-off water during development.



   2.   The construction personnel are responsible for knowing the
location of existing utilities and must protect existing utilities during the
construction.



   3.   Construction sites shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
manner. All trash shall be kept in enclosed containers and removed frequently.



   4.   Construction access shall be coordinated with Arvida/JMB.
Special care shall be taken to protect existing pavements and landscaping
from damage.



   5.   Approval shall not be required for the temporary storage of
materials, equipment and supplies needed for the construction of permanent
improvements upon a site, provided they are completely removed immediately
upon completion of construction.



M.   Landscape Maintenance



Landscape maintenance shall be of highest quality to provide at all times a
clean, orderly, and manicured appearance.



      a.   All dead or dying plant material shall be removed
immediately.



      b.   Replacements of removed plant material shall be made
within a 15-day period of beginning at date of removal.



      c.   Sites shall be policed regularly to eliminate on-site
litter.



      d.   A seasonal color program shall accompany the landscape
maintenance proposal.



      e.   Seasonal color shall be provided continually in Winter,
Spring, Summer, and Fall. “Spent” plant material shall be replaced
immediately.



      f.   All landscape areas shall be kept weed free.



      g.   Landscape areas shall be watered, fertilized, cut,
pruned, and treated for insects regularly to maintain a healthy, vigorous,
and well-kept appearance.



      h.   Landscape maintenance of parcels is the responsibility of
the respective owners.



      i.   Landscape maintenance of all Rights-Of-Way , common open
space, and conservation areas are the responsibility of Arvida/JMB Partners
or its designee.



      j.   Maintain mulch in a clean and neat condition with a
minimum three-inch cover in all planting beds. Restore as necessary with
clean mulch of the same type as that at installation.



      k.   Fertilization shall be a part of the required maintenance
activities. Fertilizer shall be applied following manufacturer’s
specifications. Any evidence of nutrient deficiency shall be addressed during
fertilization.



      l.   The irrigation system will be a required portion of the
maintenance activities to ensure lawns and plantings receive sufficient water
to maintain healthy growing conditions.



[Note: To view Exhibits 1-5 in PDF, click HERE]







 



Exhibit 1 - Town Center at Weston Community Context Map



Date:  8-24-1999



 







 



Exhibit 2 - Town Center at Weston Site Map



Date:  7-12-1999



 







 



Exhibit 3 - Town Center at Weston Conceptual Design



Date: 8-24-1999



 







 



Exhibit 4 - Town Center at Weston Core Primary Uses



Date: 7-12-1999



 







 



Exhibit 5 - Town Center at Weston Ingress/Egress Plans



Date: 7-12-1999



Exhibit 6 - Town Center at Weston - Signage Guidelines Outline



[To view this Exhibit in PDF, click HERE]



 


Designation

 

Location

 

Type

 

Quantity

 

Sign Size

 

Height

 

Material

 

Comments





Core Entry Signage



A

 

Bonaventure Boulevard/Thre e Village Road

 

Freestanding w/ planter walls

 

2

 

40 square feet

 

12 feet max.

 

stucco & metal

 

freestanding




B

 

Arvida Parkway/Town Center Boulevard

 

Freestanding w/ planter walls

 

2

 

40 square feet

 

12 feet max.

 

stucco & metal

 

freestanding




C

 

Three Village Road Entry

 

Freestanding w/planting beds

 

1

 

40 square feet

 

8 feet max.

 

stucco & metal

 

freestanding




D

 

Town Center Circle Entries

 

Freestanding w/planting beds

 

1

 

40 square feet

 

8 feet max.

 

stucco & metal

 

freestanding



Building Signage



A

 

Non-Retail Buildings

 

Building Identification

 

2 per building

 

18 feet length

 

24 Inches

 

channel style, color neon back lit

 

top floor of multi-story building



Tenant Signage



A

 

Non-Retail Suite

 

Suite Identification Sign and Hours of Operation Sign

 

1 per tenant

 

16 x 20 Inches 6x16 Inches

 

8 feet above grade

 

T.B.D.

 

adjacent to entry door than 12 inches high




B

 

Non-Retail ID

 

Wall Mounted

 

T.B.D.

 

12 feet

 

6 Inches

 

cast bronze or brass

 

limited to first floor tenants, no higher than 12 feet above F.F.




C

 

Retail Tenant ID

 

Tenant Identification

 

T.B.D.

 

18 feet length

 

16 inches

 

back lit channel style or awning

 

mounted on building face over principal entry




D

 

Supermarket

 

Tenant Identification

 

1

 

110 square feet

 

60 inches

 

T.B.D

 

wall mounted on main façade



E
 
Northwest Retail
 
Ground floor tenant identification on street side
 
1 per tenant
 
18 feet length
 
16 inches
 
back lit reverse channel style or awning
 
Mounted on building face on street side over tenant space



 

 
Ground floor tenant identification on parking lot side
 
1 per tenant
 
18 feet length
 
16 inches
 
back lit channel style or awning
 
Mounted on building face on parking lot side over tenant space


Traffic





 

Town Center Core & Parcels

 

Traffic & StreetSigns

 

T.B.D.

 

T.B.D.

 

T.B.D.

 

T.B.D.

 

As per City of Weston code



Temporary





 

Construction Site

 

Ground or Wall Mounted

 

1 per parcel

 

4 x 8 feet

 

8 feet max.

 

Single-sided

 

Temporary



Directory Signage



A

 

Building Wall

 

Wall Mounted

 

2 per building

 

48 x 48 inches

 

8 feet above grade

 

T.B.D.

 






B

 

Kiosk

 

Freestanding Kiosk

 

1 per side

 

48 x 48 inches

 

12 feet overall height

 

T.B.D.

 





C
 
Light poles
 
Restaurant identification
 
Not to exceed 6 poles
 
8 x 42 inches per restaurant
 
Based on number of restaurants
 
T.B.D.
 
Restaurant name and directions arrow only


Directional Signage





 

Town Center Core

 

Post Column Mounted or at Grade

 

T.B.D.

 

3 feet wide

 

5 feet

 

T.B.D.

 





Parcel Entry Signage





 

Minimum 10 feet from Front & Side Properly Lines, Perpendicular to Roadway 5
feet Setback from Buildings & Parking

 

Freestanding double sided

 

1 per street frontage

 

T.B.D.

 

6 feet

 

T.B.D.

 

within landscaped beds, Illuminated by ground spotlights only





 




Date: 7-12-1999




APPENDIX B:  ISLES AT WESTON PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT DESIGN GUIDELINES



TABLE OF CONTENTS



   I.   INTRODUCTION



   II.   EXISTING CONDITIONS



   III.   GENERAL DATA



   IV.   OWNERS ASSOCIATION/ACB



   V.   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN



   VI.   OPEN SPACE



   VII.   ZONING



   VIII.   ROADS/INFRASTRUCTURE



   IX.   LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION



   X.   LIGHTING



   XI.   SIGNAGE



EXHIBITS



FIGURE 1   LOCATION MAP



FIGURE 2   LAND USE MAP



FIGURE 3   ZONING MAP



FIGURE 4   LEGAL DESCRIPTION



FIGURE 5   AERIAL



FIGURE 6   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN



FIGURE 7   PERVIOUS/GREENSPACE



FIGURE 8   LANDSCAPE BUFFERS



FIGURE 8A   BUFFER CONSTRUCTION PHASES



FIGURE 9   LANDSCAPE DATA FORM



FIGURE 10   40' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER



FIGURE 11   25' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER



FIGURE 12   15' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER



FIGURE 13   INTERNAL ROADWAY SECTIONS



FIGURE 14A   RECREATIONAL AREA CONCEPT PLAN



FIGURE 14B   CLUBHOUSE CONCEPT



FIGURE 14C   CABANA



FIGURE 15A   ENTRANCE FEATURE CONCEPT PLAN



FIGURE 15B   GUARDHOUSE CONCEPT



FIGURE 15C   ENTRANCE MONUMENT CONCEPT



FIGURE 15D   COMMUNITY ENTRY MONUMENTS



FIGURE 15E   ENTRANCE FEATURES



FIGURE 15F   ENTRANCE FEATURES



I.   INTRODUCTION



Isles at Weston (aka Gulfstream) is a Planned Development District (PDD)
composed of Residential, Recreational, Community Facility, and Park uses,
including a system of lakes and mitigation areas. The Declarant, Centex Homes
(8198 Jog Road, Boynton Beach, FL 33437), has planned the community with an
emphasis on open space and security, highlighted by the creation internally
of large lakes, wetland preserve, and dedicated park/open space/recreational
areas totaling 159.29 acres. The Isles at Weston community will total
approximately 328.0 acres with an overall density of 2.0 residential units
per acre.



The proposed site is located in the City of Weston and lies within Land
Section 24 and 25, Township 50 South, Range 39 East. This planned development
district (PDD) rezoning application is for the purpose to define zoning
regulations consistent with the City and County Land Use Designations and to
demonstrate that the intended use of the parcel is in accordance with the
City and County development goals and objectives.



The Isles at Weston PDD shall consist of 655 single-family home sites.
Supporting this residential area is a 6.1 acre park/recreational area
together with an entrance feature, community entry features, roads, and
buffer areas. There will be three lot sizes available and sub-parceled as
separate PDD zones.



This submittal is made in accordance with Ordinance No. 98-41 of the City of
Weston Land Development Chapter and Resolution No. 2001-09 approving the
Developers Agreement between the City of Weston and Ronald M. Bergeron Sr.
for the Gulfstream property. This Resolution No. 2001-09 and the Development
Agreement were recorded in the Public Records of Broward County, Book 31200,
Page 0774 on January 19, 2001.



II.   EXISTING CONDITIONS



The proposed site contains approximately 328.0 acres of land which is
currently vacant. The site is generally located south of the Estates of Swan
Lake PDD, north of the C-11 canal (Griffin Road), east of US 27 (U.S. Nature
Center) and west of Bonaventure Boulevard (Educational Complex and Windmill
Lake Estates). The location of the site is graphically shown on the location
map (see Figure 1). The property has a Land Use designation of Low (2)
Residential and the current zoning is A-1. See Figures 2 and 3 for the
existing Land Use and Zoning Maps. See Figure 4 for the property legal
description.



Current and historical use of the property is improved pasture. The degraded
wetlands have been assessed by the Broward County Department of Planning and
Environmental Protection (DPEP), the South Florida Water Management District
(SFWMD), and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACOE). The evaluations have
established that a total of +63.27 acres of mitigation is proposed to
compensate for wetland impacts. Environmental regulatory permits are pending.



The Soil Survey of Broward County, Florida indicates that Dania Much was
historically the primary soil type in the area with a minor component of
Lauderhill Muck. Both soils are described as “nearly level, very poorly
drained, organic soil underlain by limestone” at 14 to 20 inches and 20 to
40 inches respectively. This area is predominantly flat with ground
elevations of 4.5' NGVD to 5.5' NGVD.



This project is located entirely within the Indian Trace Development
District. Lake and Canal easements within the property will be dedicated to
either the City/Indian Trace Development District or the Isles at Weston
OwnersAssociation .



An aerial exhibit of the property is attached (see Figure 5).



III.   GENERAL DATA



 



Location
 
Weston, Florida


Proposed Zoning
 
PDD


Land Use
 
Low (2) Residential


Dwelling Units
 
655 DU


Gross Acreage
 
328.0 Acres


Conservation Area
 
63.27 Acres


Lake Area (including L.M.E.)
 
63.85 Acres


Density
 
2.0 DU/Acre




 



 

PDD Zones
 
Type
 
No. of Units


PDD SF-1
 
55' x 110'
 
374 DU


PDD SF-2
 
65' x 115'
 
211 DU


PDD SF-3
 
80' x 130'
 
70 DU



 



IV.   OWNERS ASSOCIATION/ACB



In order to insure the continuity of the community and to maintain the
intended goals of the Development, there will be created the Isles at Weston
OwnersAssociation (IAWOA). The IAWOA is a master association over the
residential community’s common areas, conservation and lake areas, private
roadways, recreational amenities, buffers and other similar amenities serving
the Development as a whole. A maximum of three Neighborhood Associations are
contemplated to be created. The Neighborhood Associations shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the common property lying within their
respective boundaries.



The IAWOA shall be responsible for the enforcement of the various restrictive
covenants applicable to the Residential property. To that end, the IAWOA has
created an Architectural Control Board (ACB) over the residential elements.
The all proposed construction modifications, and revisions to provisions of
the applicable protective covenants and restrictions, the provisions
contained in this manual and the codes and ordinances as applicable.



USES PERMITTED:  All residential land within the Isles at Weston
development, in order to be permitted, must secure approval from the ACB and
be permitted by the zoning code of the City of Weston except as amended in
these Design and Development Standards. However, the ACB has the right to be
more restrictive than the City in controlling the manner in which any
property/lot is developed.



GENERAL CONDITIONS:  No construction shall be allowed to commence, within
Isles at Weston, unless it fully complies with all provisions and applicable
Design and Development Standards, building codes, City of Weston Zoning
Ordinances, and any other appropriate governmental regulations. All required
permits from all pertinent public agencies must be obtained and fees paid
prior to commencement of construction. Any future request, by a property
owner within the development, for modification of existing structures, new
additions or alterations shall be subject to the regulations and approvals of
the restrictive covenants contained in the IAWOA Documents or the
Neighborhood Association Documents, the City of Weston, and other appropriate
regulations.



ENFORCEMENT:  The enforcement of these Design and Development Standards
shall be delegated by the Board of Directors of IAWOA, and the City of Weston.



DEFINITIONS:  The definitions for these Design and Development Standards
shall follow the City’s definitions in accordance with the City of Weston
Zoning Ordinances and the Developers Agreement between the City of Weston and
Ronald M. Bergeron Sr. dated January 18, 2001 (City Resolution No. 2001-09).



ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL BOARD (ACB):  The ACB shall adopt a separate manual on
Design and Development standards that shall serve as a guide for the
community’s planning, design, and development in order to assure quality
and continuity. These design and development standards include (but are not
limited to) materials, colors, maintenance of common area, easements,
accessory structures (i.e. tool sheds, playground equipment, pool decks). Any
improvements on the residential property shall be approved by the ACB and the
City of Weston. The authority for the enforcement of these ARB design and
development standards is contained in the “Declaration of Protective
Covenants, Restrictions, and Easements for Isles at Weston” to be recorded
in the Public Records of Broward County and through the requirements of the
City of Weston to establish standards for lands zoned PDD. This ARB manual
may be amended from time to time with the approvals of the Board of Directors
of the IAWOA.



V.    MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN



The Master Development Plan is shown in Figure 6 and illustrates the
configuration and land use of the PDD. The project as proposed consists of
three residential components, conservation component, recreational area
component, entrance feature component together with community entry features,
park component and school component (community facility).



RESIDENTIAL:  The residential component is made up of three PDD zones for
detached single- family units with garages and accessory buildings, as
permitted by the City’s Land Development Chapter. Each PDD zone reflects
the particular lot size that the units are designed for.



 



Residential Component
 
Acreage
 
DU


PDD Zone SF-1 (55' x 110')
 
58.51 Ac.
 
374


PDD Zone SF-2 (65' x 115')
 
41.14 Ac.
 
211


PDD Zone SF-3 (80' x 130')
 
19.00 Ac.
 
70


Open Space
 

 



• Common Areas
 
20.56 Ac.
 



• Lakes (w/LME)
 
63.85 Ac.
 



• Conservation Area
 
63.27 Ac.
 



Roadways (internal)
 

 





 



Maintenance of common areas shall be the responsibility of the IAWOA. The
private roadways will be perpetually maintained by the IAWOA and cost of
maintenance will be included as part of the IAWOA maintenance fee.



Unless prohibited by the applicable governmental authority, the Owner of a
Lot shall be responsible for maintaining the property between the edge of his
or her Lot line and the edge of pavement of the adjacent private roadway.



The Developer shall have the right to assemble the platted lots into larger
lots by combining two lots or by combining one lot with another lots. In the
case of such assemblages a unity of title shall be provided to the City for
the enlarged lot area. Where a lot is combined with a portion of another lot,
the remaining portion of subdivided lot shall be combined with the adjacent
lot so that two enlarged lots are created from three lots and a unity of
title shall be provided to the City of each of the lots. No additional
building lots or parcels (in total) shall be created by these modifications
nor shall they result in lots smaller than the minimum lot dimensions with
the development PDD zone.



CONSERVATION:  The 63.27 acres of conservation area will consist of wetland
mitigation and be used for surface water management. This property will be
subject to restrictive covenants that will limit the use of the property and
prohibit any residential units on these conservation areas. This mitigation
area shall be subject to a conservation easement requiring this area to be
maintained as a wetland. The conservation area shall be conveyed to the Isles
at Weston OwnersAssociation .



RECREATIONAL AREA:  The 6.10 acres of recreational area is to be a private
recreational area for the Isles at Weston community. This area may consist of
several amenities including (but not be limited to):



   •   Clubhouse w/ related parking facilities;



   •   Cabana;



   •   Pool w/ accessory structures;



   •   Tot lot;



   •   Basketball and Tennis Courts;



   •   Open space w/ any accessory structures and landscaping.



ENTRANCE/COMMUNITY ENTRY FEATURES:



The Isles at Weston PDD shall have an entrance feature to consist of (but not
be limited to);



   •   Guardhouse



   •   Entrance Monument Sign



   •   Accessory features such as gates, pedestrian brow’s,
pilasters with aluminum (or approved equal) fence/panels and landscape



   •   See Figures 15A, 15B, 15C, 15E, and 15F for the Entrance
concept plans.



Entry features shall be provided at the entrances to each of the PDD zone
communities and shall consist of (but not be limited to):



   •   Monument sign;



   •   Accessory Brow’s and landscape;



   •   See Figures 15D for the community entry concept plan.



The entrance and community entry features shall be common area and maintained
by the IAWOA and Community Associations respectively.



PARK/SCHOOL:  The Isles at Weston PDD will have 12 acres dedicated to the
City as per the City Resolution No. 2001-09 approving the Developers
Agreement between the City of Weston and Ronald M. Bergeron Sr. This
dedication and terms of said agreement shall satisfy school and community
facility impacts on the property and shall satisfy five acres of Park/open
space requirements by the City as per their Land Development Regulations.



BUFFERS:  The Isles at Weston PDD shall have perimeter buffers as shown on
Figures 8, 10, 11 and 12. These buffers shall meet the requirements of the
City of Weston Land Development Chapter.



Buffers shall not incorporate a block or concrete wall feature but may
incorporate a chain link fence with vinyl clad.



PHASED CONSTRUCTION:  Perimeter buffers may be phased such that prior to the
issuance of the first building C.O. and acting as the first Phase, the
required buffers shall be completed along SW 36th Street and Vista Park Blvd.
extension by the School Board. Subsequent phasing of the buffer construction
shall be completed in four phases for a total of five phases. These phases
are the western boundary adjacent to the PDD Zone SF-3, western boundary
adjacent to the PDD Zone SF-I, eastern boundary south of the Phase I buffer
adjacent to Vista Park Blvd. and the south boundary (C-11 Canal). See Figure
8A for the phased layout of the perimeter buffers.



VI.   OPEN SPACE



The Isles at Weston PDD contains a significant amount of open space
consisting of the following:



 

Conservation Area
 

63.27 Acres



Lakes (w/Lake Maintenance Area)
 

63.85 Acres



Landscape Buffer and Common Areas
 

20.56 Acres



Park
 

5.0 Acres



Recreation Area
 

6.10 Acres



Total Open Space Provided (exclusive of pervious area within lots)
 

158.78 Acres



Open Space Percentage (see Figure 7 for Pervious/open areas)
 

48%




 



Lake areas and lake maintenance areas shall be conveyed to the Isles at
Weston OwnersAssociation and be used for water management for the Isles at
Weston Development. The Landscape open space and buffer areas shall be owned
and maintained by the Isles at Weston OwnersAssociation . These open and
buffer areas (see Figure 8) shall be designed in accordance with the cross
sections shown in Figures 10, 11, and 12.



VII.   ZONING



The Master Development Plan is depicted on Figure 6. This Plan illustrates
the property’s subdivision of the residential parcels, recreation area and
public facilities. Although Isles at Weston is zoned by the City of Weston as
a PDD, each Residential parcel and each group of lots therein will be subject
to their own unique requirements for setbacks, height, use and other similar
matters. For the purposes of the Design and Development Standards, each set
of unique requirements will be referred to as “PDD Zones”.



The following PDD Zones have been established for the residential property
within the Isles at Weston PDD setting forth use, coverage, setback,
landscaping, and other development restrictions:



 

SF-1 (single-family detached)
 
55' X 110' lot


SF-2 (single-family detached)
 
65' X 115' lot


SF-3 (single-family detached)
 
80' X 130' lot



 



Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, contained in these Design and
Development Standards, the Isles at Weston residential development is
restricted to 656 residential units.



 

PDD ZONE SF-1




Permitted Use:
 
One-family detached dwelling and related accessory uses.


Minimum Lot Size:
 
6,050 sq. ft. (55' X 110")


Minimum Floor Area:
 
1,900 sq. ft. of air-conditioned space.


Maximum Height:
 
40 ft. (to the highest point of the roof).


Minimum Frontage:
 
55 ft. (except on pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots where 55 ft. shall be
measured at the front setback line and the minimum street frontage shall be
30 feet).


Front Yard Setback:
 
18 ft. Front yard requirements are exclusive of sidewalks except as amended
in these Design and Development Standards.


Rear Yard Setback:
 
10 ft. minimum. Rear yard setbacks for lots adjacent to lakes are exclusive
of any required maintenance easements.


Side Yard Setback:
 
5.0 ft.


Street Side Yard:
 
15 ft. (For key lots, where the street side yard is a continuation of a front
yard for an adjoining lot).


Corner Lots:
 
Lots fronting on two streets have the front yard setback on the street the
unit faces. The other street shall be considered a street side yard. The yard
opposite the front of the unit shall, be considered the rear yard and the
other side shall be the side yard.


Landscaping:
 
Landscaping requirements shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the City of Weston, Code of Ordinances and the Landscape
section of these Design and Development Standards.


Accessory Uses:
 
All accessory structures (screen enclosures, pools, etc.) shall meet the
following setback requirements:


Front:
 
18 feet


Side:
 
5 feet


Rear:
 
5 feet (10' for screened enclosure)


Any type of hard roof over a patio shall meet the required building setback.
There shall be no accessory structures within lake maintenance easements.




 



 

PDD ZONE SF-2




Permitted Use:
 
One-family detached dwelling and related accessory uses.


Minimum Lot Size:
 
7,475 sq. ft. (65' X 115')


Minimum Floor Area:
 
2,200 sq. ft. of air-conditioned space.


Maximum Height:
 
40 ft. (to the highest point of the roof).


Minimum Frontage:
 
65 ft. (except on pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots where the 65 ft. shall
be measured at the front building line. In no event shall the frontage at
Right-Of-Way be less than 30 ft.)


Front Yard Setback:
 
20 feet to structure. Front yard requirements are exclusive of sidewalks
except as amended in these Design and Development Standards.


Rear Yard Setback:
 
10 ft. Rear yard setbacks for lots adjacent to lakes are exclusive of any
required lake maintenance easements.


Side Yard Setback:
 
5 ft. setback from property line.


Street Side Yard:
 
15 ft. to structure. (For key lots, where the street side yard is a
continuation of a front yard for an adjoining lot).


Key Lots:
 
Where a rear yard is adjacent to another home’s side yard, only single
story homes shall be permitted. Two-story homes on either one or both of the
lots maybe allowed subject to approval by both the City of Weston and the ACB.


Corner Lots:
 
Lots fronting on two streets shall have front yard setbacks on the street the
unit faces. The other street shall be considered a street side yard.


Landscaping:
 
Landscaping requirements shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the City of Weston Code of Ordinances, and the Landscape
section of these Design and Development Standards.


Accessory Uses:
 
All accessory structures (screen enclosures, pools, etc.) shall meet the
following setback requirements:


Front:
 
20 feet


Side:
 
5 feet


Rear:
 
5 feet (10' for screened enclosure)


Any type of hard roof over a patio shall meet the required building setback.
There shall be no accessory structures within lake maintenance easements.




 



 

PDD ZONE SF-3




Permitted Use:
 
One-family detached dwelling and related accessory uses.


Minimum Lot Size:
 
10,400 sq. ft.


Minimum Floor Area:
 
2,500 sq. ft. of air-conditioned space.


Maximum Height:
 
40 ft. (to the highest point of the roof).


Minimum Frontage:
 
80 ft. (except on pie-shaped or irregular shaped lots where the 80 ft. shall
be measured at the front building line. In no event shall the frontage at
Right-Of-Way be less than 30 ft.)


Front Yard Setback:
 
20 feet to structure. Front yard requirements are exclusive of sidewalks
except as amended in these Design and Development Standards.


Rear Yard Setback:
 
15 ft.


Rear yard setbacks for lots adjacent to lakes are exclusive of any required
lake maintenance easements. Any type of hard roof covering a patio must meet
the minimum required setbacks.


Side Yard Setback:
 
7.5 ft. setback from property line.


Street Side Yard:
 
15 ft. to structure. (For key lots, where the street side yard is a
continuation of a front yard for an adjoining lot).


Key Lots:
 
Where a rear yard is adjacent to another home’s side yard, only
single-story homes shall be permitted. Two-story homes on either one or both
of the lots may be allowed subject to approval by both the City of Weston and
the ACB.


Corner Lots:
 
Lots fronting on two streets shall have front yard setbacks on the street the
unit faces. The other street shall be considered a street side yard.


Landscaping:
 
Landscaping requirements shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the City of Weston Code of Ordinances, and the Landscape
section of these Design and Development Standards.


Accessory Uses:
 
All accessory structures (screen enclosures, pools, etc.) shall meet the
following setback requirements:


Front:
 
20 feet


Side:
 
7.5 feet


Rear:
 
5 feet (10' for screened enclosure)


Any type of hard roof over a patio shall meet the required building setback.
There shall be no accessory structures within lake maintenance easements.




 



 

Housing  Type*1
 
Total Number Permitted
 
Lot Size *2
 
Mm. Lot Sq. Ft.
 
Mm Lot Width*5
 
Mm. Lot Depth*6
 
Mm. Lot Frontage
 
Mm. Home Sq. Ft.*3
 
Max. Hgt. Ft.*4
 
Setbacks Front (Bldg.) Ft.
 
Setback Front (Garage) Ft.
 
Setback Rear (Building) Ft.
 
Housing Setback Rear (S/P) Ft.*7
 
Setback Side Ft.
 
Setback Street Side Ft.




PDD Zone SF-I
 
374
 
55' x 110'
 
6,050
 
55
 
110
 
30
 
1900
 
40
 
18
 
18
 
10
 
10/5
 
5
 
15


PDD Zone SF-2
 
211
 
65' x 115'
 
7,475
 
65
 
115
 
30
 
2200
 
40
 
20
 
20
 
10
 
10/5
 
5
 
15


PDD Zone SF-3
 
70
 
80' x 130'
 
10,400
 
80
 
130
 
30
 
2500
 
40
 
20
 
20
 
15
 
10/5
 
7.5
 
15


* FOOTNOTES:


1.If a lot size is not specified above, design guidelines for most similar
lot size will be utilized.


2.Platted and/or lot of sale.


3.Air-conditioned living area.


4.Measured to peak of roof.


5.A minimum is measured as an average of the front and rear setbacks for
irregularly shaped lots.


6.    For pie shaped lots, the minimum depth may be reduced by not more
than 40'; all other lots may not be reduced to less than the minimum
specified.


7.(S/P) = Screened enclosure setback/pool setback when not screen enclosed.


NOTE:   Signage, landscaping and irrigation requirements for each housing
type will be provided in accordance with current or amended City of Weston
Code.




 



VIII.   ROADS/INFRASTRUCTURE



ROADS:  Isles at Weston will be comprised of private roadways. The
Rights-Of-Way width may vary from 50 feet to 80 feet. The typical roadway
sections including sidewalk shall be in accordance with City of Weston Land
Development Chapter or as amended through these Design and Development
standards (see Figure 14). Sidewalks shall be provided on through streets as
either one 8-foot or two 4-foot sidewalks.



INFRASTRUCTURE:  Water and sewer for the project will be provided by the
City of Weston. Stormwater management shall be handled on-site with discharge
into Ditch 3 or the C-11 canal. The stormwater will be controlled to assure
that minimum roadway elevations are at the ten year - one-day storm event and
finished floor elevations are above the 100-year three-day storm stage. The
water management system shall be in accordance with the criteria of the South
Florida Water Management District and the City of Weston Water Control
District.



EXCAVATION:  The subsurface at this site generally consists of rock overlain
with a layer of muck two- to four-feet thick. The rock in this area is
normally very hard and difficult to excavate. It is anticipated that the rock
will be blasted then excavated using conventional methods.



LAND DEDICATION:  Land dedication and all modifications, dedications, and
vacation of utility, canal, landscape, lake maintenance easements and
Right-Of-Way vacations shall be made in accordance with the City of Weston
Land Development Chapter and shall be handled concurrently with the Plat ,
rezoning, and site plan approval process. The Declarant proposes to dedicate
to the IAWOA the private roadways and all other common areas within the PDD.



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:  The development of the Isles at Weston PDD shall
comply with the applicable regulations and ordinances of the City of Weston
or as amended in these Design and Development standards.



IX.   LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION



A City of Weston Landscape Specification for Single-FamilyDwelling Form shall
be completed and submitted to the City for each individual lot (see Figure 9).



 

StreetTrees :
 
1 StreetTree for approximately 35 linear feet of Right-Of-Way


Sod:
 
No more than 80% of the landscape areas will be sod. All pervious areas shall
be landscaped with Floratam sod and/or planting beds.


Screening Plants:
 
Plant material used for screening all above ground equipment shall be equal
to the height of such elements.


Site Lighting & Trees :
 
No Canopy Tree shall be located within 12' of a light pole and no Palm
species within 6' of a light pole.



 



Total landscaped area for the Isles at Weston PDD shall meet the 50% native
requirement for trees and for shrubs.



Entrance landscape concepts shall be designed around a guardhouse and
accessory features such that a causeway feeling is created with water views
on each side. See Figures 15A, 15B, 15C, 15E, and 15F for completed concept
plans. Landscaping for the concepts as represented in these Design and
Development standards shall be in accordance with the City of Weston Code.



A street landscape plan shall be consistent with the applicable provisions of
the City of Weston Code. Minimum Landscape requirements, minimum tree height,
size of trees within the Isles at Weston PDD shall be in accordance with
applicable standards of the City of Weston Code.



All landscape areas shall be served by a permanent irrigation system.
Irrigation systems will be designed in accordance with City of Weston Code.



X.   LIGHTING



All internal roadways shall have street lights installed to provide a safe
lighting environment while creating an attractive ambiance common to low
density development. Lighting shall be in accordance with the City of Weston
Code.



XI.   SIGNAGE



The objective of a quality signing and graphics program is to present a clear
hierarchy of information, direction, and organization. Conformity in style,
materials, and location of signage will be a major element in establishing
the design theme continuity within the Isles at Weston PDD Signage shall be
in accordance with the applicable codes of the City of Weston.



EXHIBITS



[Note: To view Figures 1-15F in PDF, click HERE]



FIGURE 1   LOCATION MAP







 



Figure 1 - Location Map



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 2   LAND USE MAP







 



Figure 2 - Land Use Map



Date: March, 2001



FIGURE 3   ZONING MAP







 



Figure 3 - Zoning Map



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 4   LEGAL DESCRIPTION







 



Figure 4 - Legal Description



FIGURE 5   AERIAL







 



Figure 5 - Aerial



FIGURE 6   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN







 



Figure 6 - Master Development Plan



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 7   PERVIOUS/GREENSPACE







 



Figure 7 - Pervious/Greenspace



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 8   LANDSCAPE BUFFERS







 



Figure 8 - Landscape Buffers



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 8A   BUFFER CONSTRUCTION PHASES







 



Figure 8A - Buffer Construction Phases



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 9   LANDSCAPE DATA FORM







 



Figure 9 - Landscape Data Form



FIGURE 10   40' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER







 



Figure 10 - 40' Typical Landscape Buffer



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 11   25' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER







 



Figure 11 - 25' Typical Landscape Buffer



Date: March, 2001



FIGURE 12   15' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER







 



Figure 12 - 15' Typical Landscape Buffer



Date: March, 2001



FIGURE 13   INTERNAL ROADWAY SECTIONS







 



Figure 13 - Internal Roadway Sections



Date: October, 2000



FIGURE 14A   RECREATIONAL AREA CONCEPT PLAN







 



Figure 14A - Recreational Area Concept Plan



FIGURE 14B   CLUBHOUSE CONCEPT







 



Figure 14B - Clubhouse Concept



Date: 2-23-2001



FIGURE 14C   CABANA







 



Figure 14C - Cabana



Date: 2-23-2001



FIGURE 15A   ENTRANCE FEATURE CONCEPT PLAN







 



Figure 15A - Entrance Feature Concept Plan



FIGURE 15B   GUARDHOUSE CONCEPT







 



Figure 15B - Guardhouse Concept



FIGURE 15C   ENTRANCE MONUMENT CONCEPT







 



Figure 15C - Entrance Monument Concept



FIGURE 15D   COMMUNITY ENTRY MONUMENTS







 



Figure 15D - Community Entry Monuments



FIGURE 15E   ENTRANCE FEATURES







 



Figure 15E - Entrance Features



FIGURE 15F   ENTRANCE FEATURES







 



Figure 15F - Entrance Features



APPENDIX C: FLORIDA NATURE AND CULTURE CENTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
DESIGN GUIDELINES



INTRODUCTION



The Florida Nature and Culture Center is a religious retreat and conference
facility located one mile east of U.S. Highway 27 on S.W. 36th Street in the
City of Weston. The entire site contains approximately 118.4 acres of land.
The facility is a heavily landscaped, campus style complex comprised of 12
buildings that occupy less than 3% of the total site area. Of the total site
area, approximately 60 acres has been preserved in a natural state as
wetlands, grasslands and lake area, providing a habitat for numerous egrets,
eagles, herons and other forms of native wildlife. The Culture Center
recently invested more than one million dollars to further upgrade and
enhance this preserve.



The campus is comprised of six primary common buildings, the tallest of which
is 39 feet, with a spire or architectural feature that totals 54 feet in
height. In addition, the campus features six ancillary structures that
include five buildings containing visitor sleeping rooms and a caretaker’s
residence, as well as three miscellaneous buildings that include a pump room,
guard house and gift shop/storage room. The campus also features an
amphitheater that overlooks the lake that is located on the east side of the
property. The overall site, outside of the natural preserve area, contains
extensive landscaping with a variety of trees and shrubs. The entire complex,
including all structures, setbacks, landscaping, parking, signage and any
other development feature, as well as uses of structures, were constructed
consistent with the applicable regulations in effect at the time of
development and are considered legal and conforming. Any future development
on the site shall conform with these design guidelines.



As a facility that provides a venue for religious activity, education,
cultural exchange and meditation, the Florida Nature and Culture Center has
been planned and developed to create harmony with the surrounding natural
environment. As a result, the profile of the built environment is subdued,
while natural vistas, vegetation, landscaping and pedestrian activities are
emphasized to create a serene climate.



PERMITTED USES



The subject site is approved for use as retreat, education and conference
facilities, including accessory facilities to support the primary uses.
Accessory facilities include, but are not limited to, sanctuary, chapel,
reception hall, conference center, dining hall, multi-purpose center, guest
sleeping accommodations, caretaker’s residence, guard house, storage area
and gift shop.



TOTAL BUILDING SQUARE FOOTAGE



The campus currently contains approximately 150,000 square feet of primary
common, ancillary and miscellaneous building area. The total of all existing
and potential future building development on the site shall not exceed
257,928 square feet, which is only 5% of the entire site area.



MINIMUM OPEN SPACE



As open space is a key design feature that promotes the meditation qualities
and nature center aspects of the Culture Center, a minimum of 50% of the
gross site area shall be maintained in open space. Open space may include
pedestrian paths, pedestrian plazas, active recreation areas, lakes and
wetlands, but specifically excludes vehicular access areas or drive aisles,
parking lots and roofed structures.



ARCHITECTURAL STYLE AND COLOR PALETTE



The predominant architecture of structures on the campus may be described as
a Mediterranean theme. Primary common buildings feature pillared breezeways,
façade relief, decorative banding and hip and gable roof styles. Ancillary
buildings complement the predominant architectural scheme, and all buildings
feature neutral wall colors. Visual variations and aesthetic enhancements
include subdued red roofing and a variety of red brick pavers along the
central promenade of the campus. Any future development on the site will be
consistent and compatible with the existing style of development and current
color palette that has been utilized.



MAXIMUM HEIGHT



The height of the tallest primary common building is 39 feet. The
architectural feature totals 54 feet in height. Consistent with the existing
development, therefore, future structures will not exceed 39 feet in height,
and any future spire or architectural feature will not exceed 54 feet in
height. Additionally, the height of any future fence or wall will not exceed
the current height of such similar development features, which is a total of
ten feet.



SETBACKS: PRIMARY AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES



All structural setbacks on the site will not be less than 25 feet, with the
exception of fences or walls. Fences or walls may be located on the property
line, subject to meeting traffic and engineering safety standards.



PARKING



Parking is dispersed throughout the developed portion of the campus. This not
only makes parking more convenient for each of the campus buildings, but also
de-emphasizes the visual impact of any parking area. A total of 563 parking
spaces have been provided at the facility to serve the various primary common
buildings and ancillary buildings. All future uses will conform with
applicable parking regulations that may, with the approval of the City
Commission, include shared parking per Section 124.54(F) of the Code of
Ordinances.



LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING



The Florida Nature and Culture Center is a unique development because it
features a wetland preserve as well as serving as a nature center. The
preserve, which is located along the east, south and a portion of the west
side of the property, will remain in its natural state. The Culture Center
has recently invested more than one million dollars in this preserve to
upgrade and enhance it. This area will remain in its natural state and serves
as an expansive and natural buffer and landscape area for other properties
abutting it.



The balance of the site that does not abut the preserve, which is the north
side and a portion of the west side, features gentle berming and extensive
landscaping. Additionally, the interior of the site contains extensive
landscaping, including specimen trees and shrubs that are tagged with
identification and specie information, in keeping with the nature center
aspect of the campus. The preserve and the existing landscaping and berming
shall remain, and are considered consistent with and conforming to code
requirements.



SIGNAGE



The hierarchy of signage includes facility identification, directional signs
and traffic control signs. The Culture Center identification sign is
contained within the entry wall feature located within the property at the
entrance to the facility, as approved prior to construction. The directional
signs contained within the complex, as approved prior to construction, guide
motorists and pedestrians to the various buildings within the complex, while
the traffic control signs, such as “stop signs” and “keep right”
signs provide direction to motorists for safety purposes. Any additional
signs that are proposed for the campus will be consistent and compatible with
the general design, style and color scheme of the existing signage program;
otherwise conforming to the sign regulations in effect at that time.



APPENDIX D: ESTATES OF SWAN LAKE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT DESIGN
GUIDELINES



TABLE OF CONTENTS



   I.   INTRODUCTION



   II.   APPLICANT/OWNER/DESIGN TEAM



   III.   EXISTING CONDITIONS



   IV.   GENERAL DATA



   V.   RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



   VI.   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN



   VII.   OPEN SPACE



   VIII.   TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS



      TYPICAL INTERNAL 50' ROAD SECTION (Provided with FIGURE IOC)



   IX.   UTILITIES



   X.   GRADING, EXCAVATION AND DRAINAGE



   XI.   LAND DEDICATION



   XII.   DESIGN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



      (Design Development Criteria Table)



   XIII.   JOB SITE GUIDELINES



EXHIBITS



FIGURE 1   LOCATION MAP



FIGURE 2   LAND USE MAP



FIGURE 3   ZONING MAP



FIGURE 4   PROPOSED PLAT



FIGURE 5   LEGAL DESCRIPTION



FIGURE 6   SOIL SURVEY MAP



FIGURE 7   AERIAL



FIGURE 8   SECTION MAP



FIGURE 9   CONCEPTUAL MASTER PLAN EXHIBIT



FIGURE 9-A   PERVIOUS AND GREENSPACE EXHIBIT



FIGURE 9-B   LANDSCAPE BUFFERS EXHIBIT



FIGURE 9-C   SINGLE-FAMILY LANDSCAPE DATA TABLE FORM



FIGURE 10-A   40' TYPICAL LS/LME BUFFER SECTION



FIGURE 10-A1   40' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER SECTION



FIGURE 10-B   25' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER SECTION & EQUIPMENT SCREENING
PLAN



FIGURE 10-C   15' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER SECTION



I.   INTRODUCTION



The proposed site is located in the City of Weston and lies in Land Section
23 and Section 24, Township 50 South, Range 39 East. This planned development
district (PDD) rezoning application is titled Estates of Swan Lake PDD and
was prepared by CCL Consultants, Inc. of Pompano Beach, Florida. The purpose
of this rezoning is to define zoning regulations consistent with the City and
County Land Use Designations and to demonstrate that the intended use of the
parcel is in accordance with the City and County development goals and
objectives.



The project consists of 94 dwelling units on an overall site of 239.38 acres,
which provides a low-density development of one unit per 2.55 acres. Of that
acreage, approximately 93 will remain in conservation uses consisting of
approximately 63 acres of wetland mitigation and 30 acres to be used as a
water impoundment area and conveyed to South Florida Water Management
District.



The remainder of the property will be developed with homesites, entry
features, lakes, roads and buffer area. The lots will be generously sized 27
one-acre lots, 47 half-acre lots, and 20 third-acre lots.



The residential portion of the property consists of two parcels separated by
Southwest 36th Street (Subparcels). The 20 third-acre lots will be located on
the Subparcel that is south of Southwest 36th Street. There will be a
separate landscaped and gated entrance to each of the two Subparcels. This
submittal is made in accordance with Ordinance No. 98-41 of the City of
Weston Land Development Chapter.



II.   APPLICANT/OWNER/DESIGN TEAM



APPLICANT/OWNER:



Estates of Swan Lake, Corp.



6917 Collins Avenue



Miami Beach, FL 33141



Contact: Gregory Arnone



(305) 866-7272



AGENT:



Mathis & DeSanti Associates



2401 PGA Boulevard



Suite 280-D



Palm Beach Gardens, FL 33410



Contact: Chuck DeSanti



(561) 630-4877



ENGINEER:



CCL Consultants, Inc.



2200 Park Central Boulevard North



Suite 100



Pompano Beach, FL 33064



Contact: Richard C. Wohlfarth, P.E.



(954) 974-2200



ARCHITECT/PLANNER:



III.   EXISTING CONDITIONS



The proposed site contains approximately 239.38 acres of land which is
currently vacant, with a portion a mining quarry and a tree farm. The site is
generally located west of South Post Road, north of Windmill Ranch Estates,
east of the Florida Fruit Lands Company’s Subdivision and south of
Southwest 26th Street. The location of the site is graphically shown on the
location Map (see Figure 1). The property has a Land Use Designation of
Agricultural and the Current Zoning is A-1 and P.U.D. See Figures 2 and 3 for
the existing Land Use and Zoning Maps. See Figures 4 and 5 for a reduced copy
of the proposed Plat and a copy of the Legal Description.



Current and historical land uses of the property include tree farming, range
land for cattle, limerock quarry, and creation of lots with house pads. Such
uses have: allowed the proliferation of exotic and nuisance plant species;
disturbed or eliminated natural soil profiles; altered the hydrology; and
degraded historic wetlands. The degraded wetlands have been assessed by the
Broward County Department of Planning and Environmental Protections (DPEP),
the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD) and the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers (ACOE). The evaluations have established that a total of ±117.3
acres of mitigation is proposed to compensate for wetland impacts.
Environmental regulatory permits are pending.



The Soil Survey of Broward County, Florida, Eastern Part, indicates that
Lauderhill Muck was historically the primary soil type in the area with a
minor component of Dania Muck (see Figure 6). In many areas the historic soil
profile has been severely altered by past and present land uses. Both
Lauderhill and Dania Muck are characterized as “nearly level, very poorly
drained, organic soil underlain by limestone” at 20 to 40 inches and 14 to
20 inches, respectively.



The majority of the site is relatively flat with existing ground conditions
generally varying from approximately four and one-half feet NGVD to five and
one-half NGVD. Historically, activities pertaining to mining of the existing
quarry site represent the only features having substantial topographical
relief. Such features include the quarry, scrape down areas, soil and muck
wetlands and berms, and several lot pads.



The project is located entirely within the Indian Trace Development District.
Lake and canal easements within the project will be dedicated to either the
City/Indian Trace Development District or remain with the Estates of Swan
Lakes Homeowners’ Association , whichever is appropriate.



Many of the Physical Features can be seen on the attached aerial from
February 1998 (see Figure 7). Details of the adjacent area are shown on the
Section Map (see Figure 8).



IV.   GENERAL DATA



 



Location:
 
Weston, Florida


Proposed Zoning:
 
PDD


Land Use:
 
Agricultural


Dwelling Units :
 
94 DU


Gross Acreage:
 
239,38 AC


Public Right-Of-Way Dedication:

(corner chord & turn lane)
 
1,948 S.F.


Conservation Area
 
93.32 AC


Lake Area:

(including L.M.E.)
 
55.01 AC


Density:
 
1 DU /2.54 AG


Product Types:
 
No. of Units


One-Acre Lots :
 

27



Half-Acre Lots :
 

47



Third-Acre Lots :
 

20




 

94 Units





 



V.   RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



The Broward County and City of Weston’s Comprehensive Plans designate the
Property as agricultural. Under both plans, property designated agricultural
is allowed to be developed with residential uses at a density of one unit to
two and one-half acres. The units are allowed to be clustered if:



   (1)   The parcel is development under a unified development plan;



   (2)   The areas from which density is transferred are relinquished
of the right to be developed; and



   (3)   The arrangement of dwelling units conforms to locally
established development standards.



The approval of this PDD would comply with those requirements.



VI.   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN



The Master Development Plan for the Property is shown in Figure 9. The
project as proposed, consists of a residential component of 94 single-family
homes and a conservation component that consists of 93.32 acres of mitigation
and water impoundment area.



   A.   Residential Component



The residential program is divided into three residential elements. Housing
types to be one to three story detached single-family units with garages and
accessory buildings, as permitted by the City’s Land Development Chapter.
The single-family Homes are designed to provide approximately 1.0 acre lots
(“None-Acre Lots ”), approximately one-half acre lots (“Half-Acre Lots
”), and the approximately one-third acre lots (“Third-Acre Lots ”)
gross area.



The Conceptual Master Plan (see Figure 9) illustrates the configuration and
land use of the PDD. The land use program is as follows:



 


 

ACREAGE

 

D.U.





One-Acre Lots
 

27.91 AC

 

27



Half-Acre Lots
 

36.09 AC

 

47



Third-Acre Lots
 

7.98 AC

 

20



Open Space
 



 





• Common Areas
 

13.39 AC

 





• Lakes
 

42.43 AC

 





• Conservation Area (includes perimeter berm)
 

97.42 AC

 





Roadways (Private)
 

14.16 AC

 

-



TOTAL
 

239.38 AC

 

94





 



   B.   Conservation Component



The 93.32 acres of land within the conservation component will consist of a
wetland mitigation area and a water preservation area. This property will be
subject to restrictive covenant that limit the uses of the property and that
prohibit any residential units on these conservation areas.



The uses permitted in the Water Preserve Areas include the following:



      1.   Creation, enhancement or restoration of wetlands, and the
establishment of public or private mitigation banks.



      2.   Surface impoundments that store water at depths not to
exceed 12 feet and which are consistent with the Study.



      3.   Construction and operation of water control structures.
Structures required for this purpose may include berms, dikes, levees and
pumps.



      4.   Construction and operation of passive water quality
treatment facilities. Areas required to provide surge basins to hold water
awaiting treatment are also allowed.



      5.   Structures designed to promote the storage of water
underground, which may include aquifer storage and recovery systems, pumps
designed to promote groundwater recharge, and seepage management features,
which may include curtain wall or other types of technology.



      6.   Water conveyance facilities or structures.



      7.   Public recreational uses to the extent that they do not
interfere with the primary functions of the water preserve areas as
established through the Water Preserve Area feasibility Study.



Modification of Specifically Delineated Lot Lines



The Developer shall have the right to assemble the planed building lots into
larger lots by combining two lots or by combining one lot with a portion of
another lot. In the case of such assemblages a unity of title shall be
provided to the City for the enlarged lot area. Where a lot is combined with
a portion of another lot, the remaining portion of subdivided lot shall be
combined with the adjacent lot so that two enlarged lots are created from
three lots and a unity of title shall be provided to the City for each of the
Lots . No additional building lots or parcels (in total) shall be created by
these modifications nor shall they result in lots smaller than the minimum
lot dimensions within that development Subparcel.



VII.   OPEN SPACE



   A.   Calculation of Open Space Exclusive of Lot Areas



      The PDD contains a significant amount of open space consisting of
the following:



 

On-site mitigation
 

63.32 acres



Water Impoundment Area
 

30.00 acres



Perimeter Mitigation Berm
 

4.10 acres



Lake Area and Lake Maintenance area
 

51.68 acres



Landscape Buffer Areas and Landscaped Common Areas
 

13.39 acres



Total Open Space Provided

(Exclusive of previous area within lots)
 

162.44 acres



Open Space Percentage
 

67.9%




 



   B.   Description of Open Space Components/Ownership



      (1)   The Onsite Mitigation area will consist of 63.32 acres
of high quality wetlands, open water and buffer areas. The Property used for
the mitigation area shall be subject to a conservation easement that requires
the property to be maintained as a restored wetland. The Onsite Mitigation
Area will either be conveyed to the Indian Trace Development District or the
Estates of Swan Lake Homeowners’ Association (whichever is appropriate).



      (2)   The water impoundment area (“WIA”) shall be conveyed
to SFWMD and shall be restricted to water preserve area uses as described in
Section VI. The WIA shall be subject to a declaration of restrictions that
limits the uses of the WIA property to a surface water impoundment and
ancillary facilities needed to support that use of the property.



      (3)   Lake area and Lake Maintenance Area shall be conveyed
either to the Indian Trace Development District or the Estates of Swan Lake
Homeowners’ Association (whichever is appropriate), to be used for water
management for the Estates of Swan Lake Development.



      (4)   The Landscape Open Space and Buffer Areas shall be owned
and maintained by the Estates of Swan Lake Homeowners’ Association and
shall be designed in substantial conformity with the cross-sections shown in
Figures 10-A and 10-B.



   C.   Lot Open Space



The overall open space within the lots will be a minimum of 40% resulting in
approximately 28 acres of additional open space.



   D.   Ownership of Common Areas



The Landscape Open Space Common Areas together with the other common areas,
including but not limited to, entry features, roadways, sidewalks, and
utility easement areas shall be conveyed into the ownership of the Estates of
Swan Lake Homeowners’ Association and shall be the maintenance obligation
of that association. The Estates of Swan Lake Homeowners’ Association shall
be created and the homeowners’ documents shall be placed of record prior to
the conveyance of any of the residential lots.



VIII.   TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS



The traffic concurrency issue is currently being addressed by Kimley-Horn &
Associates, Inc. Recommendations with regard to traffic will be forthcoming
in their report.



The minimum proposed roadway easement within the PDD will be 50 feet.
Sidewalks shall be provided on through streets as either one eight-foot
sidewalk or two five-foot sidewalks. See Figure 10-C for dimensions and
detailed requirements.



IX.   UTILITIES



Water and sewer for the project will be provided by the City of Weston. The
project has the following existing utilities at the intersection of South
Post Road and Southwest 36th Street:



   1.   12-inch D.I.P. watermain (W.M.) running north/south on the west
side of South Post Road with a ten-inch W.M. running west on the north side
of Southwest 36th Street.



   2.   16-inch D.I.P. force main (F.M.) running north/south on the
west side of South Post Road with a eight-inch F.M. running west on the south
side of Southwest 36th Street.



The on-site water system shall consist of a eight-inch P.V.C. looped system
to maintain water quality per BCHD rules and to provide adequate fire flow.
The eight-inch W.M. will tie into the existing 12- inch W.M. along South Post
Road and the ten-foot W.M. along Southwest 36th Street. The sanitary sewer
system shall consist of a eight-inch P.V.C. gravity system from each unit to
the proposed lift station for the project, which will then tie into the
16-inch F.M. on South Post Road. The City of Weston is unsure as to how far
the existing utilities run to the north along South Post Road; therefore, the
City may require, and developer will provide extensions from Southwest 36th
Street to the project’s tie-in points for water and sewer, if necessary. No
other extensions are proposed to be required or provided.



X.   GRADING, EXCAVATION AND DRAINAGE



The proposed stormwater management system will consist of man-made lakes and
a mitigation area hydraulically connected to the C-11 canal via Ditch 3. The
stormwater will be controlled to assure that the minimum roadway elevation is
at or above the ten-year one-day storm event and the finished floor
elevations shall be constructed at an elevation higher than the 100-year
three-day storm stage. The primary drainage system will consist of catch
basins and drainage pipe connected to the lake/canal system. The outfall
catch basins will be provided with pollution control devices to mitigate the
point discharge of pollutants into the lake system. The water management
system shall be designed to meet the criteria of the South Florida Water
Management District and the City of Weston Water Control District.



The subsurface at this site generally consists of rock overlain with a layer
of muck two to four feet thick. The rock in this area is normally very hard
and difficult to excavate, it is anticipated that the rock will be blasted
then excavated using conventional methods. Muck will be removed in lot and
roadway areas and structural fill will be placed to bring these areas to
grade.



The stormwater will be controlled to assure that the minimum roadway
elevation is AT OR ABOVE THE GREATER OF 6.9 N.G.V.D. and the ten-year one-day
storm event and the finished floor elevations shall be constructed at an
elevation AT OR ABOVE THE GREATER OF 8.0 FEET N.G.V.D. and the 100-year
three-day storm stage.



XI.   LAND DEDICATION



All roadways within the development will be private. The only public
Right-Of-Way dedication being proposed is the corner chord and right turn
lane off South Post Road. “Land Dedication” and all modifications,
dedications and vacation of utility, canal, landscape, lake maintenance
easements and Right-Of-Way vacations shall be made in accordance with the
City of Weston Land Development Chapter and shall be handled concurrently
with the plat, rezoning and site plan approval process.



The Developer proposes to dedicate to the Homeowners’ Association the
private roadways and all other common areas within the PDD.



XII.   DESIGN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



The development described within the PDD shall comply with the regulations of
Ordinance No. 98-41, the PDD district of the Weston Land Development Chapter;
as well as Ordinance No. 1999-13, lighting standards requirements; Ordinance
No. 98-8, landscape standards; Ordinance No. 98-14, signage requirements, and
all other applicable sections of the Code .



Typical building plans, floor plans and architectural elevations shall be
subject to review during the building permit review process. The table which
follows describes development criteria for the PDD.



 

Housing Type*1
 
Total Number Permitted
 
Lot Size*2
 
Mm. Lot Sq. Ft.
 
Mm. Lot Width*6
 
Mm. Lot Depth*  7
 
Mm. Lot Frontage
 
Mm. Home Sq. Ft.*3
 
Max Hgt. Ft.*4
 
Setbacks Front (Bldg.) Ft.
 
Front (Garage) Ft.
 
Rear Building) Ft.
 
Rear (S/P) Ft.*5
 
Side Ft.
 
Street Side Ft.




Acre
 
27
 
 
 
35,000
 
175'
 
235'
 
50'
 
4,500 s.f.
 
40'
 
45'
 
25'
 
50'
 
10'/5'
 
25'
 
25'


HaIf-Acre
 
47
 
 
 
15,000
 
125'
 
200'
 
50
 
3,500 s.f.
 
40'
 
35'
 
25'
 
25'
 
10'/5'
 
15'
 
25'


Third-Acre
 
20
 
90' x 130'
 
13,000
 
100'
 
133'
 
50'
 
2,500 s.f.
 
40'
 
25'
 
25'
 
15'
 
10'/5'
 
10'
 
16'


* FOOTNOTES:


1.If lot size is not specified above, design guidelines for most similar lot
size will be utilized.


2.Platted and/or lot of sale.


3.Air conditioned living area.


4.Measured to peak of roof.


5.(S/P) = Screened enclosure setback/pool setback when not screen enclosed.


6.A minimum is measured as an average of the front and rear setbacks for
irregularly shaped lot.


7.   For pie shaped lots, the minimum depth may be reduced by not more
than 40'; all other Iot may be reduced to less than the minimum specified.


NOTE:   Signage, landscaping and irrigation requirements for each housing
type will be provided in accordance with current or amended City of Weston
Code.




 



Pool/Spa Regulation



Private swimming pools and in ground spas are permitted in the rear or side
yards in the PDD subject to the following standards:



   1.   The pool shall be located at least five feet from the rear or
interior side property line and five feet from any portion of a building.
Such setbacks shall be measured from the deck line or screening of the pools.
If the proposed waterline is closer than five feet to the structure a
structural engineer must include a letter or state on the plans that all
precautions to protect the existing structure from failure shall be done by
shoring, underpinning or any method as required. Closed indoor or covered
swimming pools except in screening enclosed pools shall meet all yard
requirements in the District for which the pool is located.



   2.   The entire pool shall be enclosed with a fence five feet in
height minimum or open screen mesh enclosure which shall have a gate/door
with a self locking/closing device which must be engaged when the pool is not
in use. Any fence used must have less than a four inch gap between openings
(from fence to grade per the South Florida Building Code). Hedges shall not
satisfy the pool enclosure requirements.



   3.   All new residential swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall
comply with F.S. Chapter 515, The “Preston de lbern/Mckenzie Merriam
Residential Swimming Pool Safety Act” regarding pool safety requirements
and options.



Signage Regulation



   A.   Intent



The objective of a quality signing and graphics program is to present a clear
hierarchy of information, direction and organization. Conformity in style,
materials and location of signage will be a major element in establishing the
design theme continuity within the Estates of Swan Lake.



Signage must not conflict with any traffic control signs or be misleading,
confusing or hazardous.



   B.   Sign Types



      1.   Permanent Signage:



         a.   Main entry identification/feature;



         b.   Directional/informational;



         c.   House number signs;



         d.   Street identification signs.



      2.   Temporary Signage:



         a.   Construction ;



         b.   Future site.



   C.   Signage Location and Size



The Applicant will be required by the Developer to identify and construct
main entry signage to property, vehicular directional and regulatory signage
as applicable to the site at the builder’s own expense.



      1.   One freestanding identification, monument sign per street
frontage which provides primary access to property, 32 square feet maximum
area and eight-foot maximum height, set back a minimum of ten feet from
adjacent property.



      2.   Vehicular directional/information sign locations and
quantities within Applicant ’s property, six square feet maximum area and
three feet maximum height.



      3.   House number signs shall be three inches in height and
located on a mailbox or attached to the portion of the house facing and
closest to the street so there is no unobstructed view of the house’s
numbers.



      4.   Street identification signs shall be installed prior to
the issuance of the first building permit.



      5.   Construction signs shall only identify the name of the
project under construction, or its owner, developer, planner, architect,
engineer, builder or financier. There is to be one construction sign per
construction site, a maximum of 16 square feet and removed within five days
of the date of the issuance of a Certificate Of Occupancy .



   D.   Illuminated Signs



      1.   All sign structures are to be ground lighted.



      2.   Exposed outdoor neon signs and flashing or annoying
lighted signs are not acceptable.



      3.   Lighting fixtures shall comply with the overall design
theme for the development.



   E.   Manufacturing and Installation



      1.   All signs must be submitted to the City for approval of
materials, color, lettering and fabrication.



      2.   Sign fabricator shall provide a sample of the finish
color and material of each sigh type for approval.



      3.   All units shall be constructed and installed in a
workman-like manner.



      4.   The Applicant shall be responsible for the cost of
designing, ordering, fabrication, construction, installation and maintenance
of signs and graphics.



Lighting Regulation



All internal roadways shall have street lights installed similar to
“Windmill Ranch Estates” providing a safe lighting environment while
creating an attractive ambiance common to low-density development.



Landscape and Irrigation Regulation



LANDSCAPE:



A City of Weston Landscape Specification For Single-FamilyDwelling form shall
be completed and submitted to the City for each individual lot (See Exhibit
9-C for example). The City of Weston reserves the right to amend this form.
Therefore, contact the City for the most current Single-Family Data Table
form.



 

StreetTrees :
 
1 StreetTree for approximately each 35 linear feet of Right-Of-Way


Sod:
 
No more than 80% of the landscape areas will be sod. All pervious areas shall
be landscaped with Floratam sod and/or planting beds.


Screening Plants:
 
Plant material used for screening all above ground equipment shall be equal
to the height of such elements.


Buffer Hedges :
 
Hedge plant material shall be maintained at a height of three feet along
abutting Rights-Of-Way .


Site Lighting and Trees :
 
No Canopy Tree shall be located within 12 feet of a light pole and no Palm
species within 6 feet of a light pole.


Native and Drought Tolerance:
 
Native and drought tolerance: 50% of required plant species shall be native
arid drought tolerant.



 



ENTRANCE LANDSCAPE FEATURES:



Entrance landscape concepts will be designed around faux bridges and gate
houses which have been set. The design will have a causeway feeling taking
advantage of the water views. The completed concepts for all common areas
will come back to City Staff for review.



IRRIGATION:



All landscape areas shall be served by a permanent irrigation system.
Irrigation systems will be designed with separate zones to apply water onto
tree and shrub areas less frequently than sod areas. All zones shall be
designed to have 100% coverage with 100% overlap. Rain sensor switches shall
be installed with automatic controllers.



XIII.   JOB SITE GUIDELINES



   A.   Start of Construction



No lot clearing or placement of either sales and/or construction trailers,
and portable toilets will be permitted until closing on the lot has occurred,
all required governmental permits are obtained and formal written approval of
the ARB has been granted.



   B.   Portable Toilets, Construction Trailers and Sales Trailers



Prior to commencing work, all temporary facilities must be placed on the job
site and in a manner so as to least disturb other residents, other
construction and the marketing of the community. Portable toilets shall be
cleaned on a regular basis and shall not become noxious.



   C.   Construction Traffic



Parking of construction vehicles is prohibited on swales or grassy areas.
Washing of vehicles on the streets is also prohibited. Construction parking
is prohibited on public Rights-Of-Way .



   D.   Construction Hours



The construction working hours shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 7:30 p.m. Monday
through Friday, Saturday 7:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Sunday 12:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m. except on certain holidays. Additional hours may be provided upon
approval of the ARB.



   E.   Site Clean-Up



All construction sites must be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.
Trash from construction work will be contained in a trash dumpster or removed
from the job site on a routine basis. The Application is responsible for
trash that blows off the site and shall retrieve such trash. There will not
be stockpiling or dumping on streets or in the lakes, waterways or wetlands.
Trash removed by the Developer will be billed to the responsible Applicant .
Applicant will use only the utilities provided on the immediate site on which
they are working.



   F.   Construction Damage



Any damage to streets and curbs, drainage inlets, sidewalks, street lights,
street markers, mail boxes, walls, etc., will be repaired by the Applicant at
its sole cost and its expense. If said damage is not repaired by the
Applicant , the Developer may repair said damage and bill same to Applicant .



   G.   Established Speed Limit



The established speed limit within the Estates of Swan Lake is 25 mph for
construction vehicles, including light trucks and auto.



   H.   Construction Spillages



Operators of vehicles are required to clean up if spillage of a load occurs
while within the Estates of Swan Lake. Clean-ups done by the Applicant at its
sole cost and its expense. If said damage is not repaired by the Applicant ,
the Developer may repair said damage and bill same to Applicant .



   I.   Telephone (Cable TV Lines)



If any telephone, cable television, electrical, water, etc., lines are cut,
it is the Participating Building ’s responsibility to report the accident
to the Developer’s field representative. Costs incurred to repair such
damages, if applicable, will be charged to the Applicant .



   J.   Construction Site Appearance



All personnel working in the Estates of Swan Lakes are to keep all areas in
which they work free of discarded materials such as lunch bags and odd
materials. Throwing objects out of cars and trucks is prohibited.



   K.   Loud Noise Levels



Loud radios or noise will not be allowed within the Estates of Swan Lake.
This is distracting and discomforting to Property Owners . Normal radio
levels are acceptable. Do not mount speakers on vehicles or outside of homes
under construction.



   L.   Vehicles and Equipment



The Developer is not responsible for any vehicle or its contents (trucks,
vans, cars, etc.) left in the Estates of Swan Lake overnight Construction
equipment may be left on the site while needed, but must be kept on the
street, unless prior permission has been granted.



   M.   Personnel



Only bona fide workers are allowed on the construction sites and are required
to exit the property upon completion of their work. No children or family
members of workers will be permitted on the construction sites. No alcoholic
beverages are permitted on the property. Participating Builder personnel will
not be permitted to bring pets on property.



   N.   Lake Restrictions



No hazardous or toxic substances, chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers or any
other matter shall be dumped into any lake, wetland or canal which is within
or abuts the properties or surface water management system of the properties.
The use of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be prohibited on any
wetlands or preservation areas.



   O.   Construction Inspection



Although the Applicant is responsible to comply with the conditions of the
ARB approval, periodic inspections may be made by the ARB while construction
is in progress to determine compliance with the approved architectural
documents. However, the ARB is not specifically responsible to make such an
inspection. The ARB is empowered to enforce its policy, as set forth in the
Declaration and this manual, by any action, including an action in a court of
law, to insure compliance.



EXHIBITS



[Note: To view Figures 1-10C in PDF, click HERE]



FIGURE 1   LOCATION MAP







 



Figure 1 - Location Map



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 2   LAND USE MAP



 







Figure 2 - Land Use Map



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 3   ZONING MAP



 







Figure 3 - Zoning Map



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 4   PROPOSED PLAT



 







Figure 4 - Proposed Plat



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 5   LEGAL DESCRIPTION







 



Figure 5 - Legal Description



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 6   SOIL SURVEY MAP







 



Figure 6 - Soil Survey Map



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 7   AERIAL







 



Figure 7 - Aerial



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 8   SECTION MAP







 



Figure 8 - Section Map



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 9   CONCEPTUAL MASTER PLAN EXHIBIT







 



Figure 9 - Conceptual Master Plan Exhibit



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 9-A   PERVIOUS AND GREENSPACE EXHIBIT







 



Figure 9-A - Pervious and Greenspace Exhibit



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 9-B   LANDSCAPE BUFFERS EXHIBIT







 



Figure 9-B - Landscape Buffers Exhibit



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 9-C   SINGLE-FAMILY LANDSCAPE DATA TABLE FORM







 



Figure 9-C - Single-Family Landscape Data Table Form



FIGURE 10-A   40' TYPICAL LS/LME BUFFER SECTION







 



Figure 10-A - 40' Typical LS/LME Buffer Section



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 10-A1   40' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER SECTION







 



Figure 10-A1 - 40' Typical Landscape Buffer Section



FIGURE 10-B   25' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER SECTION & EQUIPMENT SCREENING
PLAN







 



Figure 10-B - 25' Typical Landscape Buffer Section & Equipment Screening Plan



Date: 5-5-2000



FIGURE 10-C   15' TYPICAL LANDSCAPE BUFFER SECTION







 



Figure 10-C - 15' Typical Landscape Buffer Section



Date: 5-5-2000


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 125:  LAND DEVELOPMENT



Section



Part 1:  Administration and Procedure



   125.01   Development review required



   125.02   Application for development permits



   125.03   Revocation of development permits for material
misrepresentation or mistake



   125.04   Review of applications for development permits



   125.05   Procedures for development review



   125.06   Requirements for advertising and notice



   125.07   Violation of development permits and development orders



   125.08   Procedures for vacation of right-of-way or easement




Part 2:  Standards




   125.10   Development review requirements



   125.11   Adequacy of regional road network



   125.12   Adequacy of the local road network



   125.13   Access to trafficways



   125.14   Adequacy of stormwater management



   125.15   Adequacy of potable water service



   125.16   Adequacy of wastewater treatment and disposal services



   125.17   Adequacy of solid waste disposal sites or facilities



   125.18   Adequacy of solid waste collection service



   125.19   Adequacy of fire protection service



   125.20   Adequacy of municipal facilities



   125.21   Adequacy of public school facilities



   125.22   Impact on environmentally sensitive lands and
archaeological resources



   125.23   Conformity to the City certified land use plan




Part 3:  Plats




   125.30   Land required to be platted



   125.31   Building permits prior to plat recordation



   125.32   Mandatory plat review



   125.33   Notation on face of plat



   125.34   Installation of improvements



   125.35   Waiver of required dedications and improvements for
affordable housing




Part 4:  Site Plans





Procedures




   125.40   Site plan review



   125.41   Site plan application and review



   125.42   Unity of title or covenant in lieu of unity of title




Design Requirements




   125.50   Off-street parking facilities



   125.51   Loading facilities



   125.52   Vehicular reservoir areas



   125.53   Access for fire-rescue vehicles



   125.54   Driveway entrance from public or private Right-Of-Way



   125.55   Limitations on improvements in the ultimate Right-Of-Way



   125.56   Sight distance



   125.57   Access to trafficway corridors



   125.58   Design of trafficway corridors



   125.59   Design of nontrafficway corridors



   125.60   Standards for local roadway improvements



   125.61   Design criteria for local roadways



   125.62   Pervious area and greenspace



   125.63   Archaeologically significant lands



   125.64   Sidewalks



   125.65   Outparcel and multi-tenant properties



   125.66   Building elevations



PART 1:  ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURE



§ 125.01  DEVELOPMENT REVIEW REQUIRED.



   An application for Development Review shall be submitted to the City
prior to approval of any of the following:



   125.01(A)   Site plans;



   125.01(B)   Plats;



   125.01(C)   Plat amendments;



   125.01(D)   Rezonings;



   125.01(E)   Comprehensive Plan amendments;



   125.01(F)   Special exceptions;



   125.01(G)   Variances; or



   125.01(H)   Any other Development of land requiring a permit.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.02  APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   The Owner of the property that will be developed if the permit is
approved must make any application for a Development Permit required or
authorized under this Chapter on forms provided by the City. If any Person or
entity will be acting as agent for the property Owner , the application must
clearly indicate by affidavit of the Owner that he or she or the entity has
given the agent full authority to bind the Owner to any condition that may be
imposed upon the issuance of the Development Permit .



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.03  REVOCATION OF DEVELOPMENT PERMITS FOR MATERIAL MISREPRESENTATION
OR MISTAKE.



   125.03(A)   Generally.  The City Manager, either on his or her own
initiative or upon the request of the Mayor or a City Commissioner, shall
determine whether or not a material misrepresentation or mistake, regardless
of any intent to deceive, has occurred during the application or approval
process of any Development Permit. Should the City Manager determine that
there is a reasonable likelihood that such a material misrepresentation or
mistake has occurred, and provided that it is within ten Years of the date
such material misrepresentation or mistake was made, he or she shall schedule
a revocation of Development Permit hearing before the City Commission.



   125.03(B)   Revocation hearing.  The City Commission may order the
revocation of a Development Permit, at a revocation of Development Permit
hearing, if the City Commission finds:



   125.03(B)(1)   A material misrepresentation or mistake is contained
in the application for a Development Permit ; or



   125.03(B)(2)   A material misrepresentation or mistake is contained
in any documentation, that was provided by the Applicant or anyone on his or
her behalf, supporting the application for a Development Permit ; or



   125.03(B)(3)   Material misrepresentation or mistake was made by the
Applicant , or anyone on his or her behalf, in any oral or written
presentation to the City relating to the application or approval process.



   125.03(C)   Removal of Structure or Building.  Should the City
Commission find that a material misrepresentation or mistake was made during
the application or approval process, regardless of an intent to deceive, it
may order the removal of the Structure or Building that was permitted to be
constructed as a result of the approval. Should the nature of the
misrepresentation or mistake be such that the granting of a variance could
cure it, the Owner of the Building or Structure found to be in violation of
this section shall have 30 calendar days to apply for such a variance to
allow the Structure to remain in place. If no variance is applied for, or the
variance is denied, and at the conclusion of any applicable appeal, the City
shall provide the Owner, by certified mail at the address listed in the
Property Appraiser’s records, with a Notice to Vacate and Demolish.
Thereafter, the Building or Structure must be demolished within 90 days of
the mailing of the written notice. If the Structure has not been demolished
at the end of 90 days, the City may contract for the demolition, the cost of
which shall be a lien against the property coequal with the lien of taxes and
superior to all other liens against the property.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.04  REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   No application for a Development Permit to be issued by the City for
the Development of land within the City shall be reviewed, or a Development
Permit issued, except in compliance with the requirements and procedures set
forth in this Chapter.



   125.04(A)   City Commission review.  Applications for Plat
approval, modifications to conditions of Plat approval, including amendments
or revisions to a non-vehicular access line, amendments to, or placement of,
notation on the face of the Plat; variances and special exceptions; site
plans and amendments to site plans requiring City Commission action; and
applications for land use plan amendments, rezoning, and DRI Development
Orders shall be subject to City Commission review. An application for a
Development Permit requiring City Commission review shall comply with the
following:



   125.04(A)(1)   The applicable provisions of this Chapter.



   125.04(A)(2)   The applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances,
and all other ordinances affecting the Development of land for Development
Permit . All applications for a Development Permit must be consistent with
the zoning code at the time the application is heard by the City Commission.



   125.04(A)(3)   The applicable provisions of the Broward County Land
Use Plan and the City of Weston Comprehensive Plan. An application for final
Plat approval or an amendment to a notation on the Plat must be consistent
with the Broward County and local Certified Land Use Plans at the time the
application is heard by the City Commission.



   125.04(B)   Administrative review.  A Development Permit not
requiring City Commission approval shall be subject to administrative review.
All applications for Development Permits requiring administrative review
shall comply with the following:



   125.04(B)(1)   The applicable provisions of this Chapter.



   125.04(B)(2)   The applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances,
the applicable provisions of the Building Code , and all other ordinances
affecting the Development of land for Development Permit .



   125.04(B)(3)   The applicable provisions of the elements of the City
of Weston Comprehensive Plan.



   125.04(C)   Affidavits of Applicant.



   125.04(C)(1)   Applicant Representative Affidavit.  Each individual
or entity applying for a Development Permit must submit, with the
application, an Applicant Representative Affidavit.” The affidavit must be
on a form provided by the City and be signed by an authorized representative
of the individual or entity applying for the Development Permit, and the
Owner of the property subject to the application (if different), whose
signatures must be notarized. The form for the affidavit shall be prepared
and distributed by the City Manager and shall identify all Persons
representing the individual or entity applying for the Development Permit in
connection with the application, including, but not limited to, all
attorneys, architects, Landscape Architects, Engineers and lobbyists. Any
statement or representation made by any Person listed on the Applicant
Representative Affidavit shall be binding upon the individual or entity
applying for the Development Permit and the Owner of the subject property.



   125.04(C)(2)   Business Relationship Affidavit.  Each individual or
entity applying for a Development Permit, the Owner of the property subject
to the application, and each individual or entity appearing on the Applicant
Representative Affidavit must submit, with the application, a “Business
Relationship Affidavit.” The affidavit must be on a form provided by the
City and be signed by an authorized representative of individual or entity
submitting the affidavit, whose signature must be notarized. The form for the
affidavit shall be prepared and distributed by the City Manager and shall
require the individual or entity to disclose whether it has any Business
Relationships with any member of the City Commission, and, if so, disclose
the identity of the member with which it has a Business Relationship and the
nature of the Business Relationship.



   125.04(C)(3)   Duty to supplement affidavits.  If, at any time
prior to City Commission consideration of an application for a Development
Permit, the information contained in any Applicant Representative Affidavit
or Business Relationship Affidavit becomes incorrect or incomplete, the
Person or entity submitting the affidavit must supplement the affidavit and,
if the supplementation requires the submission of additional Applicant
Representative Affidavits or Business Relationship Affidavits, ensure that
such affidavits are also filed. If any supplementary affidavits are submitted
less than 14 days before the application is scheduled for consideration by
the City Commission, the application may be withdrawn by the City Manager and
placed on a subsequent agenda.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.05  PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT REVIEW.



   Any application for a Development Permit required or authorized under
this Chapter shall require a Development Order to be granted by the City
Manager or the City Commission prior to issuance of the Development Permit .
The following procedures shall govern the review of applications for
Development Permits subsequent to filing:



   125.05(A)   Completeness of application.  The City Manager shall
review the application for Development Permit to determine its completeness.
If the application is incomplete, the Applicant shall be advised in writing
as to the missing items.



   125.05(B)   Discipline review.  Upon acceptance of an application
for a Development Permit, the City Manager shall forward a copy of the
application and accompanying material to each of the following disciplines
for review: Engineering, Traffic Engineering, Planning and Zoning, Fire
Prevention, Public Works/Utilities, Landscaping, Survey, Building, and any
other discipline, as applicable.



   125.05(C)   Review responsibilities.  Each reviewing discipline
shall prepare a staff report which sets out in writing its comments and
recommendations regarding the application for Development Permit, and shall
forward such staff report to the City Manager.



   125.05(D)   Administrative review.



   125.05(D)(1)   If the application is for Development of
Single-Family units within a lotted subdivision, the application shall be
subject to review by those disciplines that the City Manager deems
appropriate. Within seven working days of acceptance of a completed
application for Development Permit subject to administrative review, the City
Manager shall make a determination, based upon required discipline reviews:



   125.05(D)(1)(a)   That the application complies with the applicable
standards and minimum requirements of this Chapter, in which case the City
Manager shall issue a Development Order granting the application; or



   125.05(D)(1)(b)   That the application is not in compliance with the
applicable standards and minimum requirements of this Chapter, in which case
the City Manager shall issue a Development Order denying the application.



   125.05(D)(2)   A Development Order denying an application shall
include a statement of the basis for denial. A Development Order granting an
application with conditions shall include a statement of said conditions and
the basis therefor.



   125.05(E)   City Commission review.  Prior to the scheduled
development review meeting, the City Manager shall compile the individual
staff reports, and prepare a written development review report.



   125.05(F)   Referral of applications to City Commission.



   125.05(F)(1)   For applications subject to City Commission review,
upon compliance with all conditions contained in the report, the City Manager
shall submit the development review report and recommendation to the City
Clerk for scheduling on the next available agenda of the City Commission.



   125.05(F)(2)   If the application is subject to administrative
review and the City Manager believes there is a substantial question
regarding the interpretation of this chapter as it applies to the
application, the City Manager may refer the matter to the City Commission for
a determination.



   125.05(G)   City Commission review: Development Order.



   125.05(G)(1)   At a regularly scheduled public meeting the City
Commission shall review the application for conformity to this Chapter and
shall act upon the application. The City Commission shall make one of the
following determinations:



   125.05(G)(1)(a)   That the application is in compliance with the
applicable standards and minimum requirements of all applicable codes, in
which case the City Commission shall adopt a resolution granting approval of
the application;



   125.05(G)(1)(b)   That the application is not in compliance with the
applicable standards and minimum requirements of all applicable codes, in
which case the City Commission shall adopt a resolution denying the
application; or



   125.05(G)(1)(c)   That the application is not in compliance with the
applicable standards and minimum requirements of all applicable codes, but
conditions have been determined by the City Commission to be reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with the applicable standards and minimum
requirements, in which case the City Commission shall adopt a resolution
granting approval of the application with said conditions.



   125.05(G)(2)   In the case of land use plan amendments, rezonings,
and DRI Development Orders, the City Commission shall adopt an ordinance
granting approval of the application.



   125.05(H)   Effect of Development Order.



   125.05(H)(1)   No Development Permit shall be issued except pursuant
to an effective Development Order .



   125.05(H)(2)   No Development Permit shall be issued for a
Development which is inconsistent with the Development Order governing such
Development.



   125.05(I)   Time limitation on re-filing of applications.



   125.05(I)(1)   Whenever the City Commission has denied an
application for a Development Permit, the City Manager shall not accept the
same or substantially the same application for a period of 12 months from the
date of the denial by the City Commission. The above time limit may be waived
by the City Commission by an affirmative vote of four City Commissioners when
the full City Commission is present, or by a unanimous vote of all City
Commissioners present if less than the full City Commission is present, when
the City Commission deems such an action necessary due to changed
circumstances, to prevent an injustice, or to facilitate the proper
development of the City based upon evidence provided by the Applicant .



   125.05(I)(2)   Whenever the City Manager has denied an application
for a Development Permit and that denial has not been appealed by the City
Commission, the City Manager shall not accept the same or substantially the
same application for a period of 12 months from the date of the denial. The
above time limit may be waived by the City Manager when he or she deems such
action necessary due to changed circumstances, to prevent an injustice, or to
facilitate the proper development of the City based upon evidence provided by
the Applicant .



   125.05(I)(3)   Whenever the Applicant withdraws an application for a
Development Permit:



   125.05(I)(3)(a)   If the withdrawal occurs prior to the application
being advertised for a Commission hearing, it may be re-filed at any time.



   125.05(I)(3)(b)   If the withdrawal occurs after the application has
been advertised for a Commission hearing but before the hearing begins, the
City Manager shall not accept the same or substantially the same application
for a period of 25 days from the date of the withdrawal.



   125.05(I)(3)(c)   If the withdrawal occurs after the Commission
hearing on the application has been opened, the withdrawal will be treated as
a denial for the purpose of resubmission.



   125.05(I)(4)      If a deferral of an application occurs after
the application has been advertised for a Commission hearing, the deferral
will be treated as a denial for the purpose of resubmission if the Applicant
  has not rescheduled the application within 90 days of the originally
scheduled Commission hearing.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-10, passed 7-2-2018)



§ 125.06  REQUIREMENTS FOR ADVERTISING AND NOTICE.



   125.06(A)   Applicability of provisions.  The advertising
requirements of this Section shall apply to all applications that require
City Commission approval pursuant to this Chapter and Chapter 124.
Advertising for such applications shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Florida Statutes and the additional notice requirements set
forth below.



   125.06(B)   Mailed notice requirements.



   125.06(B)(1)   Notice requirements for applications related to an
existing Single-Family Residence to contiguous property Owners.  For matters
heard by the City Commission relating to existing Single-Family Residences, a
notice for the City Commission meeting, on a form approved by the City
Manager, shall be sent to: (a) all property Owners whose property is
contiguous with the property of the Applicant; and (b) all
Homeowners’/maintenance Associations that govern the property, if such an
Association exists. The notices shall include the location, and nature of the
land Development approval applied for and the date, time, and location of the
City Commission meeting. The notices shall be sent by first class mail and
postmarked at least ten days prior to the hearing.



   125.06(B)(2)   Notice requirements for all other applications.  For
all applications, except for those applications relating to existing
Single-Family Residences, heard by the City Commission, a notice for the City
Commission meeting, on a form approved by the City Manager shall be sent to
all property Owners in the City within 500 feet of the property, exclusive of
road Rights-Of-Way and water bodies. Notices shall include the project title
or name, location and nature of the approval or amendment applied for, and
the date, time and location of the meeting. The notices shall be sent by
first class mail and postmarked at least ten days prior to the hearing.



   125.06(B)(3)   Obtaining lists for mailed notice.  All lists of
property Owners to whom notice must be mailed shall be based upon the most
recently updated records available from the Broward County Property Appraiser
and be obtained from the Property Appraiser no more than 30 days prior to the
date of mailing.



   125.06(C)   Signage and posting requirements.



   125.06(C)(1)   For all applications heard by the City Commission, a
Sign shall be posted on the affected property at least ten days, and not more
than 30 days, prior to the meeting in which the application will be heard.
The Sign shall include the type of application, type of hearing, date, time,
and location of the meeting, and number to call for additional information.
The Sign shall be posted in a location that is clearly visible from the
adjacent Right-Of-Way within ten feet of the Right-Of-Way line.



   125.06(C)(1)(a)   For applications concerning existing Single-Family
Residences , the Sign shall measure 24 inches by 24 inches and shall be made
of a weather resistant non paper material, set 24 inches above surrounding
grade from the bottom of the Sign board. Lettering shall be in gothic style
upper case with the top line measuring at least three inches in height and
all other lines measuring one and one-half inches in height.



   125.06(C)(1)(b)   For all other applications, the Sign shall measure
48 inches by 48 inches and shall be constructed of weather resistant non
paper materials, set 36 inches above surrounding grade from the bottom of the
Sign board, mounted on two, two-inch by four-inch by ten-foot
pressure-treated posts. The Sign shall be painted with a white enamel
background and black enamel letters. Lettering shall be in gothic style upper
case with the top line measuring at least six inches in height and all other
lines measuring three inches in height.



   125.06(C)(2)   Unless the City Manager determines a different
address or phone number, the text of the Sign shall read as follows:



 

REQUEST FOR: _____________________________________________


PROJECT TITLE: ____________________________________________


PROPOSED USE: ____________________________________________


CITY COMMISSION MEETING:  DATE AND TIME


WESTON CITY HALL


17200 ROYAL PALM BOULEVARD


COMPLETE INFORMATION REGARDING THE APPLICATION IS AVAILABLE BY CONTACTING THE
PLANNING DEPARTMENT AT 954-921-7781.



 



   125.06(C)(3)   Signs must be maintained in readable condition while
posted.



   125.06(D)   Evidence of compliance.  Evidence of compliance of all
advertising and notice required by Florida Statutes and this section for the
City Commission hearing must be received by the City Clerk no later than the
City Hall’s close of business at least five days prior to the date of the
meeting in which the application will be heard. Evidence of compliance shall
consist of the following:



   125.06(D)(1)   Photograph of posted Sign ;



   125.06(D)(2)   Copy of mailed notice to adjacent and contiguous
property Owners and Associations , if applicable;



   125.06(D)(3)   List of adjacent and contiguous property Owners and
Associations , if applicable, to whom mailed notice was sent;



   125.06(D)(4)   Affidavit of mailing notice to adjacent and
contiguous property Owners and Associations , if applicable, on a form
approved by the City Manager; and



   125.06(D)(5)   Proof of advertised legal notice, where required by
Florida Statutes.



   125.06(E)   Enforcement.  Failure to comply with these advertising
requirements will result in the hearing being rescheduled for the next
available City Commission meeting that is at least 25 days from the meeting
for which the advertising requirements were not met. All advertisements,
notices and Signs must be reissued with the correct meeting date shown. The
failure of an Applicant to satisfy the advertising requirement for the same
item two consecutive times shall constitute sufficient grounds for denial of
the application.



   125.06(F)   Sign removal.  All Signs shall be removed within five
days after the hearing where the City Commission takes final action on the
application.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-12, passed 6-18-2012)



§ 125.07  VIOLATION OF DEVELOPMENT PERMITS AND DEVELOPMENT ORDERS.



   The violation of any provision of a Development Permit, or condition
placed upon a Development Order , issued by the City shall constitute a
violation of the City Code .



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.08 PROCEDURES FOR VACATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY OR EASEMENT.



   125.08(A)   A petition for vacation of Right-of-Way or easement may
be submitted by any of the following:



   125.08(A)(1)   City Manager; or



   125.08(A)(2)   Property Owner owing property abutting the
Right-of-Way or subject to the easement.



   125.08(B)   Petition Requirements. The petition shall be on a form
provided by the City Manager.  The petition shall include the following:



   125.08(B)(1)   A legal description and survey of the Right-of-Way or
easement petitioned to be vacated.  The survey shall also include properties
abutting the Right-of-Way or easement to be petitioned;



   125.08(B)(2)   Opinion of title demonstrating that the Applicant
owns fee simple title to the property abutting the Right-of-Way or subject to
the easement;



   125.08(B)(3)   Written consent of all utilities and governmental
entities that may have a right to the Right-of-Way or easement;



   125.08(B)(4)   Proof that all state, county, and City taxes have
been paid. 



   125.08(C)   Public Notice.  Public notice shall be provided as set
forth in § 125.06 of the City Code.  In addition, the Applicant shall
publish legal notice in two weekly issues of a newspaper of general
circulation within Broward County.



   125.08(D)   Review Procedure.  The Applicant is required to provide
documentation that the petition complies with the criteria provided for in
this section.  In order to approve a vacation of Right-of-Way or easement,
the City Commission needs to determine, in its legislative capacity, that the
petition complies with each of the following criteria:



   125.08(D)(1)   The ownership or right of convenient access of
persons owning other parts of the subdivision will not be adversely affected;



   125.08(D)(2)   The general public will not be adversely affected by
the proposed vacation;



   125.08(D)(3)   Neither the City, any public utility, or any other
governmental entity has a present or possibly future need for the
Right-of-Way or easement sought to be vacated; and



   125.08(D)(4)   The vacation is in the public's interest.



(Ord. 2012-01, passed 1-17-2012)



PART 2:  STANDARDS



§ 125.10  DEVELOPMENT REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   An application for a Development Permit must comply with the
requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.11  ADEQUACY OF REGIONAL ROAD NETWORK.



   The adequacy of the Regional Road Network shall be determined in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Broward County Land
Development Code.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.12  ADEQUACY OF THE LOCAL ROAD NETWORK.



   125.12(A)   Generally.  The adequacy of the Local Road Network
shall be determined in accordance with the provisions outlined in (B) below,
the City Transportation Concurrency and Traffic Performance Standards.



   125.12(B)   Transportation Concurrency and Traffic performance
standards.



   125.12(B)(1)   General provisions.  It is the intent of the City to
ensure that adequate transportation facilities and Traffic Control Devices
are provided throughout the community to support existing and proposed
Development, and to ensure that such facilities are in place concurrent with
the impacts of such Development. To the extent permitted by the City Charter
and other Laws governing this topic, the City shall initiate actions and
enact standards and policies within its jurisdiction to protect the safety
and welfare of the motoring public, even if such actions, standards, or
policies are more restrictive than the requirements of other governmental
agencies. These actions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
adoption and enforcement of level of service standards; establishment of
local Concurrency and Traffic performance standards; adoption of Traffic
impact guidelines and review requirements for site-specific Development
applications; and adoption of mechanisms to assess property Owners a
fair-share cost of providing the transportation facilities necessary to serve
the proposed Development. These standards, policies, and guidelines shall be
adopted and implemented as part of the City Code, the City’s Local
Comprehensive Plan and the City’s land Development regulations, as
appropriate.



   125.12(B)(2)   Level of service (LOS) standards.  The average
annual daily and peak hour level of service (LOS) standard for all Roadways
functionally classified as State or county Arterials,” “county
collectors,” “City collectors,” “unclassified Roadways,” or
“local Roadways” within the City shall be LOS “D” or better. The
level of service standard for all “limited access Highways” and
“controlled access Highways” on the Florida Intrastate Highway System
(FIHS) located within the City shall be LOS “D” consistent with the
Statewide Minimum Level of Service Standards. The peak hour level of service
standard for all intersections within the City shall be LOS “D” or better
overall, with no individual intersection approach operating below LOS
“E.” Level of service determinations shall be based on criteria outlined
in the most current version of the Quality/Level of Service Handbook,
published by the Florida Department of Transportation, and the most current
version of the Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 2000, published by the
Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C. The
term “peak hour” used herein refers to the “100th highest hour” as
outlined in the Quality/Level of Service Handbook.



   125.12(B)(3)   Development subject to transportation Concurrency
determination.



   125.12(B)(3)(a)   Generally.



   125.12(B)(3)(a)1.   The following types of Development applications
shall be subject to Concurrency review: All Development applications subject
to approval or permitting by the City. For Development Permits requested on
land platted prior to March 20, 1979, the City will be responsible for making
the final transportation Concurrency determination.



   125.12(B)(3)(a)2.   Transportation Concurrency shall only be
considered vested for Plats approved by Broward County between March 20,
1979, and October 1, 1989, provided there is no replat. Otherwise the Plat
shall be subject to Concurrency review.



   125.12(B)(3)(b)   Exemptions.  The following Developments shall be
considered conditionally exempt from City transportation Concurrency review:



   125.12(B)(3)(b)1.   Developments which have been determined by the
City to have vested rights with regard to surrounding transportation
facilities in accordance with the provisions of F.S. Chapter 163, Part II.



   125.12(B)(3)(b)2.   Developments which are specifically authorized
as a Development of Regional Impact (DRI) or Florida Quality Development
(FQD) pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380, which have been issued a final local
Development Order either prior to the adoption of the 1989 Broward County
Comprehensive Plan, or after being reviewed for satisfaction of the Broward
County Transportation Concurrency Standards on or prior to September 3, 1997.



   125.12(B)(3)(b)3.   Developments which are comprised of one
Single-FamilyDwelling or Duplex . Any Single-Family Dwelling or Duplex which
is demolished shall be considered vested if a similar Dwelling Unit is
approved through plan review and is constructed within 18 months of
demolition.



   125.12(B)(3)(b)4.   Developments which are public facilities which
the City Commission has determined to be essential to the safety, welfare, or
critical functions of the City.



   125.12(B)(4)   Determination of project adequacy.  For the purpose
of the issuance of Development Orders and Development -related Permits, the
burden shall be placed upon the Applicant to demonstrate compliance with the
following:



   125.12(B)(4)(a)   Satisfaction of Broward County Concurrency
standards.  If applicable, the Development application shall be reviewed to
ensure that the proposed Development satisfies the Broward County Concurrency
Standards for the Regional Road Network as outlined in § 5-182(a) of the
Broward County Land Development Code as currently enacted or as amended from
time to time. The Applicant shall provide the necessary documentation from
Broward County demonstrating satisfaction of these requirements. In addition
to satisfying the requirements of this subsection 125.12(B)(4)(a), the
Applicant may also need to provide a proportionate share contribution for its
impacts on the City’s Roadway system, as provided in subsection
125.12(B)(4)(b)2.d., 125.12(B)(4)(b)2.j., 125.12(B)(4)(b)2.k. and
125.12(B)(4)(b)2.l. below.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)   Satisfaction of City transportation Concurrency
standards.  Notwithstanding the above requirements, all Development
applications shall be reviewed by the City to ensure that the impacts of the
proposed Development do not degrade the level of service on the surrounding
Roadway facilities below the City’s adopted level of service standards.
Approval of the Development application shall be granted by the City only
under the following conditions:



   125.12(B)(4)(b)1.   The Development does not lie within a compact
deferral area, as defined in subsection 125.12 (B)(5)(c) that would be
created by a Roadway segment or intersection that would deteriorate below the
adopted level of service standard if the trips from the Development were
approved; or



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.   The Development lies within a compact deferral
area created by a Roadway segment or intersection that would deteriorate
below the adopted level of service standard if the trips from the Development
were approved but one or more of the following additional conditions applies:



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.a.   The proposed Development does not place any
trips on the over-capacity segment or intersection.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.b.   The necessary facilities are in place at the
time the impacts of Development occur.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.c.   The necessary facilities are under
Construction at the time the Development Permit is issued.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.d.   At the time the Development Permit is issued,
the necessary facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract which
provides for the commencement of the actual Construction of the required
facilities or the provision of service within one Year of the issuance of the
Development Permit.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.e.   At the time the Development Permit is issued,
the necessary facilities have been included in the first two years of the
adopted Florida Department of Transportation Five Year Work Program or
Broward County Transportation Improvement Program.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.f.   At the time the Development Permit is issued,
the necessary facilities have been included in the first two years of the
adopted City transportation improvement program as may be created by the
City, or equivalent schedule of improvements.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.g.   At the time the Development Permit is issued
the necessary facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable Development
Agreement. An enforceable Development Agreement may include, but is not
limited to, Development Agreements pursuant to F.S. §§ 163.3220 et seq. or
an agreement or Development Order issued pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380;
provided, that road improvements required by a Development of Regional Impact
(DRI) or Florida Quality Development (FQD) Development Order shall not be
considered for Concurrency determinations for the property outside the
boundaries of the DRI or FQD unless conditions in subsections
125.12(B)(4)(b)2.d., 125.12(B)(4)(b)2.e. and 125.12(B)(4)(b)2.f. above apply.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.h.   The necessary improvement to the
transportation system is one which complies with the requirements provided in
Rule 9J-5.0055(3)(c) of the Florida Administrative Code.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.i.   There is an action plan approved by Broward
County and the City that will accommodate the Traffic impact of the
Development.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.j.   There is a transportation action plan
associated with City collector and/or local Roadways under the City’s
jurisdiction which has been approved by the City Commission which will
accommodate the Traffic impact of the Development.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.k.   The Applicant has entered into an agreement to
fund a fair-share proportion of the costs associated with a transportation
improvement program which has been approved by the City Commission, and which
will accommodate the Traffic impact of the Development. The options available
for and methodology for determining the amount of proportionate share
mitigation, and the procedures for the City to implement proportionate share
mitigation on the City’s Roadway network, utilizing the City’s
Concurrency management system, shall be consistent with the applicable
standards of the Broward County Land Development Code.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.l.   The Applicant has entered into an agreement,
either individually or with other property Owners , to provide cash to the
City to ensure that the necessary transportation improvements will be in
place to accommodate the impact of the Development if such improvements are
of the type which can only be legally implemented when certain warranting
criteria or thresholds are met.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.m.   The Development has been demonstrated to have
vested rights with regard to specific transportation facilities in accordance
with the provisions of F.S. Chapter 163, Part II, and the proposed
Development has satisfied level of service standards for other Roadway
segments and/or intersections for which a vested rights determination has not
been made.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.n.   The Development is specifically authorized as
a Development of Regional Impact (DRI) or Florida Quality Development (FQD)
pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380, which has been issued a final local Development
Order either prior to the adoption of the 1989 Broward County Comprehensive
Plan, or after being reviewed for satisfaction of the Broward County
Transportation Concurrency Standards and after being reviewed for
satisfaction of the City transportation Concurrency standards for DRIs and
FQDs submitted after September 3, 1997.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.o.   The daily and peak hour Traffic generated by
the Development on a deficient Roadway segment does not exceed 0.5% of the
link’s capacity (service volume) at the adopted level of service, and the
total peak hour trips generated by the Development assigned through any
deficient intersection does not exceed more than five trips.



   125.12(B)(4)(b)2.p.   The proposed Development is a public facility
which the City Commission has determined to be essential to the safety,
welfare, or critical functions of the City.



   125.12(B)(4)(c)   Provision of safe and adequate access and
acceptable Traffic operations. Notwithstanding any of the above, all
site-specific Development applications which have received transportation
Concurrency approval shall be reviewed by the City to ensure that safe and
adequate access will be provided to the site, and that the Traffic generated
by the Development will not create unsafe or adverse impacts to the Traffic
operations of the surrounding transportation network that may not have been
readily quantified by Concurrency review. Improvements necessary to meet this
requirement shall be required as part of site-specific Development approval,
and may include, but are not limited to, installation or modification to the
following: Traffic Control Devices (including Traffic signals), signing,
striping, pavement markings, lighting, channelization, Median treatment, turn
lanes, and drainage. These improvements may be required in addition to
requirements set forth by other governmental agencies such as Broward County
or the Florida Department of Transportation, and all such improvements shall
comply with applicable City standards.



   125.12(B)(5)   Determination of project impact.  The Traffic impact
associated with the Development application shall be determined as follows:



   125.12(B)(5)(a)   Trip generation.  Trips generated by the project
shall be estimated using the most current daily TRIPS model rates published
by Broward County or other acceptable models utilized by other governmental
agencies having competent jurisdiction. Peak hour directional trips shall be
estimated by using the ratio of peak hour generated trips to weekday daily
trips calculated from data provided by the most current version of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation manual. In the
case where suitable TRIPS model rates are not available for the proposed land
Use(s), rates included in the most current version of the ITE Trip Generation
manual, or rates based on local study, shall be utilized subject to approval
of the City TrafficEngineer.



   125.12(B)(5)(b)   Trip distribution and assignment.  Trip
distribution and assignment shall be determined by a Broward County TRIPS
model run for the specified land Use and scale, less any trip credits due to
the existing Uses being demolished (an Informational TRIPS Run will be
required if the Development application was not subject to Broward County
Concurrency review). For Roadway segments not included in the TRIPS network,
and/or segments which provide immediate access to the project, Traffic
assignment shall be determined by the Applicant’s Traffic consultant
consistent with the TRIPS Model assignment, subject to approval of the City
TrafficEngineer. Project distribution and assignment performed by methods
other than a TRIPS model run require prior approval from the City
TrafficEngineer.



   125.12(B)(5)(c)   Compact deferral area.  A compact deferral area
is created when a Roadway segment or intersection becomes over-capacity or
operationally deficient due to the cumulative sum of existing and approved
Development trips including the proposed Development trips. For the purposes
of the City transportation Concurrency review, the compact deferral area
created by an over-capacity Roadway segment is specifically defined as a
“two-mile band having a centerline which is coincident with the centerline
of the over-capacity (deficient) link extending parallel to the over-capacity
link for a distance of one-half mile beyond each endpoint of the
over-capacity link.” The compact deferral area created when an intersection
becomes deficient due to unacceptable operations on one or more of its
approaches is specifically defined as the “circular area encompassed by a
one-mile radius with its center being located coincident with the center of
the deficient intersection, the center of the intersection being the point of
intersection of the intersecting Roadway centerlines.”



   125.12(B)(5)(d)   Insignificant impact.  A Development shall be
considered to have an insignificant impact on a deficient Roadway segment if
the daily and peak hour Traffic generated by the Development on the deficient
Roadway segment does not exceed 0.5% of the link’s capacity (service
volume) at the adopted level of service. A Development shall be considered to
have an insignificant impact on a deficient intersection if the total of peak
hour trips generated by the Development assigned through the deficient
intersection does not exceed more than five trips.



   125.12(B)(6)   Determination of capacities.  Roadway capacities
shall be based on the “Generalized Average Annual Daily Volume Tables”
and the “Generalized Peak Hour Directional Volumes Tables” contained in
the most current version of the Quality/Level of Service Handbook prepared by
the Florida Department of Transportation. For those Roadway segments within
the City which are included as part of the Broward County TRIPS model
network, the network capacity incorporated in the model shall be used as the
Average Annual Daily capacity for the segment. The corresponding peak hour
directional capacity for Roadway segments included in the TRIPS model shall
be the peak hour directional service volume from the FDOT Generalized tables
that corresponds to the TRIPS model daily capacity. Intersection capacities
and levels of service shall be based on Chapters 9 and 10 of the most current
version of the Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 2000, published by the
Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C. If
warranted, engineering studies may be performed to determine more localized
capacities, subject to approval by the City TrafficEngineer.



   125.12(B)(7)   Determination of available capacity.  For the
purposes of satisfying the standards herein, the available capacity shall be
determined by:



   125.12(B)(7)(a)   Adding together:



   125.12(B)(7)(a)1.   The capacity (service volume) of existing
facilities operating at the adopted level of service; and



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.   The sum total of new facilities that will become
available concurrent with the impact of the Development. The capacity of the
new facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following conditions
applies:



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.a.   The necessary facilities are in place at the
time the impacts of Development occur.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.b.   The necessary facilities are under
Construction at the time the Development Permit is issued.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.c.   At the time the Development Permit is issued,
the necessary facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract which
provides for the commencement of the actual Construction of the required
facilities or the provision of services within one Year of the issuance of
the Development Permit.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.d.   At the time the Development Permit is issued,
the necessary facilities have been included in the first two years of the
adopted Florida Department of Transportation Five Year Work Program or
Broward County Transportation Improvement Program.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.e.   At the time the Development Permit is issued,
the necessary facilities have been included in the first two years of the
adopted City transportation improvement program as may be created by the
City, or equivalent schedule of improvements.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.f.   At the time the Development Permit is issued,
the necessary facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable Development
Agreement. An enforceable Development Agreement may include, but is not
limited to, Development Agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220 or an
agreement or Development Order issued pursuant to F.S. Chapter 380; provided,
that road improvements required by a Development of Regional Impact (DRI) or
Florida Quality Development (FQD) Development Order shall not be considered
for Concurrency determinations for the property outside the boundaries of the
DRI or FQD unless conditions contained in subsection 125.12 (B)(7)(a)2.c.,
125.12 (B)(7)(a)2.d. or 125.12 (B)(7)(a)2.e. above apply.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.g.   The necessary improvement to the
transportation system is one which complies with the requirements provided in
Rule 9J-5.0055(3)(c) of the Florida Administrative Code.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.h.   The Applicant has entered into an agreement to
fund a fair-share proportion of the costs associated with a transportation
improvement program which has been approved by the City Commission, and which
will accommodate the Traffic impact of the Development.



   125.12(B)(7)(a)2.i.   The Applicant has entered into an agreement,
either individually or with other property Owners , to provide cash to the
City to ensure that the necessary transportation improvements will be in
place to accommodate the impact of the Development, if such improvements are
of the type which can only be legally implemented when certain warranting
criteria or thresholds are met.



   125.12(B)(7)(b)   Subtracting from that number the sum of:



   125.12(B)(7)(b)1.   Existing Traffic created by existing
Development. For Roadway segments included in the Broward County TRIPS Model
network, the daily existing Traffic shall be the Traffic included in the
model as “ADT.” Peak hour Traffic shall be derived using appropriate
conversion factors outlined in the most current version of the Quality/Level
of Service Handbook. Existing daily and peak hour Traffic estimates may also
be obtained from local study subject to approval by the City TrafficEngineer .



   125.12(B)(7)(b)2.   Future committed Traffic that will be created
from other area Developments concurrent with the impact of the proposed
Development. For Roadway segments included in the Broward County TRIPS Model
network, the future committed daily Traffic shall be the Traffic included in
the model as “Cumulative.” Peak hour committed Traffic shall be derived
using appropriate conversion factors outlined in the most current version of
the Quality/Level of Service Handbook. Daily and peak hour committed Traffic
estimates may be obtained from other technically sound methodologies subject
to approval by the City TrafficEngineer .



   125.12(B)(8)   Cost-sharing for improvements.  As an interim
measure prior to Development and adoption of the City’s Capital
Improvements Element, the City may require Applicants to fund the fair-share
cost of transportation improvements needed to support the proposed
Development, even if such improvements were not previously identified or made
part of the Development requirements of another governmental agency. The
fair-share percentage of improvement costs assigned to a specific Development
application shall be the proportion of the Development application’s peak
hour trips to the sum total of the peak hour trips anticipated for the
remaining Development impacting the deficient Roadway segment (or
intersection) at the time the deficiency was identified. Specific
transportation improvement programs shall be identified and approved by the
City Commission.



   125.12(B)(9)   Cost-estimating for improvements.  The amount of
funds to be provided or secured by a developer for the cost of transportation
improvements shall be based on 125% of an Engineer’s certified cost
estimate using prevailing and professionally accepted unit costs for the
facilities and/or services. All cost-estimates are subject to reevaluation by
the City every 24 months following the date of the executed Developer
Agreement or other enforceable binding instrument, and shall be adjusted
appropriately according to the Engineering News Record Construction Cost
Index (ENRCCI), which is the accepted industry standard for cost price
indexing for transportation facilities. The developer will be required to
provide additional funds or security should an increase in the cost-estimate
be warranted based on the ENRCCI.



   125.12(B)(10)   Adequacy of Traffic Signage.   To the extent that
additional Traffic Control Devices are necessary, on a Public Right-Of-Way or
to control Traffic accessing a Public Right-Of-Way, as a condition of the
approval for a Development Order, all Applicants shall be responsible for the
reimbursement to the City for the actual costs of required City installed
Traffic Control Devices, and the related installation costs.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-06, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 125.13  ACCESS TO TRAFFICWAYS.



   A final Plat of lands which abut or contain an existing or proposed
Trafficway shall be designed to facilitate the safe and efficient movement of
vehicles between the Trafficway and the proposed Development and shall comply
with the following standards and requirements:



   125.13(A)   Street capacities shall be determined by the standards
established by the Highway Capacity Manual prepared by the Transportation
Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C.



   125.13(B)   The geometric design of Streets shall conform to the
minimum standards established by Resolution No. 85-3606, the Minimum
Construction Standards Applicable To Public Rights-Of-Way Under Broward
County Jurisdiction, the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design,
Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, prepared by the
Florida Department of Transportation, by A Policy on Design of Urban Highways
and Arterial Streets prepared by the American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), and a Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets (AASHTO).



   125.13(C)   Trafficways shall conform to the criteria and
characteristics established by and shown on the Broward County Trafficways
Plan.



   125.13(D)   In order to expand intersections of two major
Trafficways to handle additional approach lane capacity, additional
Rights-Of-Way shall be required to be provided consistent with the standards
of the Typical Intersection Detail on file at the Broward County Engineering
Division unless waived by the Broward County Engineering and Traffic
Engineering Divisions, with such waiver based upon a study submitted by the
Applicant .



   125.13(E)   In order to provide for the installation of Traffic
Control equipment, additional Rights-Of-Way shall be provided pursuant to the
applicable section of the Broward County Land Development Code.



   125.13(F)   A collector should intersect a Trafficway only if
aligned with and extending an existing collector which intersects the
Trafficway , or at a minimum distance of 1,320 feet from the intersection of
an existing collector and the Trafficway , or a minimum of 1,420 feet from
the intersection of two Arterial Trafficways .



   125.13(G)   A Local Street should not intersect a Trafficway unless
aligned with and extending an existing Local Street which intersects the
Trafficway , or at a minimum distance of 660 feet from any other
intersection, except at a minimum distance of 760 feet from the intersection
of two Arterial Trafficways .



   125.13(H)   The Frontage width of a residential Lot fronting on a
Trafficway should not be less than 200 feet unless one of the following
conditions is met:



   125.13(H)(1)   Access to the Lot is limited to Streets other than
Trafficways .



   125.13(H)(2)   Access to the Lot is provided jointly with other Lots
created as part of the same Development or another Development.



   125.13(H)(3)   Access to the Lot will be provided from a Frontage
road paralleling the Trafficway .



   125.13(I)   If the Development abuts a Trafficway Corridor:



   125.13(I)(1)   A Nonvehicular Access Line shall be delineated along
the Trafficways Corridor except at those points of access not in conflict
with the standards provided in the Broward County Land Development Code.



   125.13(I)(2)   Then left-turn or right-turn lanes, or both, and bus
pullout bays shall be required, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the
Broward County Land Development Code.



   125.13(I)(3)   Sidewalks adjacent to the Development shall be
required pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Broward County Land
Development Code.



   125.13(I)(4)   Ingress and egress easements may be required in order
to provide joint-use driveways for adjacent properties, pursuant to the
applicable provisions of the Broward County Land Development Code.



   125.13(I)(5)   Additional Rights-Of-Way shall be conveyed to the
public by dedication on the face of the Plat , by deed, or, if acceptable to
Broward County, by grant of easement which is necessary for the ultimate
Construction of turn lanes, bicycle facilities, Sidewalks , bus pullout bays,
bus shelters, or RoadwayDrainage Facilities as required pursuant to the
applicable provisions of the Broward County Land Development Code.



   125.13(J)   The design of a final Plat abutting a Trafficway or
Trafficway Corridor reflected on the Broward County Trafficways Plan or a
road functionally classified as a Broward County road shall be consistent
with the applicable provisions of the Broward County Land Development Code.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.14  ADEQUACY OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   125.14(A)   The proposed Development shall be designed to provide
adequate areas and easements for the Construction and maintenance of a water
management system to serve the proposed Development and adjacent Public
Rights-Of-Way in a manner which conforms to sound engineering standards and
principles, and which will be provided in accordance with applicable
provisions of the City Engineering Standards and the local agency having
water management review and permitting authority over the area.



   125.14(B)   In addition to subsection 125.14(A) above, the
Development Order for a Building Permit shall require the Applicant to
demonstrate, prior to the issuance of the Building Permit within the
Development, that the following levels of service standards, as outlined in
the City Engineering Standards where applicable, will be met prior to the
issuance of a Certificate Of Occupancy :



   125.14(B)(1)   Crown elevation for road protection.



   125.14(B)(2)   Flood elevations for Buildings .



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.15  ADEQUACY OF POTABLE WATER SERVICE.



   125.15(A)   Potable Water service must be available prior to
occupancy to provide for the needs of the proposed Development. Potable Water
service includes publicly and/or privately owned water treatment facilities
and wells on individual parcels which will provide for the needs of the
proposed Development. The proposed Development shall be designed to provide
adequate areas and easements which may be necessary to the installation and
maintenance of a Potable Water distribution system. All installations shall
be in accordance with applicable Building , health, and Environmental
Regulations, including the applicable provisions of the Florida
Administrative Code and the City Engineering Standards.



   125.15(B)   A finding that Potable Water service is available must
be based upon a demonstration that an existing water treatment facility has
sufficient Capacity to provide for the Potable Water needs of the application
and for other Developments in the service area which are occupied, available
for occupancy, for which Building Permits are in effect or for which Potable
Water treatment Capacity has been reserved. If Potable Water service is not
available, but will be made available, any Development Order shall be
conditioned on such availability. A finding that Potable Water service will
be made available must be based upon a demonstration that there is a fiscally
feasible plan to construct or expand a water treatment facility which will
have sufficient Capacity to provide for the Potable Water needs of the
Development proposed by the application prior to issuance of certificates of
occupancy for that Development and for other Developments in the service
area, which are occupied, available for occupancy, for which Building Permits
are in effect or for which Potable Water treatment Capacity has been reserved.



   125.15(C)   City Commission approval of an application for Plat
approval shall not be construed to affect a reservation of WastewaterCapacity
or commitment to provide service.



   125.15(D)   In addition to subsections 125.15(A), 125.15(B) and
125.15(C) above, proposed Developments must comply with the adopted level of
service listed in the City Engineering Standards, latest edition.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.16  ADEQUACY OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SERVICES.



   125.16(A)   Wastewater Treatment and disposal services must be
available prior to occupancy to provide for the needs of the proposed
Development. The proposed Development shall be designed to provide adequate
areas and easements which may be necessary for the installation and
maintenance of a Wastewater disposal system. All installations shall be in
accordance with all applicable health and Environmental Regulations and the
City of Weston Engineering Standards, latest edition.



   125.16(B)   A finding that Wastewater Treatment and disposal
services are available must be based upon a demonstration that an existing
Wastewater Treatment and disposal facility has sufficient plant and network
Capacity to provide for the Wastewater Treatment and disposal needs of the
Development proposed by the application and for other Developments in the
service area which are occupied, available for occupancy, for which Building
Permits are in effect or for which Wastewater Treatment or disposal Capacity
has been reserved. If existing Capacity is unavailable, conditional approval
may be granted if it is shown that there is a fiscally feasible plan to
construct or expand a Wastewater Treatment and disposal facility which will
have sufficient plant and network Capacity to provide for the treatment and
disposal needs of the Development proposed by the application prior to the
issuance of certificates of occupancy for that Development, and for other
Developments in the service area which are occupied, available for occupancy,
for which Building Permits are in effect or for which Wastewater Treatment or
disposal Capacity has been reserved. This determination of adequacy shall be
based upon the standards of Broward County except the City Commission may
where it deems appropriate rely upon the standards of the service provider.



   125.16(C)   City Commission approval of an application for Plat
approval shall not be construed to effect a reservation of WastewaterCapacity
or commitment to provide service.



   125.16(D)   In addition to the requirements in subsections
125.16(A), 125.16(B), and 125.16(C) above, proposed Developments must comply
with the adopted level of service listed in the City Engineering Standards.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.17  ADEQUACY OF SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITES OR FACILITIES.



   125.17(A)   Solid Waste disposal sites or facilities shall be
available prior to occupancy to provide for the needs of the proposed
Development at the level of service in Table 1 below.



   125.17(B)   A finding that Solid Waste disposal sites or facilities
are available must be based upon a demonstration that existing Solid Waste
disposal sites or facilities have sufficient Capacity to provide for the
Solid Waste disposal needs of the Development proposed by the application and
for other Developments in the service area which are occupied, available for
occupancy, for which Building Permits are in effect or for which Solid Waste
disposal Capacity has been reserved. If existing Capacity is unavailable,
conditional approval may be granted if it is shown that there is an
economically and fiscally feasible plan to expand Solid Waste disposal sites
so that sufficient Capacity will be available for the Solid Waste disposal of
the Development proposed by the application (and for other Developments in
the service area which are occupied, available for occupancy, for which
Building Permits are in effect or for which Solid Waste disposal Capacity has
been reserved) prior to the issuance of any Certificate Of Occupancy .



 


TABLE 1:  SOLID WASTE LEVEL OF SERVICE STANDARDS




Facility Type

 

Generation per Day





Residential
 

8.9 lbs. per unit



Industrial & Commercial
 





Factory/Warehouse
 

2 lbs. per 100 square feet



   Office Building
 

1 lb. per 100 square feet



   Department Store
 

4 lbs. per 100 square feet



   Supermarket
 

9 lbs. per 100 square feet



   Restaurant
 

2 lbs. per meal per day



   Drug Store
 

5 lbs. per 100 square feet



School
 





   Grade School
 

10 lbs. per room & 1/4 lb. per pupil



   High School
 

8 lbs. per room & 1/4 lb. per pupil



Institution
 





   Hospital
 

8 lbs. per bed



   Nurse or Intern Home
 

3 lbs. per person



   Home for Aged
 

3 lbs. per person



   Rest Home
 

3 lbs. per person





 



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.18  ADEQUACY OF SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE.



   Solid Waste collection service will be available prior to occupancy to
provide for the needs of the proposed Development.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.19  ADEQUACY OF FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE.



   Fire protection services shall be adequate to provide an effective
level of life safety and property protection in all new and proposed
Developments, and for proposed Developments in existing developed areas. A
finding that adequate fire protection service is available shall be based
upon a determination of the City Manager that all proposed Development meets
the following requirements:



   125.19(A)   Water supply.  All water supply facilities, either
existing or proposed to be constructed by the developer, shall be adequate to
meet the fire protection needs of the proposed Development.



   125.19(A)(1)   All proposed Developments within 1,500 feet of
existing public water supply shall extend the public water supply to the new
Development.



   125.19(A)(2)   Residential Developments of less than ten Dwelling
Units not within 1,500 feet of a public water supply may use approved
alternative water supplies as determined by the City Manager. Approved
alternative water supplies may be any one or more of the following as
determined by the City Manager: fire wells, water tanker trucks, ground drop
tanks, elevated water storage tanks, drafting site on either canal or water
reservoirs, automatic fire sprinkler systems, or other equivalent methods as
approved and permitted by the City Manager. If the proposed Development is
adjacent to an existing Development, the combined total of Dwelling Units
shall be computed.



   125.19(A)(3)   Residential Developments of ten or more contiguous
Dwelling units, commercial Developments, industrial Developments, or assembly
Development, which are not within 1,500 feet of a public water system shall
provide an equivalent central public water supply. The equivalent central
public water supply shall approximate the Fire Flows as indicated in the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard, NFPA-1 “Annex H”
(current edition).



   125.19(A)(4)   Fire protection water mains shall be looped. Taps for
looped water mains shall be no closer than 150 feet apart. Alternative
methods for looping of fire mains may be permitted as approved by the City
Manager. A dead end water main for fire protection may be permitted only if
the dead end main is connected to a looped fire main system and does not
extend more than 100 feet in length, with only one fire hydrant on that dead
end main.



   125.19(B)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be installed as an
integral part of the Potable Water system for the Development within the
distances described below. Wherever a water line is installed within a Public
or Private road Right-Of-Way, a fire hydrant shall be installed at intervals
measured along the water line, access way or emergency road in accordance
with spacing distances specified below. No distance shall be measured across
a Trafficway Arterial, or Collector Road.



   125.19(B)(1)   Residential Developments, including, but not limited
to, one- and two-family Dwellings, or Mobile Homes shall have hydrants
installed at intervals not to exceed 500 feet, with a minimum water main size
of six inches. In no case shall the distance from any Structure to a
permitted fire hydrant be more than half of the required interval spacing
distance indicated above.



   125.19(B)(2)   Commercial and industrial (non-high hazard)
Developments and multi-family Developments of three or more Dwelling units
shall have hydrants installed at intervals not to exceed 350 feet, with a
minimum water main size of eight inches. A minimum of two hydrants shall be
provided, with at least one hydrant being no more than 175 feet from any
Structure within the Development. In the case of redevelopment, existing
Developments with approved water main sizes of less than eight inches, may be
permitted to remain, at the discretion of the City Manager, provided the
existing design complies with the fire protection flow requirements
prescribed in NFPA- 1 “Annex H”, or an approved alternative water supply.



   125.19(B)(3)   Structures protected with automatic fire suppression
systems or standpipes shall have a fire hydrant installed at an approved
location determined by the City Manager. The installed fire hydrant shall be
no closer than ten feet and no further than 20 feet from a Fire Department
connection.



   125.19(B)(4)   High hazard commercial and industrial Developments,
such as storage facilities, manufacturing operations, shopping centers, and
similar operations, as defined in the Florida Fire Prevention Code, which
have large amounts of combustible or flammable products shall be required to
install fire hydrants and water main sizes as determined by computing the
required Fire Flow for the proposed Development.



   125.19(B)(5)   All fire hydrants shall deliver the required
gallonage with a residual pressure of 20 pounds per square inch.



   125.19(C)   Fire Department Connections.



   125.19(C)(1)   When a single, stand-alone, Fire Department
connection is utilized, the Fire Department connection shall be located at an
approved location outside of the collapse zone of the Structure , as
determined by the City Manager.



   125.19(C)(2)   When wall mounted Fire Department connections are
utilized for a Structure , there shall be a minimum of two Fire Department
connections installed on the exterior of the Building . These Fire Department
connections shall be installed remotely from each other, at approved
locations as determined by the City Manager.



   125.19(D)   Fire apparatus and facilities.



   125.19(D)(1)   The fire agency responsible for fire protection
service will determine the strategic locations of fire stations and
availability and suitability of fire apparatus and equipment within defined
response areas for the proposed Development. In no case shall any point in a
Development be more than three miles travel distance from an existing or
budgeted fire station which houses the required Fire Department vehicles to
serve the response area. Such fire apparatus and facilities shall be under
the administrative and operational control of the fire agency responsible for
fire protection service.



   125.19(D)(2)   Determination of the number and type of Fire Rescue
Department vehicles and apparatus required to provide adequate fire rescue
services and protection for the proposed Development and given response area
shall be as outlined in the ISO Fire Suppression Rating Schedule (current
edition), and as specified by the City Manager.



   125.19(E)   Public Safety Communications Network and System
Integrity Requirements.  Buildings and Structures shall not interfere with
the Public Safety Communications network and system. A minimum radio signal
strength required for the Public Safety Communications network and system, at
a level determined by the City Manager, shall be provided and maintained
within any Building or Structure, to ensure the integrity of the Public
Safety Communications network and system. Buildings, Structures, and/or
Developments, shall be modified, as determined by the City Manager, to
accommodate the needs of the Public Safety Communications network and system,
to eliminate any potential interference or disruption to the network and
system that a Building, Structure, and/or a Development would create, or
otherwise accommodate the needs of the public safety communication network
and system within the Development proposal.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.20  ADEQUACY OF MUNICIPAL FACILITIES.



   125.20(A)   An application for land use plan amendment or Plat
submitted to the City for Development pursuant to the applicable land
Development regulation shall provide for such Usable Land area as required by
the comprehensive land use plan to be set aside for parks, playgrounds,
Recreational Facilities , or other municipal purposes within the subdivision.
The locations of these areas shall be subject to the approval of the City
Commission.



   125.20(B)   In order to provide Usable Lands or funds or a
combination thereof to be used by the City to provide administrative,
operational, Recreational, and public safety Facilities, or other municipal
purposes, a developer must at the discretion of the City either dedicate land
or provide a cash equivalent.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.21  ADEQUACY OF PUBLIC SCHOOL FACILITIES.



   Pursuant to the Public School Facilities Element of the City
Comprehensive Plan (PSFE) and the Amended Interlocal Agreement for Public
School Facility Planning (ILA), the City, in collaboration with Broward
County and the School Board of Broward County (School Board), shall ensure
that Public School facilities will be available for current and future
students consistent with available financial resources and adopted level of
service standards and that such facilities are available concurrent with the
impact of proposed residential Development.



   125.21(A)   Applications subject to a Public School Concurrency
determination.  The City shall not approve an application for a residential
Plat, replat, Plat note amendment, or any site plan, until the School Board
has reported that the school Concurrency requirement has been satisfied or
unless the City has determined that the application is exempt or vested.



   125.21(B)   Exemptions and vested Development.



   125.21(B)(1)   The following residential applications shall be
exempt from the requirements of Public SchoolConcurrency :



   125.21(B)(1)(a)   An application which generates less than one
student at each level in the relevant Concurrency Service Area (CSA). Such
Development shall nevertheless be subject to the payment of school impact
fees;



   125.21(B)(1)(b)   An application for age restricted communities with
no permanent residents under the age of 18. Exemption for an aged restricted
community shall only be applicable provided that a recorded restrictive
covenant prohibiting the residence of school aged children in a manner not
inconsistent with federal, State or local Law or regulations is provided;



   125.21(B)(1)(c)   A Development of Regional Impact (DRI) with a
Development Order issued before July 1, 2005, the effective date of Senate
Bill 360, or an application submitted before May 1, 2005; or



   125.21(B)(1)(d)   As may otherwise be exempted by Florida Statutes.



   125.21(B)(2)   The following residential applications shall be
vested from the requirements of Public SchoolConcurrency :



   125.21(B)(2)(a)   Any application located within a previously
approved Comprehensive Plan amendment or rezoning which is subject to a
mitigation agreement in accordance with the following:



   125.21(B)(2)(a)1.   The mitigation to address the impact of the new
students anticipated from the Development has been accepted by the School
Board consistent with School Board Policy 1161, entitled “Growth
Management,” as may be amended from time to time; and



   125.21(B)(2)(a)2.   A declaration of restrictive covenant has been
properly executed and recorded by the developer, or the Development is
located within a boundary area that is subject to an executed and recorded
tri-party agreement (between the School Board, City, and the developer)
consistent with School Board Policy 1161, as may be amended from time to time.



   125.21(B)(2)(a)3.   The Applicant shall provide a letter from the
School Board or other evidence acceptable to the City verifying subsections
125.21(B)(2)(a)1. and 125.21(B)(2)(a)2. above. Other evidence may include
documentation as specified in the tri-party agreement.



   125.21(B)(2)(b)   Any application which is included within a
residential Plat or Development Agreement for which school impacts have been
satisfied for the Dwelling units included in the proposed application. This
includes any unexpired applications approved by Broward County or City
between February 2, 1979, and the effective date of the PSFE of the City’s
Comprehensive Plan. In the transmittal of an application to the School Board,
the City shall include written information indicating that the units in the
application are vested.



   125.21(B)(2)(c)   Any application that has received final site plan
approval, and which has not expired, prior to the effective date of the PSFE
of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.



   125.21(B)(3)   To be exempt or vested from the requirements of
Public SchoolConcurrency , an Applicant seeking such a determination shall be
required to submit documentation with the application to the City which shall
include written evidence sufficient to verify that the subject Development
meets the exemptions stated herein, and as such, is exempt from the
requirements of Public SchoolConcurrency . The City shall transmit or provide
written information to the School Board indicating that the units in the
application are vested.



   125.21(C)   Level of service standards.  The level of service
standard (LOS) shall be 100% of gross capacity (with relocatable classrooms
for each Concurrency Service Area (CSA) until the end of the 2018/19 school
year; and commencing at the 2019/20 school year, the LOS for each CSA shall
be 110% of the permanent FISH capacity. The LOS shall be achieved and
maintained within the period covered by the five-year schedule of capital
improvements contained in the effective Five-Year Adopted District
Educational Facilities Plan (DEFP).



   125.21(D)   Concurrency Service Areas (CSAs).  The areas for the
implementation of Public School Concurrency in the City shall be known as
Concurrency Service Areas (CSAs) and such CSAs shall be the approved school
boundaries for elementary, middle and high schools, as annually adopted by
the School Board. For the purposes of Public School Concurrency, such CSAs
shall be effective on the first day of the school year and end on the last
day before the beginning of the next school year.



   125.21(E)   Student generation rates.  The Broward County adopted
student generation rate(s) contained in the Broward County Land Development
Code shall be utilized to determine the potential student impact anticipated
from the residential Development proposed in submitted applications.



   125.21(F)   Review procedure.



   125.21(F)(1)   Public School Impact Application (PSIA).  Any
Applicant submitting an application with a residential component, that is not
exempt or vested, is subject to Public School Concurrency and shall be
required to submit a Public School Impact Application (PSIA) for review by
the school district. Evidence of acceptance of the PSIA and payment of the
applicable application fee to the school district shall be required prior to
acceptance of the application by the City.



   125.21(F)(2)   School Capacity Availability Determination Letter
(SCAD).



   125.21(F)(2)(a)   No residential application or amendments thereto
shall be approved by the City, unless the residential Development is exempt
or vested from the requirements of Public SchoolConcurrency , or until a
School Capacity Availability Determination (SCAD) Letter has been received
from the school district confirming that capacity is available, or if
capacity is not available, that proportionate share mitigation has been
accepted by the School Board. The SCAD Letter shall be sent to the Applicant
, the Broward County Development Management Division if the application
relates to a Plat , and the City, no later than 45 days after acceptance of
the completed PSIA by the school district.



   125.21(F)(2)(b)   The school district shall determine the potential
student impact from proposed residential Development on the applicable CSA by
performing the review procedure specified in School Board Policy 1161, as
amended.



   125.21(F)(2)(c)   If the school district determines that sufficient
permanent capacity is available at the adopted LOS to accommodate students
anticipated from the Development, the school district shall issue a SCAD
Letter indicating that adequate school facilities exist to accommodate the
student impact and that the proposed Development satisfies Public
SchoolConcurrency requirements.



   125.21(F)(2)(d)   If the SCAD Letter states that the Development has
not satisfied Public School Concurrency requirements, the SCAD Letter shall
state the basis for such determination, and the Applicant shall have 30 days
to propose proportionate share mitigation to the school district.



   125.21(F)(2)(e)   If the Applicant proposes proportionate share
mitigation within the 30-day deadline, upon the subsequent acceptance of the
proposed mitigation by the School Board, and upon the execution of a legally
binding document among the School Board, the City and the Applicant , an
amended SCAD Letter shall state that adequate capacity anticipated from the
accepted proportionate share mitigation will be available to accommodate the
student impact anticipated from the proposed Development and that the
proposed Development satisfies Public SchoolConcurrency requirements. The
total amount committed for any mitigation option shall not be less than the
school impact fees due for the proposed units as calculated based upon the
adopted school impact fee schedule provided in the Broward County Code of
Ordinances. The school impact fee for the Development shall be considered
included in the total proportionate share mitigation amount due or paid. If
the proportionate share mitigation is not accepted by the School Board, the
amended SCAD Letter shall state the basis upon which the mitigation
proposal(s) was rejected and why the Development is not in compliance with
Public SchoolConcurrency requirements.



   125.21(F)(2)(f)   An Applicant adversely impacted by a SCAD
determination may appeal such determination by written request to the School
Board within the designated 30-day time period. A timely request for an
appeal shall stay the requirement for an Applicant to propose proportionate
share mitigation until the appeal has been resolved.



   125.21(F)(2)(g)   If an application or approval expires, the SCAD
Letter will no longer be valid.



   125.21(G)   Term of Public School Concurrency.



   125.21(G)(1)   The Public SchoolConcurrency approval for a
residential site plan shall be considered vested, unless the site plan
approval expires as provided for within the City Code .



   125.21(G)(2)   The Public SchoolConcurrency approval for a Plat ,
replat, Plat note amendment or findings of adequacy shall be considered
vested for up to five Years from the date of Broward County’s approval.
Vesting of a residential application beyond the five Years requires that one
of the following conditions are met within the five-Year period: 1) the
issuance of a Building Permit for a Principal Building and first inspection
approval; or 2) substantial completion of project water lines, Sewer lines
and the rock base for internal roads. If the Development was denied, the
school district shall deduct students associated with the Development from
its database.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-12, passed 6-18-2012)



§ 125.22  IMPACT ON ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL
RESOURCES.



   125.22(A)   If a proposed Development includes all or any part of
any lands identified as jurisdictional Wetlands as defined in §§ 62-340.100
through 62-340.550 of the Florida Administrative Code, the City shall require
Development authorizations from all applicable external agencies regarding
impacts of wetland habitat.



   125.22(B)   If the proposed Development Permit includes any
Archaeological Site listed in the Florida Site File then an appropriate
survey shall be required.



   125.22(B)(1)   Archaeological resources.



   125.22(B)(1)(a)   If a professional archaeological survey has not
been conducted within those portions of the property subject to the
Development Permit, a Reconnaissance Level Archaeological Survey shall be
conducted and an archaeological summary report prepared by a professional
archaeologist. The archaeologist shall be familiar with the kind and
character of Archaeological Sites known or expected to be present in Broward
County and shall meet the Professional Qualifications Standards established
by federal regulation (see 36 C.F.R. pt. 61). The archaeological report
submitted by the Applicant shall include a brief history of the area, the
field survey methods, the results of the field survey and an assessment of
any identified Archaeological Sites.



   125.22(B)(1)(b)   If the subject property contains a designated
Archaeological Site, or an Archaeological Site identified pursuant to
125.22(B)(1)(a) above:



   125.22(B)(1)(b)1.   Permit approval shall include requirements for
management of the Archaeological Site. It shall be the purpose of the
management plan to provide for protection and preservation of the site to the
extent feasible and to allow salvage Excavation only where other methods of
preservation would not permit reasonable Development of the subject property.
The proposed plan for management shall be reviewed by the City Manager after
consultation with any other agencies deemed appropriate;



   125.22(B)(1)(b)2.   A note shall be placed on the face of the Plat
or site plan identifying the site using the Florida Site File number and
historical name, if any;



   125.22(B)(1)(b)3.   A note shall be placed on the face of the Plat
or site plan referencing the management agreement;



   125.22(B)(1)(b)4.   The boundaries of the Archaeological Site shall
be delineated on the face of the Plat or site plan; and



   125.22(B)(1)(b)5.   If preservation of the entire Archaeological
Site is not feasible, only that portion of the site which cannot be preserved
may be subject to an Archaeological Salvage Excavation operation as
authorized through the State of Florida Division of Historical Resources and
outlined in the Management Plan.



   125.22(B)(1)(b)6.   If, through the Site Assessment Survey, the
archaeologist determines that the site would not be likely to yield important
prehistorical or historical information, and this determination is accepted
by the City Manager after consultation with any other agencies deemed
appropriate, then, based on the findings of the Site Assessment Survey, the
City Manager may waive compliance with subsections125.22(B)(1)(b)2.,
125.22(B)(1)(b)3., 125.22(B)(1)(b)4. and 125.22(B)(1)(b)5. above, in whole or
in part. However, the City Manager may require that a monitoring program be
established for all State authorized Excavation activities within or in the
immediate vicinity of the Archaeological Site.



   125.22(B)(1)(b)7.   If otherwise in compliance with the applicable
standards and minimum requirements of this Code, the application for a
Development Permit may be approved subject to the management agreement
containing those conditions set forth in the management plan and which have
been determined by the City Commission to be reasonably necessary to minimize
disturbance of the Archaeological Site. The execution and recordation of the
management agreement shall be a condition of the Development Order . Such an
agreement shall also provide for recordation of releases upon satisfaction of
the conditions, where applicable.



   125.22(B)(2)   Procedural requirements.  For purposes of this
section, the Applicant shall not have met the procedural requirements for the
submittal of a complete application for a Development Permit, as determined
by the City Manager, until the Applicant has submitted an archaeological
report which contains all relevant information required by this section, as
determined by the City Manager, to evaluate the archaeological significance
of the site.



   125.22(C)   If a proposed Development includes all or any part of
any lands designated by Broward County as a Natural Resource Area (NRA),
Local Area of Particular Concern (LAPC), Upland Tree Resources (UTR),
Environmentally Sensitive Lands (ESL) or Environmentally Sensitive Land that
is also a Local Area of Particular Concern (ESL/LAPC), the City shall require
Development authorizations from the Broward County Environmental Protection
Department regarding potential impacts to these habitats.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.23  CONFORMITY TO THE CITY CERTIFIED LAND USE PLAN.



   The Development of land within the City shall conform to the Certified
Land Use Plan.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



PART 3:  PLATS



§ 125.30  LAND REQUIRED TO BE PLATTED.



   125.30(A)   No application for a Building Permit for the
Construction of a principal Building on a Parcel Of Land shall be granted
unless a Plat including such Parcel Of Land has been approved by the City
Commission and the Broward County Commission and recorded in the Official
Records of Broward County subsequent to June 4, 1953, which commences with
Plat Book 32, page 15, Official Records of Broward County, Florida.



   125.30(B)   The Construction of a Single-FamilyDwelling Unit or
Duplex on a Lot or parcel which Lot or parcel was of record as such in the
Official Records of Broward County as of March 1, 1989 shall not be required
to be platted, provided that the Applicant has met all City requirements for
obtaining Plat approval prior to the issuance of the Building Permit .



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.31  BUILDING PERMITS PRIOR TO PLAT RECORDATION.



   125.31(A)   City Commission and Broward County Commission approval
required.  The City Commission may allow Building Permits to be issued for a
Parcel Of Land for which Plat approval has been given by the City Commission
and the Broward County Commission although the Plat has not yet been
recorded, provided such authorization is granted in an agreement among the
developer, the City, and Broward County. Such agreements shall be in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney and shall at a minimum require compliance
with the applicable provisions of Plat approval and prohibit the issuance of
a Certificate Of Occupancy until the Plat is recorded. The City Commission
shall be required to make a finding prior to the issuance of the Building
Permit that facilities and services will be available at the adopted level of
service concurrent with the impact of Development.



   125.31(B)   Essential governmental facilities.  The City Commission
may allow Building Permits to be issued for an essential governmental
facility after final Plat application where the City Commission finds that
immediate Construction of the governmental facility is essential to the
health, safety, or welfare of the public and where the Commission determines
that public facilities and service will be available at the adopted level of
service concurrent with the impact of the Development of the governmental
facility. Such authorization shall be granted by agreement between the City
and Broward County and shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. A
Certificate Of Occupancy shall not be issued until the Plat is recorded.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.32  MANDATORY PLAT REVIEW.



   125.32(A)   Application.  An application for Plat review shall be
filed and processed pursuant to § 125.05(A) through (C).



   125.32(B)   Plat Drawing Requirements.  An application for Plat
review shall be accompanied by a Plat for Development, the overall size of
which shall be 24 inches x 36 inches, drawn at a scale no smaller than one
inch = 100 feet except when a smaller scale is approved by the City Manager
and the Broward County Engineering Division, Plat Section, and which shows
the following:



   125.32(B)(1)   The proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
Such name shall not be the same or in any way so similar to any name
appearing on any recorded Plat in Broward County as would confuse the records
or mislead the public as to the identity of the subdivision, except when an
existing subdivision is subdivided as an additional unit or section by the
same developer or his or her successors in title.



   125.32(B)(2)   A Plat location sketch showing the Plat in relation
to a nearby intersection of two Arterial, collector, or other
well-established existing Roadways .



   125.32(B)(3)   North arrow, scale and date.



   125.32(B)(4)   Name of the Owner of the property or the Owner ’s
authorized agent.



   125.32(B)(5)   Lots and blocks of adjacent recorded Plats, giving
Plat book and page number along with names of such Plats.



   125.32(B)(6)   All existing Streets and alleys on or adjacent to the
tract, including name and Right-Of-Way width.



   125.32(B)(7)   The legal description of the property being platted.



   125.32(B)(8)   All existing easements and Rights-Of-Way within the
Plat limits with the purpose and the instrument of record labeled.



   125.32(B)(9)   Location and width of all proposed Ultimate
Rights-Of-Way , alleys, easements; proposed Lot lines with dimensions, public
areas, and parcels of land proposed or reserved for public Use.



   125.32(B)(10)   If the Development abuts a Trafficway , proposed
points of access to the Trafficway .



   125.32(B)(11)   Access to a Public Right-Of-Way that will be
utilized by the proposed Development.



   125.32(B)(12)   Space for signature of the Broward County Mayor.



   125.32(B)(13)   Space for signature of the Broward County
Administrator.



   125.32(B)(14)   Space for HighwayConstruction and Engineering
Division Director’s signature and seal.



   125.32(B)(15)   Space for signature of the City Mayor and City
Manager.



   125.32(B)(16)   Space for the Broward County Surveyor’s signature
and seal, if applicable.



   125.32(B)(17)   Space for approval of Broward County Planning
Council.



   125.32(B)(18)   Space for approval of Broward County Environmental
Protection Department.



   125.32(B)(19)   The parcel encompassed by the legal description
shown on the Plat shall be clearly identified with a heavy line, and shall
show dimensions, and either bearings or interior angles of said parcel with
independent ties to two or more land corners, or independent ties to a
recorded subdivision, and one land corner. When a case arises where it is
impractical to tie to a land corner because of lost or destroyed monuments,
and the parcel can be adequately surveyed independent of said land corners,
then the following points will be considered acceptable as land ties: block
corners, permanent reference monuments, or permanent control points from a
previously recorded Plat . The Use of these types of land ties shall be
subject to approval by the Broward County Surveyor.



   125.32(B)(20)   Space for Plat book and page number outside the
border in the upper right-hand corner of each page.



   125.32(B)(21)   Space for Plat file number, as assigned by the
Broward County Development Management Division, outside the border in the
lower right-hand corner of each page.



   125.32(B)(22)   Notes or legend, and any tabular data or other data
pertinent to the Plat , on each page that contains the drawing.



   125.32(B)(23)   Executed dedication and acknowledgment language.



   125.32(B)(24)   Executed mortgagee approval and acknowledgment
language.



   125.32(B)(25)   Adjacent Streets.



   125.32(B)(26)   All Plat dimensions shall be shown accurate to
one-hundredth of a foot, except for riparian boundaries, which may be shown
as approximate with a witness line showing complete dimension data. Rows of
Lots with the same dimensions may use ditto marks, providing the first and
last Lots in the row are appropriately dimensioned.



   125.32(B)(27)   Computation of the square footage of each Parcel Of
Land and the acreage of the land proposed to be platted accurate to the
nearest square foot. All survey and survey information shall be certified by
a land surveyor licensed in the State of Florida.



   125.32(B)(28)   At least two benchmarks referenced to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or the Broward County Vertical Network in
conformity with the standards adopted by the National Ocean Survey for Third
Order Vertical Control. No benchmark shall be established purporting to be
based on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum or the Broward County Vertical
Network unless the benchmark is certified by a surveyor licensed in the State
of Florida and such certification is shown on the Plat . The benchmarks shall
be of a permanent nature, easily accessible, located within, along or within
200 feet of the Plat boundary and described by ties to the Plat boundary. The
Plat shall list in the Plat notes the governmental benchmark from which the
Plat benchmarks were established. Only benchmarks established by federal,
State, county, or municipal governments shall be acceptable as the starting
benchmark.



   125.32(B)(29)   The Plat shall show grid bearings or azimuths, with
State plane coordinates shown on all permanent reference monuments and all
land ties where the Plat lies within sections assigned state plane
coordinates that have been recorded in the Public Records of Broward County.
Coordinates may be tabulated when necessary for legibility, and must appear
on each page that contains the drawing. State plane coordinates shall be
derived from field measurements in conformity with the Minimum Technical
Standard for Land Surveying pursuant to Chapter 21, § 21HH-6, Florida
Administrative Code, adopted by the Florida Board of Land Surveyors,
September 1, 1981.



   125.32(B)(30)   A mathematical closure of the Plat boundary shall
not exceed three-hundredths of a foot.



   125.32(B)(31)   Copies of approved certified corner records shall be
submitted to the Broward County Land Surveyor prior to Plat recordation,
unless approved certified corner records are on file with the State of
Florida Department of Natural Resources pursuant to F.S. Chapter 177, Part
III.



   125.32(B)(32)   The Surveyor’s Certificate shall state conformity
with:



   125.32(B)(32)(a)   F.S. Chapter 177.



   125.32(B)(32)(b)   National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and
National Ocean Survey Third Order Control Standards.



   125.32(B)(32)(c)   Applicable sections of Chapter 21, § HH-6,
Florida Administrative Code.



   125.32(B)(33)   Space for approval of drainage district, special
improvement district, or taxing district, as applicable.



   125.32(B)(34)   Such other information as required by the City.



   125.32(C)   Procedural requirements.



   125.32(C)(1)(a)   The agencies shall prepare comments and forward
such staff report to the City Manager. A final development review report
shall be issued at a regularly scheduled development review meeting.



   125.32(C)(1)(b)   Upon approval of the final Plat by the reviewing
agencies and receipt of the Broward County Development Review Report, the
final Plat will be scheduled for the next available City Commission meeting.



   125.32(C)(2)   Prior to recording the Plat an Applicant shall
furnish the City with a digital file in a format compatible with the City’s
GIS/CAD system according to the following guidelines:



   125.32(C)(2)(a)   If the Plat is prepared utilizing a CAD/GIS or
other automated system capable of exporting a “DXF” file, then the file
submitted must contain all the line and text data utilized in the preparation
of the final Plat document, as submitted and as amended; or



   125.32(C)(2)(b)   If the Plat is prepared by hand drafting but
utilizes a coordinate geometry (COGO) computer program in the calculation of
the parcel or parcels, then the file submitted must contain the coordinate
values, point numbers, distance and direction of all lines, arcs, and radius
points utilized in finalizing the Plat document for recordation, as submitted
and as amended; or



   125.32(C)(2)(c)   If the Plat is prepared without the use of any of
the above, then an affidavit to that effect must be submitted and signed by
the surveyor of record whose name appears on the face of the Plat .



   125.32(C)(3)   Any Plat being submitted in the City in which state
plane coordinates are being used to identify permanent reference monuments
(PRM) shall use the most current datum and adjustment (as of the date of this
ordinance the NAD 83 with the 1990 adjustment).



   125.32(D)   Depiction of non-contiguous parcels of land.  A Plat
may not depict or include non-contiguous parcels of land except in the
following cases:



   125.32(D)(1)   Parcels may be separated by a Right-Of-Way for a
Highway, road, railroad, or Utility .



   125.32(D)(2)   Parcels may be separated by a waterbody or
watercourse which does not exceed 300 feet.



   125.32(E)   Single-Family subdivisions.  No application for a
Building Permit for the Construction of a Single-Family unit shall be granted
unless a Plat including Lots has been approved by the City Commission. This
provision shall not apply to those Single-Family units specified in § 125.30.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.33  NOTATION ON FACE OF PLAT.



   The face of each recorded Plat shall bear a notation indicating the
developmental level at which the Plat was reviewed and approved for adequacy
of required services and facilities pursuant to this chapter.



   125.33(A)   An application for a change to the notation on the face
of a Plat or for placement of a notation on the face of a Plat recorded
between June 4, 1953, and March 20, 1979, may be granted if the City
Commission makes a determination that the amendment is consistent with the
terms of this chapter.



   125.33(B)   The Applicant for a change to the notation on the face
of a Plat or for placement of a notation on the face of a Plat recorded
between June 4, 1953, and March 20, 1979, shall be required to execute or
provide such documents as determined necessary to amend the notation.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.34  INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   125.34(A)   Completion of required improvements.  All improvements
required from the developer as a condition to the approval of an application
for a Development Order, including but not limited to water, Sewer, paving,
drainage, Street signs, fire hydrants, and connected Street lighting, shall
be installed and completed prior to the issuance of the first Building Permit
for a principal Structure.



   125.34(B)   Water, Sewer and drainage improvements.  Any water,
Sewer or drainage improvements proposed or required to be constructed within
the proposed road Right-Of-Way shall be installed and completed before
acceptance of any proposed or required road improvements by the appropriate
agency.



   125.34(C)   Paved access.  Prior to the issuance of the first
Building Permit, the developer shall provide paved fire access to all
existing and proposed vertical Construction within the site. Said paved
access shall be approved by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.35  WAIVER OF REQUIRED DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.



   125.35(A)   When an application for a Development Permit is made for
the Construction of Affordable Housing, as defined in § 1.01, the City
Commission may waive, upon a request therefor, dedications of land, payments
of money in lieu thereof, if the City Commission finds that the proposed
project will provide Affordable Housing for Very Low Income, Low Income,
and/or Moderate Income Persons as defined in § 1.01. Prior to consideration
of any waiver request, the developer shall obtain certification from Broward
County stating that the project qualifies as Affordable Housing at a
specified income level.



   125.35(B)   The percentage of any waiver granted shall be as follows:



 

Very Low Income
 

100%



Low Income
 

75%



Moderate Income
 

50%




 



   125.35(C)   Any such waiver shall be only for that portion of the
Development that qualifies as Affordable Housing.



   125.35(D)   Upon such waiver, the City Commission shall identify on
the record the source of funds that will be used to pay for the services or
facilities that would otherwise have been paid for by such dedications,
payments, or fees.



   125.35(E)   Developers shall enter into an agreement with the City
upon terms and conditions determined by the City to be necessary to
reasonably ensure that Affordable Housing is constructed, that any waiver
hereunder enhances the affordability of the housing, and that such units are
rented or sold to Persons meeting the income limitations defined in § 1.01.
The requirement for the agreement may be waived by the City Attorney if, in
the opinion of the City Attorney, adequate alternate assurances exist.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



PART 4:  SITE PLANS



PROCEDURES



§ 125.40  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   125.40(A)   Generally.  Review of a site plan is required prior to
any Development of land in the City.



   125.40(B)   Approval authority.



   125.40(B)(1)   Administrative review site plans.  Site plans for
the deposit and contouring of fill on land and the Construction of a
Single-Family residential or Duplex Dwelling Unit(s) shall be subject to
approval by the City Manager.



   125.40(B)(2)   City Commission review site plans.  All other site
plans shall be subject to approval by the City Commission.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.41  SITE PLAN APPLICATION AND REVIEW.



   125.41(A)   Procedures.  An application for site plan approval
shall be filed and processed pursuant to § 125.05(A) through (C).



   125.41(B)   Submission requirements.



   125.41(B)(1)   Site plan.  A site plan shall be not less than 24
inches by 36 inches, drawn at a scale not less than one inch = 50 feet. The
Site Plan shall include the following:



   125.41(B)(1)(a)   A legal description, including the section,
township, and range.



   125.41(B)(1)(b)   Clearly identified property and site boundaries,
ties-to-section corners and adjacent properties (showing land Use and zoning
designations for each property).



   125.41(B)(1)(c)   Proposed land Use(s).



   125.41(B)(1)(d)   Location and Height of all Structures and Gross
Floor Area with dimensions to Lot lines, and designations of Use.



   125.41(B)(1)(e)   Building separations.



   125.41(B)(1)(f)   Circulation system for Motor Vehicles , bicycles,
and pedestrians, showing loading area(s), all parking, and connection to
Rights-Of-Way .



   125.41(B)(1)(g)   All adjacent Rights-Of-Way , with indication of
ultimate Right-Of-Way line, center line, width, paving width, existing Median
cuts and intersections, Street light Poles , Traffic signals and other
Utility facilities and easements. Location of all cross Streets and driveways
within 350 feet of property limits.



   125.41(B)(1)(h)   Provider of water and Wastewater services.



   125.41(B)(1)(i)   Location of septic tank and drain field, if
applicable.



   125.41(B)(1)(j)   Provider of stormwater services.



   125.41(B)(1)(k)   Existing and proposed fire hydrant locations.



   125.41(B)(1)(l)   The following computations:



   125.41(B)(1)(l)1.   Gross acreage.



   125.41(B)(1)(l)2.   Net acreage. Gross acreage covered by the
property excluding road easements and Rights-Of-Way , if any.



   125.41(B)(1)(l)3.   Number of Dwelling units and density for
residential Uses .



   125.41(B)(1)(l)4.   Square footage of ground covered by Buildings or
Structures and designation of Use.



   125.41(B)(1)(l)5.   Required number of parking spaces for Motor
Vehicles and bicycles.



   125.41(B)(1)(l)6.   Number of parking spaces provided for Motor
Vehicles and bicycles.



   125.41(B)(1)(l)7.   Pervious and impervious surfaces, in square
footage and percentage.



   125.41(B)(1)(m)   Site plan location sketch, including section,
township, and range, showing the nearest public Rights-Of-Way .



   125.41(B)(1)(n)   Geometry of all paved areas including centerlines,
elevations and dimensions for lengths, widths and radii.



   125.41(B)(1)(o)   Solid Waste and Recycling storage location(s) and
paved access for collection vehicles.



   125.41(B)(1)(p)   On-Site loading areas and paved access for
vehicles of the required type, if applicable.



   125.41(B)(1)(q)   Areas for fire-rescue vehicles, and access for
vehicles of the required type, if applicable.



   125.41(B)(1)(r)   Proposed street names and addresses, or a range of
addresses, for any proposed Building within the site plan, in conformity with
City standards. Address assignment shall be based on a Right-Of-WayFrontage
the site faces or accesses. Driveways serving as access to a location that
connect to Frontage cannot be used for addressing purposes.



   125.41(B)(1)(s)   Other such information as required by the City.



   125.41(B)(2)   Additional submission requirements.  In addition to
the site plan, the following items shall be included:



   125.41(B)(2)(a)   Survey.  A survey that is dated less than one
year from the submittal of the site plan application and prepared by a
Florida Professional Surveyor and Mapper, certified as to meeting the
requirements of the applicable section of the Florida Administrative Code,
reflecting existing natural features, such as topography, vegetation,
existing paving, existing Structures , and water bodies.



   125.41(B)(2)(b)   Landscape plan and irrigation plan.  Landscape
plan and irrigation plan with landscape calculations, existing Tree Survey
with indication of existing Native Vegetation that will be preserved, as
required herein.



   125.41(B)(2)(c)   Lighting plan.  Lighting plan showing photometric
measurements and spillage onto adjacent properties and Rights-Of-Way, if
applicable.



   125.41(B)(2)(d)   Sign Plan.  Sign plan, for all Signs that will be
on-site.



   125.41(B)(2)(e)   Elevations.



   125.41(B)(2)(e)1.   For administrative review site plans, a minimum
24-inch by 36-inch rendition of the Building elevations of all sides shall be
submitted with the site plan. Any Machinery and electrical switchgear that is
to be located on exterior wall planes of a multi-family residential or
commercial Building that is visible from any Rights-of-Way, from pedestrian
access ways, and from areas accessible to the general public shall be shown.



   125.41(B)(2)(e)2.   For City Commission review site plans, a minimum
24-inch by 36-inch color rendition of the Building elevations of all sides
shall be submitted with the site plan. The rendition shall be placed upon an
easel in the lobby of the place of the City Commission meeting at least 30
minutes prior to the commencement of the City Commission meeting where the
site plan will be considered. In addition, 11-inch by 17-inch color
renderings depicting the architectural design elements and theme for all
sides of a BuildingStructure shall be submitted with the site plan. All sides
of a BuildingStructure are required to possess similar architectural design
elements and theme that is depicted on the primary side of the same
BuildingStructure .  Any Machinery and electrical switchgear that is to be
located on exterior wall planes of a multi-family residential or commercial
Building that is visible from any Rights-of-Way, from pedestrian access ways,
and from areas accessible to the general public shall be shown.



   125.41(B)(2)(f)   Pavement markings and Traffic signing plan.



   125.41(B)(2)(g)   Schematic water and Sewer plan including the
location and size of all mains and lift stations (Final engineering plans
must be submitted and approved).



   125.41(B)(2)(h)   Paving and drainage plan showing location of all
drainage features, and Retention Areas , if any.



   125.41(B)(2)(i)   Materials chart requirement for City Commission
review site plans:



   125.41(B)(2)(i)1.   All Applicants for site plan approval, where
applicable, shall create and present to the City, a materials chart, which
shall consist of actual samples, indicating the color, type and the
manufacturer’s name and identifying numbers of roofing materials, and the
color, type and the manufacturer’s name and identifying numbers of paint,
to be used in the project.



   125.41(B)(2)(i)2.   The City shall maintain the materials chart
until the issuance of the Certificate of Completion or the Certificate Of
Occupancy , and for such additional time as it may determine is necessary.



   125.41(B)(2)(i)3.   The Applicant shall also provide the City with
the information from the materials chart in written form, including the name
of the manufacturer and the manufacture’s designation number for each item
used on the materials chart. This sheet shall be attached to the site plan
approval application and shall be incorporated as part of the application.



   125.41(B)(2)(j)   Applications submitted that utilize an existing
approved site plan, or portion thereof, shall either include: a current “as
built” or existing conditions survey delineating all Buildings , parking
spaces and easements of record; or the certification of a surveyor, Engineer
or architect, duly licensed by the State, that the existing conditions are
identical with those shown on the submitted site plan.



   125.41(B)(2)(k)   Other such information as required by the City.



   125.41(C)   Review process for City Commission review site plans.



   125.41(C)(1)   The reviewing disciplines shall review the site plan
and prepare comments for inclusion in a development review report to be
issued at a regularly scheduled development review meeting.



   125.41(C)(2)   The Applicant shall discuss the development review
report with the representatives of the reviewing disciplines and shall
address all comments raised by the reviewing disciplines.



   125.41(C)(3)   Upon completion of the review of the site plan by the
reviewing disciplines, the site plan shall be scheduled for the next
available City Commission meeting.



   125.41(D)   Site plan amendments.  Any change to an approved site
plan shall be considered an amendment. The Applicant shall file an
application for a site plan amendment with the City. However, no application
will be considered for property that is the subject of pending Code
enforcement action by the City or that has an unpaid Code enforcement lien
unless the amendment to the site plan is necessary to cure the violation.



   125.41(D)(1)   Administrative review site plan amendments.



   125.41(D)(1)(a)   Any site plan amendment that meets all of the
following criteria shall be considered an administrative review minor site
plan amendment:



   125.41(D)(1)(a)1.   The amendment does not require modifications or
deletion of any conditions of the original site plan approval or any approved
amendments thereto.



   125.41(D)(1)(a)2.   The amendment does not rely on any shared
parking analysis or cross parking agreement that has been performed or
entered into more than five Years from the date of the site plan amendment
application.



   125.41(D)(1)(a)3.   The amendment does not exceed 5% of the
originally approved Height.



   125.41(D)(1)(a)4.   The amendment does not result in any increase in
the Gross Square Footage of the Building .



   125.41(D)(1)(a)5.   The amendment does not require a variance or
special exception approval.



   125.41(D)(1)(a)6.   The amendment does not result in a change to any
of the Building elevations (except the addition of canvas awnings or the
addition, deletion or modifications of windows or doors as long as the
changes match the existing finishes).



   125.41(D)(1)(a)7.   The amendment does not change the location of
any Structure on the property.



   125.41(D)(1)(a)8.   The amendment does not alter the location of any
points of ingress or egress from the Public Right-Of-Way.



   125.41(D)(1)(b)   Administrative review site plan amendments shall
be reviewed by staff and may be approved by the City Manager. An Applicant
may appeal the denial of a minor site plan amendment to the City Commission
by paying the cost recovery fee for a full site plan review.



   125.41(D)(1)(c)   City Commission review site plan amendments. Any
site plan amendment that does not meet the criteria for a administrative
review site plan amendment shall be considered as a City Commission review
site plan amendment. City Commission review site plan amendments shall be
processed in the same manner as site plan applications.



   125.41(E)   Issuance of Development Order.



   125.41(E)(1)   Site Plans and site plan amendments that require City
Commission approval.  The adoption of a resolution by the City Commission
shall be considered as the Development Order for site plans and site plan
amendments that require Commission approval. Subsequent to the adoption of
that Order, a site plan reflecting all conditions of site plan approval and
referencing the resolution or order number must be submitted to the City
Manager, which shall constitute the approved site plan. At that time, a final
Development Order shall be stamped on the plans reflecting compliance with
all conditions of site plan approval. Such Development Order stamp must be
obtained within 180 days of adoption of the resolution approving the site
plan. This time period may be extended for an additional 90 days upon
approval of the City Commission. Notice for such an extension shall be the
same as for the original site plan approval.



   125.41(E)(2)   Administrative review Site Plan.  The approval of a
administrative review site plan by the City Manager shall be considered the
final Development Order for that plan. A final Development Order shall be
stamped on the plans reflecting compliance with all conditions of site plan
approval.



   125.41(F)   Effective period of site plan approval.



   125.41(F)(1)   City Commission review Site Plan.  An approved City
Commission review site plan shall be effective until the Development is
completed except that if, after one Year from the date the site plan is
approved by the City Commission a Building Permit for a principal Building
has not been issued and remains in effect, the site plan shall be null and
void. For the purpose of this section, a Building Permit for a principal
Building shall cease to be in effect once required inspections have lapsed or
once a certificate of completion or Certificate Of Occupancy is issued. In
those cases where a Development includes more than one principal Building and
it is contemplated that the Development shown on a site plan will not be
completed with a Building Permit for a principal Building continuously in
effect, approval by the City Commission of a phasing schedule must be
obtained as part of the overall site plan approval. There shall be no
extensions to this time frame. In the event that a natural or man-made
disaster, act of God, or other such occurrence where the City has to suspend
the issuance of Building Permits occurs during the one Year period to obtain
a Building Permit for a principal structure, the City Manager may grant an
extension of the expiration of the one-Year period by the number of business
days that the City has suspended the issuance of Building Permits plus up to
60 additional calendar days.



   125.41(F)(2)   Administrative Review Site Plan.  An approved
administrative review site plan shall be effective until the Development is
completed except that if, after one Year from the date the site plan is
approved by the City Manager a Building Permit for a Principal Building has
not been issued and remains in effect, the site plan shall be null and void.
There shall be no extensions to this timeframe. In the event that a natural
or man-made disaster, act of God, or other such occurrence where the City has
to suspend the issuance of Building Permits occurs during the one-Year period
to obtain a Building Permit for a principal structure, the City Manager may
grant an extension of the expiration of the one Year period by the number of
business days that the City has suspended the issuance of Building Permits
plus up to 60 additional calendar days.



   125.41(G)   Conformity to recorded Plat.  If a site plan depicts
land previously recorded by Plat, the application for site plan approval or
revised site plan approval shall conform to such Plat.



   125.41(H)   Conformity to zoning regulations.  Development depicted
in a site plan shall conform to all applicable zoning ordinances and
regulations.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-19-2012; Am. Ord.
2012-13, passed 8-20-2012; Am. Ord. 2018-15, passed 11-19-2018)



§ 125.42  UNITY OF TITLE OR COVENANT IN LIEU OF UNITY OF TITLE.



   An Applicant that proposes a site plan that includes multiple Buildings
on a single property shall submit one of the following documents:



   125.42(A)   Unity of Title.  A unity of title, approved for legal
form and sufficiency by the City Attorney, which shall run with the land and
be binding upon the heirs, successors, personal representatives and assigns,
and upon all mortgagees or lessees and others presently or in the future
having any interest in the property; or



   125.42(B)   Covenant in Lieu of Unity of Title.  A declaration of
restrictive covenants, approved for legal form and sufficiency by the City
Attorney, which shall run with the land and be binding upon the heirs,
successors, personal representatives and assigns, and upon all mortgagees and
lessees and others presently or in the future having any interest in the
property. To the extent applicable, the declaration shall contain the
following necessary elements:



   125.42(B)(1)   The subject site will be developed in accordance with
the approved site plan.  No modification shall be submitted to the City for
approval without the written consent of the then Owner(s) of the phase or
portion of the property for which modification is sought.



   125.42(B)(2)   If the subject property will be developed in phases,
that each phase will be developed in accordance with the approved site plan.



   125.42(B)(3)   In the event of multiple ownerships subsequent to
site plan approval, that each of the subsequent Owners shall be bound by the
terms, provisions and conditions of the declaration of restrictive covenants.
The Owner shall further agree that he or she will not convey portions of the
subject property to such other parties unless and until the Owner and such
other party (parties) shall have executed and mutually delivered, in
recordable form, an instrument to be known as an “easement and operating
agreement” which shall contain, among other things:



   125.42(B)(3)(a)   Easements in the common area of each Parcel Of
Land for ingress to and egress from the other Parcels Of Land;



   125.42(B)(3)(b)   Easements in the common area of each Parcel Of
Land for the passage and parking of Motor Vehicles;



   125.42(B)(3)(c)   Easements in the common area of each Parcel Of
Land for the passage and accommodation of pedestrians;



   125.42(B)(3)(d)   Easements for access roads across the common area
of each Parcel Of Land to public and private roadways;



   125.42(B)(3)(e)   Easements for the installation, Use, operation,
maintenance, repair, replacement, relocation and removal of utility
facilities in appropriate areas in each such Parcel Of Land;



   125.42(B)(3)(f)   Easements on each such Parcel Of Land for
construction of Buildings and improvements in favor of each such other Parcel
Of Land;



   125.42(B)(3)(g)   Easements upon each such Parcel Of Land in favor
of each adjoining Parcel Of Land for the installation, Use, maintenance,
repair, replacement and removal of common construction improvements such as
footings, supports and foundations;



   125.42(B)(3)(h)   Easements on each Parcel Of Land for attachment of
Buildings;



   125.42(B)(3)(i)   Easements on each Parcel Of Land for Building
overhangs and other overhangs and projections encroaching upon such Parcel Of
Land from adjoining Parcel Of Land for marquees, canopies, lights, lighting
devices, awnings, wing walls and the like;



   125.42(B)(3)(j)   Appropriate reservation of rights to grant utility
easements;



   125.42(B)(3)(k)   Appropriate reservation of rights to road
Right-Of-Ways and curb cuts;



   125.42(B)(3)(l)   Easements in favor of each such Parcel Of Land for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic over dedicated private ring roads and access
roads; and



   125.42(B)(3)(m)   Appropriate agreements between the Owners of the
several Parcels Of Land as to the obligation to maintain and repair all
private roadways, parking facilities, common areas and common facilities and
the like.



   In addition, such easement and operating agreement shall contain such
other provisions with respect to the operation, maintenance and development
of the property as agreed to by the parties, to insure that even although the
property may have several Owners, it will be constructed, conveyed,
maintained and operated in accordance with the approved site plan.  Non-use
variances created solely by separate ownerships, pursuant to this section,
shall be waived.



   125.42(B)(4)   Duration and Release. The declaration of restrictive
covenants shall be in effect for a period of 30 years from the date the
documents are recorded in the public records of Broward County, Florida,
after which time they shall be extended automatically for successive periods
of ten years unless released in writing by the Owners and the City Manager,
acting for and on behalf of the City, upon the demonstration and affirmative
finding that the same is no longer necessary to preserve and protect the
property for the purposes herein intended.



   125.42(B)(5)   Enforcement.  Enforcement of the declaration of
restrictive covenants shall be by action at law or in equity with costs and
reasonable attorney's fees to the prevailing party.



(Ord. 2015-07, passed 3-16-2015)



DESIGN REQUIREMENTS



§ 125.50  OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.



   125.50(A)   General design requirements.  Internal site circulation
shall follow a functional classification and hierarchical design criteria to
assure that the movements between the Public Right-Of-Way, which is the high
speed movement facility, and the Parking Stall, which is the terminal
facility, are conducted in an efficient and orderly form. All streams of
departing Traffic from the Parking Stalls in a parking lot shall be assembled
and delivered to an internal collector facility that combines them into a few
concentrated streams which will then be connected to the Public Right-Of-Way
at a few properly spaced access locations.



   125.50(B)   Functional elements of On-Site circulation system.  Car
Parking Stalls, Parking Aisles, driveways, Reservoir Areas and entrances are
the basic functional elements of the On-Site circulation system. Additional
elements, including but not being limited to perimeter roads, rear collector
roads, service roads within the proposed Development, left turning lanes,
right turning lanes, Traffic lights, Frontage roads in the Public
Right-Of-Way immediately adjacent to the proposed Development may also be
required.



   125.50(B)(1)   Parking Stalls and Aisles.



   125.50(B)(1)(a)   The minimum size (in feet) of a Parking Stall
space shall be as follows:



 


9 ft. x 18 ft.

 

standard space




9 ft. x 23 ft.

 

parallel space




10 ft. x 25 ft.

 

loading space




12 ft. x 18 ft.

 

handicap space




 



   125.50(B)(1)(b)   The design of parking areas and the required
number of parking spaces shall be in conformance with the City Code .



   125.50(B)(1)(c)   All required Parking Stalls shall have direct and
unobstructed access from a Parking Aisle .



   125.50(B)(1)(d)   No Parking Stall shall be located within a
driveway that connects directly to the external Roadway system, unless
adequate vehicular Reservoir Areas are provided in accordance with § 125.52.



   125.50(B)(1)(e)   Access for emergency fire vehicles shall be in
accordance with Fire Protection Standards.



   125.50(B)(1)(f)   All off-street parking areas shall be so arranged
and marked as to provide for orderly safe loading, unloading, parking, and
storage of vehicles with individual Parking Stalls clearly defined with
directional arrows and Traffic signs provided as necessary for Traffic
Control.



   125.50(B)(1)(g)   Acceptable plans must illustrate that proper
consideration has been given to the surrounding Street plan, Traffic volumes,
proposed Street improvements, vehicular Street capacities, pedestrian
movements, and safety. Plans for adequate pedestrian movements shall include
Sidewalks that are accessible by disabled persons connecting existing or
planned bus stops, bus bays, and bus shelters; and the RoadwaySidewalk
adjacent to the project. In addition, there shall be Sidewalks that are
accessible by disabled persons connecting the RoadwaySidewalk and the
interior Street system Sidewalk or, in the case of multi-family residential
or nonresidential Development, between the Roadway aislewalk and doorway
entrance(s) to the Building (s). Where Sidewalks cross streets and driving
aisles, proper curb drops and pavements markings delineating the cross walk
shall be installed. Accessibility requirements shall be in conformance with
the criteria outlined in the Florida Accessibility Code for
BuildingConstruction .



   125.50(B)(1)(h)   All parking areas shall be so arranged so that if
there are ten or more contiguous Parking Stalls along the same Parking Aisle
, the eleventh space shall be a landscaped peninsula consistent with the
provisions of the Landscape Chapter. Other suitable solutions or innovative
designs may be substituted when approved by the City Manager.



   125.50(B)(2)   Reserve and overflow parking regulations.  Reserve
and overflow parking shall be in conformance with the City Code. Other
suitable solutions or innovative designs may be substituted when approved by
the City Manager.



   125.50(B)(3)   Driveways.



   125.50(B)(3)(a)   All Parking Aisles shall provide connectivity to a
driveway.



   125.50(B)(3)(b)   A parking lot which exceeds 60 Parking Stalls
shall be designed with at least one two-way directional driveway loop system
connecting the entrance to the Parking Stalls and the principal Building .
Other innovative designs may be substituted when approved by the City Manager.



   125.50(B)(3)(c)   The minimum distance to a driveway, service drive,
or Parking Aisle from a Right-Of-Way shall be ten feet where there is no
connection between the driveway and the Street .



   125.50(B)(3)(d)   Two-way driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet
wide. Required widths shall be increased according to vehicle type. Curves
along driveways shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the anticipated
design vehicle per AASHTO design criteria, particularly in industrial and
commercial facilities.



   125.50(B)(3)(e)   One-way driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet
wide for private drives and 15 feet wide off of main Streets. Required widths
shall be increased according to vehicle type. Curves along driveways shall be
of sufficient width to accommodate the anticipated design vehicle per AASHTO
design criteria, particularly in industrial and commercial facilities.



   125.50(B)(3)(f)   Any off-street parking facility shall have either
driveway approaches of sufficient width to allow for two-way Traffic, or
one-way driveways connected to aisles, parking areas or maneuvering areas in
such a manner as to permit Traffic to both enter and leave the property,
facing forward, at the same time. A driveway which is only wide enough for
one-way Traffic shall not be used for two-way access.



   125.50(B)(3)(g)   Driving Aisles: Two-way driving aisles shall be a
minimum of 24 feet wide. Two-way driving aisles located along the front of a
retail center containing more than 50,000 square feet or that serve
industrial Traffic comprising primarily of WB-40 design vehicles or larger
shall be 30-feet wide. One-way driving aisles shall be a minimum of 14 feet
wide, clearly marked for one-way Traffic. One-way driving aisle widths may be
required to be 20 feet in width if needed for fire protection.



   125.50(B)(4)   Circulation design.  A parking lot abutting a
Broward County Trafficway shall be designed for full circulation. A parking
lot abutting a Street other than a Trafficway may be designed for partial
circulation.



   125.50(B)(5)   Parking and loading areas to be curbed.



   125.50(B)(5)(a)   Except for one-family and two-family Dwellings,
all parking and loading areas shall be constructed with raised curb or wheel
stops. The raised curb shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent
vehicles from crossing Sidewalks or other pedestrian walkways, other than by
means of an approved driveway approach. FDOT Type “D” or Type “F”
curbing shall be utilized along all curbed sections where vehicular impact
can be reasonably anticipated. This includes the following:



   125.50(B)(5)(a)1.   Entire perimeter of terminal and interior
islands, including the side of contiguous to the adjacent parking spaces(s).



   125.50(B)(5)(a)2.   Along all turning radii, and along the first
five feet of straight tangent extending beyond each turning radii.



   125.50(B)(5)(a)3.   Along the curbed sections of driveway
connections to Public Rights-Of-Way or connections to private collector
Roadway systems.



   125.50(B)(5)(a)4.   Along all curvilinear curbed sections with a
radius of curvature of 100 feet or less.



   125.50(B)(5)(b)   Parking Stalls which abut landscaped areas,
Sidewalks , Structures, or property lines shall be designed with wheel stops
or continuous curbing. The required wheel stops or curbing shall be located a
minimum of two and one-half feet from any landscaped area, Sidewalk or
property line.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 125.51  LOADING FACILITIES.



   125.51(A)   Truck loading and unloading areas are required for all
Buildings and establishments which receive and/or ship materials or
merchandise by truck. The number of loading spaces required shall be in
conformance with the City Code .



   125.51(B)   Off-street truck loading shall be required except as
provided in subsection 125.51(D) below. The off-street loading facility shall
be designed to accommodate both the parking of and maneuvering of the design
vehicle exclusive of those areas designated for aisles, driveways, or Parking
Stalls .



   125.51(C)   Off-Street Loading Areas shall be clearly marked with
four-inch white diagonal lines, spaced 5.0 feet apart and at least one “No
Parking Loading Zone” Sign (MUTCD R7-6).



   125.51(D)   On-street loading shall be permitted on a local
Cul-De-SacStreet abutting commercial and industrial Development. Where
permitted, such on-street loading areas shall berth the design vehicle
exclusive of the Public Right-Of-Way.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.52  VEHICULAR RESERVOIR AREAS.



   Adequate reservoir capacity shall be required for both inbound and
outbound vehicles to facilitate the safe and efficient movement between the
Public Right-Of-Way and the Development. An inbound reservoir shall be of
sufficient size to ensure that vehicles will not obstruct the adjacent
Roadway , the Sidewalk , and the circulation within the facility. An outbound
reservoir shall be required to eliminate backup and delay of vehicles within
the Development.



   125.52(A)   Design.  A Reservoir Area shall be designed to include
a space of 12 feet wide by 22 feet long for each vehicle to be accommodated
within the Reservoir Area and so that vehicles within the Reservoir Area do
not block Parking Stalls, Parking Aisles, or driveways of off-street parking
facilities.



   125.52(B)   Adjacent to Trafficway.  The number of vehicles
required to be accommodated within a Reservoir Area adjacent to a Trafficway
shall be in conformance with Table 2.



   125.52(C)   Adjacent to non-trafficway Local Street.  All
off-street parking facilities shall provide a Reservoir Area at the point(s)
of connection of a driveway with a Public Right-Of-Way. The Reservoir Area
for any residential Use other than Single-Family detached, commercial Use or
industrial Use shall accommodate at least 2% of the number of Parking Stalls
served by the driveway. For parking lots with fewer than 50 cars, the
Reservoir Area shall be able to accommodate at least one car.



 


TABLE 2:  VEHICLE RESERVOIR AREA REQUIREMENTS




Type of Facility

 

Inbound Vehicles

 

Outbound Vehicles



Residential




Attendant parking
 
10% of the total parking capacity of the facility
 

1 space



Self-parking
 
5 spaces or 1% of the total parking capacity (use the greater figure)
 

1 space



Gatehouse (residential)
 
5 spaces*
 

1 space



Nonresidential


Attendant parking
 
10% of the total parking capacity of the facility
 

1 space



Self-parking
 
5 spaces or 1% of the total parking capacity (use the greater figure)
 

1 space



Ticket gate (ticket dispensing machine)
 
4 spaces minimum*
 

1 space



Cashier booth (tickets dispensed manually)
 
6 spaces minimum*
 

1 space



Gatehouse (commercial)
 
5 spaces or 1% of the total parking capacity (use the greater figure)
 

2 spaces



Note:   1 reservoir space is 12 ft. X 22 ft.


*   Requirements are subject to condition-specific queuing study, and may
be greater than the number of spaces shown, subject to the approval of the
City Manager.




 



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.53  ACCESS FOR FIRE-RESCUE VEHICLES.



   125.53(A)   Structures intended for Principal Uses shall be made
accessible to the following type of vehicles:



 


USE

 

TYPE OF VEHICLE



Residential Uses, other than Single-Family or Duplex
 
Single Unit Truck (SU)


Commercial Uses
 
Single Unit Truck and semi-Trailer (WB-40) combination intermediate


Industrial Uses
 
Single Unit Truck (SU) and semi-Trailer - full Trailer combination (WB-60)


Definitions of, as well as, required specifications for the above vehicle
types shall be those found in AASHTO Geometric Highway Design.



 



   125.53(B)   Fire rescue emergency access roads.  Approved fire
rescue emergency access roads shall be paved and provided for every
Structure, Building, or portion thereof constructed or relocated. Fire rescue
emergency access paved roads shall consist of Roadways, fire lanes, access
areas, parking lots lanes, or a combination thereof. Fire rescue emergency
access paved roads shall be continuous and extend around the perimeter of the
Buildings and/or Structures, and shall be maintained free of any impediments
or obstructions.



   125.53(B)(1)   Multiple access roads.  More than one fire rescue
emergency access paved road, separate and remote, into the internal On-Site
circulation system of the Development, shall be provided when it is
determined by the authority having jurisdiction that access by a single road
could be impaired by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain, climatic
conditions, or other factors that could limit access.



   125.53(B)(2)   When, at the determination of the City, fire rescue
emergency access roads cannot be installed due to location on property,
topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades, or other similar conditions, the
City shall be authorized to require additional fire protection features as
equivalent alternative methods for compliance such as, but not limited to,
automatic fire sprinklers.



   125.53(B)(3)   Emergency access to Buildings or Structures.  A
Structure shall be made accessible to all elevations for fire rescue
Emergency use. In all cases, a minimum of two elevations shall be made
accessible. In the cases where only the minimum access is available, the City
shall be authorized to require additional fire protection features as
equivalent alternative methods for compliance.



   125.53(C)   Fire Rescue Emergency Access Road Specifications.



   125.53(C)(1)   Fire rescue emergency access roads, access paved
areas, or fire lanes shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20
feet. The City may increase the required width for fire rescue emergency
access paved roads, access areas or fire lanes when the minimum width is not
adequate to accommodate fire apparatus.



   125.53(C)(2)   Fire rescue emergency access paved roads, access
paved areas or fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed vertical
clearance of at least 14 feet and shall have a Sign indicating the minimum
vertical clearance. The City may require an increase to the required vertical
clearance for fire rescue emergency access paved roads, access paved areas or
fire lanes when the minimum vertical clearance is not adequate to accommodate
fire apparatus.



   125.53(C)(3)   When, at the determination of the City, minimum
vertical clearance and/or widths for fire rescue emergency access paved
roads, access areas, or fire lanes cannot be met due to location on property,
topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades, or other similar conditions, the
vertical clearances and/or widths may be permitted to be reduced, provided
such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus, and approved signs
are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance
and/or width approved. The City may require additional fire protection
features as equivalent alternative methods for compliance.



   125.53(C)(4)   Fire rescue emergency access paved roads, access
paved areas, or fire lanes shall be capable of meeting the needs of vehicles
considered as WB-40, as defined by the AASHTO Geometric Highway Design, shall
be designed to accommodate fire apparatus weighing a minimum of 32 tons, and
shall be designed and provided with an approved, all-weather driving, solid
surface material such as, solid pavement, asphalt, concrete or similar
materials approved by the City.



   125.53(C)(5)   Grade:  The gradient for a fire rescue emergency
access paved roads, access paved areas, or fire lanes shall not exceed the
maximum approved.



   125.53(C)(5)(a)   The angle of approach and departure for any means
of fire rescue emergency access shall not exceed one foot drop in 20 feet or
the design limitations of the fire apparatus of the Fire Department, and
shall be subject to approval by the City.



   125.53(C)(6)   Fire rescue emergency access paved roads, access
paved areas, or fire lanes connecting to Roadways shall be provided with curb
cuts extending at least two feet beyond each edge of the emergency access
paved roads, access paved areas, or fire lanes.



   125.53(C)(7)   A fire rescue emergency access paved road shall
extend to within 50 feet of at least one exterior egress door that can be
opened from the outside and that provides access to the interior of the
Building .



   125.53(C)(8)   Fire rescue emergency access paved roads shall be
provided such that any portion of an exterior wall of the first Story of the
Building or Structure is located not more than 150 feet from fire rescue
emergency access roads as measured by an approved route around the exterior
of the Building or Structure . When Buildings are protected throughout with
an approved automatic sprinkler system that is installed in accordance with
NFPA 13, NFPA 13D, or NFPA 13R, the distance shall be permitted to be
increased to 450 feet.



   125.53(D)   Turning radius.  The turning radius of a fire rescue
emergency access paved road, access area, or fire lane shall be as approved
by the City.



   125.53(D)(1)   Turns in fire rescue emergency access roads, access
areas, or fire lanes shall maintain the minimum required emergency access
road width.



   125.53(D)(2)   Fire rescue emergency access roads, access areas, or
fire lanes shall be designed to have a minimum outside fire apparatus turning
radius of 50 feet, and an inside fire apparatus turning radius of 38 feet.



   125.53(E)   Dead ends and fire apparatus turnaround requirements. 
Dead ends in excess of 75 feet in length shall be provided with approved fire
apparatus turnarounds as provided below:



   125.53(E)(1)   Fire rescue emergency access roads, access areas, or
fire lanes with dead ends of more than 75 feet in length shall be designed
and constructed with an approved paved turnaround at the closed end. Design
and type of paved turnaround shall be determined and approved by the City.



   125.53(E)(2)   Fire rescue emergency access roads, access areas, or
fire lanes with dead ends of more than 150 feet in length shall be designed
and constructed with an approved paved Cul-De-Sac at the closed end, having a
minimum diameter of 100 feet, not including curbs or Sidewalks . At the
discretion of the City, an alternative equivalent method of design and
Construction for the required paved Cul-De-Sac turnaround may be approved by
the City.



   125.53(F)   Bridges within fire rescue emergency access roads. 
When a bridge is required to be used as part of a fire rescue emergency
access road, access area, or fire lane, it shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with nationally recognized standards. Bridges shall
be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of fire
apparatus, with a minimum design and Construction to accommodate fire
apparatus weighing a minimum of 32 tons, and shall be designed and provided
with an approved, all-weather driving, solid surface material such as, solid
pavement, asphalt, concrete or similar materials approved by the City.
Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges where
required by the City.



   125.53(G)   Laddering areas.  When, at the determination of the
City, laddering areas designated for fire rescue Emergency use are required
for accessibility to Buildings and Structures for fire rescue operations, the
laddering areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:



   125.53(G)(1)   Laddering areas shall have a minimum dimension of 24
feet in width by 50 feet in length, with a cross slope of less than 5%.



   125.53(G)(2)   Laddering areas shall be positioned and constructed
with the inner edge no closer than ten feet, nor further than 30 feet from
the Building or Structure .



   125.53(G)(3)   Surface Construction of laddering areas shall be
capable of meeting the needs of vehicles considered as WB-40 as defined by
the AASHTO Geometric Highway Design, and shall be designed to accommodate
fire apparatus weighing a minimum of 32 tons.



   125.53(G)(4)   Laddering areas shall be designed and provided with
an approved, all-weather driving, solid surface material, such as solid
pavement, asphalt, concrete or similar materials approved by the City.



   125.53(G)(5)   Laddering areas shall be designed and constructed
with no vertical obstructions or impediments.



   125.53(G)(6)   Laddering areas shall be clearly designated and
properly marked as specified by the City.



   125.53(H)   Fire rescue emergency access road markings.  Fire
rescue emergency access roads, access areas, or fire lanes shall be clearly
designated and marked for this purpose. Where required by the City, approved
signs, markings or other approved notices shall be provided and maintained to
identify fire rescue emergency access roads, access areas, or fire lanes.



   125.53(I)   Physical Break-Away Barrier Devices.  The design and
use of physical break-away barrier devices may be approved by the City. When
approved by the City, physical break-away barriers may be installed within
designated fire rescue emergency access paved roads, access areas, or fire
lanes. Such barriers shall be constructed in such a manner that they will
immediately break-away in an Emergency situation.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.54  DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE FROM PUBLIC OR PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   125.54(A)   If a driveway connects Development to a Trafficway , or
a Street within a Trafficway Corridor, the design of driveways shall be
regulated as follows:



   125.54(A)(1)   Any Development with access to a Trafficway shall
have either driveway approaches of sufficient width to allow for two-way
Traffic, or one-way driveways connected to aisles, parking areas, or
maneuvering areas in such a manner as to permit Traffic to both enter and
leave the Development, facing forward, at the same time. A driveway which is
only wide enough for one-way Traffic shall not be used for two-way access.



   125.54(A)(2)   The area within the Development to which the driveway
provides access shall be of sufficient size to allow all necessary functions
for loading, unloading, and parking maneuvers to be carried out on Private
Property and completely off the StreetRight-Of-Way .



   125.54(B)   The following requirements apply to driveways connecting
Development to a nontrafficway corridor (local) Street .



   125.54(B)(1)   Design requirements.



   125.54(B)(1)(a)   The area within the Development to which the
driveway provides access shall be of sufficient size to allow all necessary
functions for loading, unloading, and parking maneuvers to be carried out on
Private Property and completely off the StreetRight-Of-Way .



   125.54(B)(1)(b)   The minimum distance from the Ultimate
Right-Of-Way Line at any ingress or egress driveway to any interior service
drive or Parking Stall with direct access to such driveway shall be 25 feet.



   125.54(B)(2)   Number and location of driveway entrances.  In order
to provide the maximum safety with the least interference to the Traffic flow
on public Streets, and to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress
to Private Property, the number and location of driveways shall be regulated
relative to the intensity or size of the property served and the amount of
Frontage which that property has on a given Street as follows:



   125.54(B)(2)(a)   One driveway shall be permitted for ingress and
egress purposes to a single property or Development.



   125.54(B)(2)(b)   Two driveways entering on a particular Street from
a single property or Development may be permitted if all other requirements
of this section are met and if the minimum driveway centerline spacing
between the two driveways equals or exceeds 150 feet.



   125.54(B)(2)(c)   Three driveways entering on a particular Street
from a single property or Development may be permitted if all other
requirements of this section are met and if the minimum driveway spacing
between adjacent driveways equals or exceeds 200 feet.



   125.54(B)(2)(d)   In general, not more than three driveways will be
permitted from a single property or Development. However, in the case of
extensive property Development (property exceeding ten acres in total land
area and/or containing more than 1,000 Parking Stalls ), additional driveways
may be permitted provided all other requirements of this section are met and
the minimum driveway spacing between adjacent driveways equals or exceeds 300
feet.



   125.54(B)(2)(e)   The minimum driveway centerline between driveways
on adjacent properties shall be 125 feet. This spacing may be reduced to 75
feet if the posted speed limit on the Street is 25 mph or less, and the
adjacent driveways serve less than 50 peak hour trips, or the driveways are
restricted to right-turns-in only or right-turns-out only.



   125.54(C)   Driveway entrance width according to type.



   125.54(C)(1)   Ramp-type or Swale -type driveway entrance.



   125.54(C)(1)(a)1.   Except as provided in 125.54(C)(1)(a)2. below,
all driveways shall be constructed with the standard ramp type or Swale-type
driveway entrance and shall conform to the following width requirements.



 


WIDTH REQUIREMENTS




Use

 

Minimum (ft.)

 

Maximum (ft.)



Residential Subdivision
 

12

 

24



Other Uses:


   One-way
 

15

 

24



   Two-way
 

24

 

44



(Widths to be measured at the Street Right-Of-Way line )



 



   125.54(C)(1)(a)2.   The width of a curb opening for a ramp type
driveway entrance shall not exceed the driveway width by more than five feet
on each side.



   125.54(C)(2)   Street-type driveway entrance.  Construction of a
Street-type driveway shall be required for entrances of any Development which
includes a parking area for 300 or more vehicles or where the Development
anticipates substantial loading or trucking operations. Such driveway shall
be a minimum width of 28 feet and a maximum width of 60 feet.



   125.54(D)   Single-Family or Duplex lot.



   125.54(D)(1)   Number and location of driveway entrances.  In order
to provide the maximum safety with the least interference to the Traffic flow
on public Streets, and to provide ease and convenience in ingress and egress
to a Single-Family or Duplex Lot, the number and location of driveways on a
given Street shall be as follows:



   125.54(D)(1)(a)   One driveway shall be permitted for ingress and
egress purposes to a Single-Family or DuplexLot .



   125.54(D)(1)(b)   Two driveways entering a Single-Family or
DuplexLot may be permitted if all other requirements of this section are met
and if the minimum driveway centerline spacing between the two driveways
equals or exceeds 35 feet.



   125.54(D)(1)(c)   The minimum driveway spacing between driveways of
adjacent Single-Family or DuplexLots shall be five feet measured between the
closest edge of the first driveway and the closest edge of the second
driveway.



   125.54(D)(2)   Driveway dimensions.



   125.54(D)(2)(a)   The minimum dimensions of an isolated driveway
serving a Single-Family or DuplexLot , or serving an individual unit within a
townhome Development, shall be ten feet in width and 20 feet in length.



   125.54(D)(2)(b)   The maximum width of the driveway opening,
parallel to the garage shall not exceed 24 feet in width or the width of the
garage opening plus five feet on either side of the garage, whichever is
greater.



   125.54(D)(2)(c)   The maximum width of the driveway opening when the
driveway is not parallel to the garage shall be 18 feet.



   125.54(E)   Limitations on driveway entrance improvements.



   125.54(E)(1)   There shall be a minimum of 15 feet of straight
tangent length between a driveway and the radius return or chord of the
Ultimate Right-Of-Way of an intersection of Local Streets. At all other
intersections the minimum straight tangent length shall be 100 feet.



   125.54(E)(2)   No driveway entrance shall include any public
facility such as Traffic signal poles, crosswalks, loading zones, Utility
facilities, fire alarm supports, meter boxes, Sewer clean outs, or other
similar type Structures.



   125.54(E)(3)   Within the Ultimate Right-Of-Way limits, the maximum
recommended driveway grade is approximately 3%. The maximum allowable grade
is 4.2% or one-half inch per foot. The maximum slope immediately beyond the
Ultimate Right-Of-Way line shall not change in excess of 5% for either angle
of approach or break over angle. Variations from these standards shall be
permitted if adherence to these standards would cause incompatibility with
existing Swales .



   125.54(E)(4)   Existing driveway approaches shall not be relocated,
altered, or reconstructed without approval for relocation, alteration, or
reconstruction of such driveway approaches. When the Use of any driveway
approach is changed, making any portion or all of the driveway approach
unnecessary, the developer of the abutting property shall obtain a permit to
abandon the driveway approach and shall, at the developer’s expense,
replace all necessary curbs, gutters, Swale areas, and Sidewalks .



   125.54(E)(5)   If the closest intersection involves two Streets
classified as Arterial or collector, then Traffic movements to and from any
driveway within 125 feet of an intersection with a collector and 250 feet of
an intersection with an Arterial shall be limited to right turns only. This
distance shall be measured from the closest radius return or chord on the
intersection to the closest edge of the driveway.



   125.54(E)(6)   No driveway shall be constructed prior to issuance of
a permit for work in the Right-Of-Way by the appropriate governmental agency.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-12, passed 6-18-2012; Am. Ord.
2013-14, passed 11- 18-2013)



§ 125.55  LIMITATIONS ON IMPROVEMENTS IN THE ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   125.55(A)   No obstructions of any type that are deemed unsafe by
the City shall be left in the Ultimate Right-Of-Way.



   125.55(B)   No bus shelter or bus bench may be placed in the
Ultimate Right-Of-Way by any entity other than the City.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.56  SIGHT DISTANCE.



   125.56(A)   Cross-visibility requirements at the intersection of
driveways and Public Rights-Of-Way.



   125.56(A)(1)   Sight triangle requirements for the intersections of
public Roadways shall conform with the criteria outlined in the following
standards:



   125.56(A)(1)(a)   AASHTO’s, A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets;



   125.56(A)(1)(b)   Broward County Minimum Standards Applicable to
Public Rights-Of-Way Under Broward County Jurisdiction;



   125.56(A)(1)(c)   FDOT Roadway and Traffic Design Standards, Index
Nos. 545, 546 and 700; and



   125.56(A)(1)(d)   FDOT Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for
Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways.



   125.56(A)(2)   The intersection of private Roadway systems with
public Roadways , or intersections of private Roadways that have direct
access to the public Roadway network, shall also conform to the above
criteria to the extent that they reasonably apply.



   125.56(A)(3)   If an individual private driveway intersects with a
Public Right-Of-Way, no sight distance obstruction will be permitted within
the ten-foot by 50-foot triangular area formed by the intersection of each
side of the driveway and the Ultimate Right-Of-Way Lines with the driveway
side of the triangle being ten feet in length, the Public Right-Of-Way side
of the triangle being 50 feet in length, and the third side of the triangle
being the line connecting the ends of the two other sides.



   125.56(A)(4)   These requirements may be reduced to ten-feet by
35-feet subject to City approval, if the public Roadway is a Local Street
with a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less.



   125.56(A)(5)   For all On-Site intersections of private internal
Roadways , driveways and/or private drive aisles, a minimum ten-foot by
25-foot sight triangle must be maintained from the intersecting edges of the
travel way, with the ten-foot side of the triangle being along the minor
drive aisle and the 25-foot side of the triangle being along the major drive
aisle.



   125.56(B)   Setback areas.  Within the setback area included in the
Street or driveway intersection sight triangle thereby created, it shall be
unlawful to install, set out, or maintain, or to allow the installation,
setting out, or maintenance of, any Sign, Hedge, shrubbery, Tree, natural
growth, or other obstruction of any kind which obstructs cross-visibility at
a level between 24 inches and 96 inches above the level of the center of the
adjacent intersection.



   125.56(C)   Obstructions.  Any fence, Hedge, or other object which
will cause a sight visibility obstruction within 100 feet of a driveway or
cross Street, must be located outside of the clear sight triangle.



   125.56(D)   Cross-visibility requirements at pedestrian crosswalks
and other areas of pedestrian concentration. If a crosswalk intersects a
vehicular access aisle, driveway, or an Ultimate Right-Of-Way, there shall be
no sight obstruction within a triangular area of property on both sides of a
crosswalk or walkway formed by the intersection of each side of the walkway
and the Ultimate Right-Of-Way Line or aisle with two sides of each triangle
being ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side
being a line connecting the ends of the two sides.



   125.56(E)   Sight triangles.



   125.56(E)(1)   Within the triangular areas described above, it shall
not be permissible to install, set out, or maintain, or to allow the
installation, setting out, or maintenance of, either temporarily or
permanently, any vehicular parking space, Sign , wall, Hedge, shrubbery,
Tree, earth mound, natural growth, or other obstruction of any kind which
obstructs cross-visibility at a level between 30 inches and eight feet above
the level of the center of the adjacent intersection. Any wall or fence
within the sight triangle must be constructed in such a manner as to provide
adequate cross-visibility over or through the Structure between 30 inches and
eight feet in Height above the driving surface.



   125.56(E)(2)   The following will be permitted within the triangular
area described above:



   125.56(E)(2)(a)   Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such a
manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the area between 30 inches and
eight feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection. Trees
must be so located so as not to create a Traffic hazard. Landscaping except
required grass or Ground Cover shall not be located closer than five feet
from the edge of any Roadway pavement, and three feet from the edge of any
alley or driveway pavement.



   125.56(E)(2)(b)   Fire hydrants, public UtilityPoles , street
markers, and Traffic Control Devices .



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.57  ACCESS TO TRAFFICWAY CORRIDORS.



   Access and design criteria associated with designated Broward County
Trafficway Corridor shall be in conformance with the criteria outlined in the
applicable sections of the Broward County Land Development Code.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.58  DESIGN OF TRAFFICWAY CORRIDORS.



   A site connected to a Street at any point within a Trafficway Corridor
shall meet the design criteria, requirements, and standards of the applicable
sections of the Broward County Land Development Code.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.59  DESIGN OF NONTRAFFICWAY CORRIDORS.



   A site connected to a Street which is not within a Trafficway Corridor
shall meet the design criteria, requirements and standards of § 125.60 and
§ 125.61.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.60  STANDARDS FOR LOCAL ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS.



   125.60(A)   Improvements required.  An Applicant shall construct or
bond for the Construction, prior to issuance of any Development Order, all
Roadway and drainage improvements for those Rights-Of-Way lying within or
adjacent to the proposed Development and necessary to accommodate the Traffic
generated by the Development. Such improvements shall be in accordance with
all applicable Laws and standards. The Applicant shall provide a cash bond in
an amount equal to:



   125.60(A)(1)   400% of the estimated cost of a project for any
project less than $25,000.00;



   125.60(A)(2)   300% of the estimated cost of a project for any
project between $25,000.00 and $100,000;



   125.60(A)(3)   200% of the estimated cost of the project for any
project greater than $100,000.00.



   125.60(B)   On-Site improvements.  An Applicant shall be required
to construct or bond for the Construction of the On-Site improvements
required by the provisions of this subchapter and any additional improvements
necessary for Traffic safety, including but not limited to the following:
pavement, rock base, fill, curbs, gutters, Sidewalks, Bikeways, guardrail,
shoulder areas, Swales, roadside recovery areas, bridges, drainage outlets,
catch basins, drainage pipes, culverts, drainage ditches, headwalls,
endwalls, rip-rap, Traffic signals and interconnecting facilities,
Traffic-Control signs and pavement markings, Street name signs,
identification signs, left and right turn lanes, Median openings, bus
turnouts, and Traffic separators.



   125.60(C)   Off-Site improvements.  An Applicant shall be required
to construct or bond for the Construction of the Roadway and drainage
improvements on property adjacent to the proposed Development necessary to
connect the new Development to an existing adequately paved adjacent Street
system.



   125.60(D)   Access to Development.



   125.60(D)(1)   Every Lot or parcel shall be served from a publicly
dedicated Street ; provided however that an Applicant may retain as private a
Local Street or a collector nontrafficway Street if the following conditions
are met:



   125.60(D)(1)(a)   Public Right-Of-Way is not required in order to
serve adjacent Development that is existing or projected on the City of
Weston Land Use Plan, as amended;



   125.60(D)(1)(b)   A permanent access easement is granted for service
and emergency vehicles and for maintenance of public and semi-public
utilities;



   125.60(D)(1)(c)   A reciprocal easement for ingress and egress is
granted all residents of the Development; and



   125.60(D)(1)(d)   Private local or collector Streets comply with all
applicable Construction standards as outlined in this section.



   125.60(D)(2)   Where Development borders on or contains a
Right-Of-Way for an expressway, drainage canal, or waterway, a Street may be
required approximately parallel to and on each side of such Right-Of-Way , at
a distance suitable for the appropriate Use of the intervening land and in
compliance with all provisions of this subchapter.



   125.60(D)(3)   Reserve strips controlling access to Streets shall be
prohibited.



   125.60(D)(4)   New half or partial Streets shall not be permitted
unless the half or partial Street constitutes adequate public access to the
Development as determined by the City Manager. Whenever a tract borders on an
existing half or partial Street the other part of the Street shall be
dedicated within such tract.



   125.60(E)   Arrangement of Streets.



   125.60(E)(1)   The pattern of Streets in new subdivisions shall
provide for the continuation of existing Streets properly aligned from
adjoining areas, or for their proper projection where adjoining land is not
subdivided. Where Street extensions into adjacent Undeveloped Land are
necessary to ensure a coordinated Street system, provisions for such future
Street or Streets shall be made.



   125.60(E)(2)   The arrangement of Streets in new subdivisions or
Developments shall facilitate and coordinate with the desirable future
platting of adjoining unplatted property of a similar character, and provide
for local circulation and convenient access to neighborhood facilities.



   125.60(E)(3)   Local residential Streets shall be arranged so as to
discourage their Use by through Traffic. Residential Streets shall not
connect with industrial areas except in cases where it is unavoidable, as
determined by the City Manager.



   125.60(F)   Right-Of-Way required.  An Applicant will be required
to dedicate Right-Of-Way in addition to the Right-Of-Way requirements of
Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 in the following situations:



   125.60(F)(1)   If proposed access from the Development to an
existing dedicated and accepted Street does not meet the total Right-Of-Way
requirement for a complete road.



   125.60(F)(2)   If a Development has a greater impact on an existing
road than that for which the Roadway width had previously been designed.



   125.60(F)(3)   If a Development abuts or contains an existing Street
of inadequate Right-Of-Way width.



   125.60(G)   Turning radius specifications for local Roadways within
Developments.  Streets shall be designed to have a minimum outside fire
apparatus turning radius of 50 feet, and an inside fire apparatus turning
radius of 38 feet.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.61  DESIGN CRITERIA FOR LOCAL ROADWAYS.



   The design of Local Streets shall comply with the requirements of the
provisions and Tables below, depending on the type of Development proposed.
Deviations from the numerical standards of Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 may be
allowed but only where approved by the City Manager upon a finding that
substantially equivalent protection of the public safety can be achieved by
alternative standards. If a proposed Development includes more than one type
of Use, the highest criteria shall apply.



   125.61(A)   Residential Development.  Residential Streets shall be
adequate to permit neighborhood Traffic circulation to flow from the highest
element of the hierarchical classification, the expressway, Arterial, or
collector, to the lowest element, the local residential Street. Circulation
within a residential Development shall be adequate when the criteria of the
Tables below are met and when collectors and Local Streets are provided that
meet the standards below:



   125.61(A)(1)   Design criteria.  If the gross density of a
residential Development is one unit per two and one-half acres or less, the
Development shall conform to the minimum design standards of Table 3. If the
gross density of a residential Development is between one unit per acre and
one unit per two and one-half acres, the Development shall conform to the
minimum design standards of Table 4. All other residential Development shall
conform to the minimum design standards of Table 5.



 


TABLE 3:  DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STREETS FOR RURAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS



(Minimum Lot size: More than 2.5 acres gross)




Collector (Nontrafficway)

 

Local Streets




Collector

 

Four-lane Collector

 

Two-lane Local

 

Cul-De-Sac

 

Local





Typical Volume
 

6,500-18,000 vpd

 

2,000-5,000 vpd

 

300-2,000 vpd

 

0-300 vpd (a)



Residential Access
 

Limited

 

Limited

 

Yes

 

Yes



Design Speed
 

45 mph

 

40 mph

 

35 mph

 

30 mph



Typical Space Between Streets*
 

1/2 mile

 

1/4 mile

 

660 feet

 

330 feet*



Intersection Space Maximum
 

No Maximum (b)

 

2 miles (b)

 

N/A

 

N/A



Intersection Space Minimum
 

1,320 ft. (b)

 

660 ft. (b)

 

250 ft. (c)

 

250 ft. (c)



Lanes
 

4

 

2

 

2

 

2



Minimum Pavement
 

52 ft. (g)

 

28 ft. (g)

 

22 ft.

 

22 ft.



Pavement Mark/Signing
 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)



Driveway Design
 

Swale-Drive (e)

 

Swale-Drive (e)

 

Swale-Drive (e)

 

Swale-Drive (e)



Parking - On-Street
 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited



Curbing Along Intersection Radii
 

Optional

 

Optional

 

Optional

 

Optional



Median
 

Yes

 

No

 

No

 

No



Turn Lanes*
 

Yes (f)

 

Yes (f)

 

No

 

No



Traffic Signal
 

As Warranted

 

As Warranted

 

No

 

No



Pedestrian Crossing
 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)



Building Setback*
 

25 ft. min.

 

25 ft. min.

 

25 ft. min.

 

25 ft. min.



Approach Widening (Intersection Improvement)*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Right-Of-Way*
 

80 ft.

 

60–80 ft. (e)

 

50 ft.

 

50 ft.



Design Vehicle (Geom)
 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB 40

 

WB 40



Corners (Right-Of-Way)
 

30 ft. chord

 

30 ft. chord

 

25 ft. radius

 

25 ft. radius



Bikeways*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Sidewalks
 

No

 

No

 

No

 

No



* Further explanation in provisions of §§ 125.50–125.65


(a)   Over 300 vpd may be allowed if an alternate emergency access is
provided.


(b)   Or alternate approved by the City Manager based upon land planning
and Traffic analysis.


(c)   See § 125.61(A)(3)(a).


(d)   As delineated in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).


(e)   Or alternate approved by the City Manager.


(f)   On Collectors–For Collector/Collector Intersections or
Local/Collector Intersections with more than 1,000 vpd.


(g)   The outermost lanes shall be two feet wider than the interior lanes
if Right-Of-Way is available.


N/A Not applicable.




 



 


TABLE 4:  DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STREETS FOR LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS (35,000 square feet net (a) to 2.5 acres gross)






 

Collector (Nontrafficway)

 

Local Streets






 

Four-lane Collector

 

Two-lane Collector

 

Local

 

Local Cul-De-Sac





Typical Volume
 

6,500-18,000 vpd

 

2,000-6,500 vpd

 

300(d)-2,000 vpd

 

0-300(d) vpd



Direct Access
 

Limited (c)

 

Limited (c)

 

Yes

 

Yes



Design Speed
 

45 mph

 

40 mph

 

35 mph

 

30 mph



Typical Space Between Streets*
 

1/2 mile

 

1/2 mile

 

330 ft.

 

330 ft.*



Intersection Space Maximum
 

No Maximum(d)

 

2 miles (d)

 

1/2 mile

 

N/A



Intersection Space Minimum
 

660 ft.

 

660 ft.

 

250 ft. (e)

 

250 ft. (e)



Lanes
 

4

 

2

 

2

 

2



Minimum Pavement
 

52 ft. (h)

 

28 ft. (h)

 

24 ft.

 

22 ft.



Pavement Mark/Signing
 

Yes (f)

 

Yes (f)

 

Yes (f)

 

Yes (f)



Driveway Design
 

Swale-Drive (d)

 

Swale-Drive (d)

 

Swale-Drive (d)

 

Swale-Drive (d)



Valley Gutter
 

No

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes



Parking - On Street
 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited



Median
 

Yes

 

No

 

No

 

No



Turn Lanes*
 

Yes (g)

 

Yes (g)

 

No

 

No



Traffic Signal
 

As Warranted

 

As Warranted

 

No

 

No



Pedestrian Crossing
 

Intersection



Only (f)

 

Intersection



Only (f)

 

Intersection



Only (f)

 

Intersection



Only (f)



Building Setback*
 

25 ft. min.

 

25 ft. min.

 

25 ft. min.

 

25 ft. min.



Approach Widening (Intersection Improvement)*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Right-Of-Way*
 

80 ft.

 

60–80 ft. (e)

 

50 ft.

 

50 ft.



Design Vehicle (Geom)
 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB 40

 

WB 40



Corners (Right-Of-Way)
 

30 ft. chord

 

30 ft. chord

 

25 ft. radius

 

25 ft. radius



Bikeways*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Sidewalks
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Curbing along Intersection Radii
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



* Further explanation in provisions of §§ 125.50–125.65.


(a)   Net = Fee Simple Ownership.


(b)   Over 300 vpd may be allowed if an alternate emergency access is
provided.


(c)   Residential access may be allowed for Lots with a minimum of 200
feet Frontage or for collectors if volume does not exceed a projection of
3,000 vpd.


(d)   Or alternate approved by the City Manager.


(e)   See § 125.61(A)(3)(a).


(f)   As delineated in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).


(g)   On Collectors–For Collector/Collector Intersections or
Local/Collector Intersections with more than 1,000 vpd.


(h)   The outermost lanes shall be two feet wider than the interior lanes
if Right-Of-Way is not available.


N/A Not Applicable.




 



 


TABLE 5: DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STREETS FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS






 

Collector (Nontrafficway)

 

Local Streets






 

Four-Lane Collector

 

Two-Lane Collector

 

Local

 

Local Cul-De-Sac





Typical Volume
 

8,500-20,400 vpd

 

4,000-8,500 vpd

 

500-4,000 vpd

 

0-500 vpd



Residential Access
 

Limited (a)

 

Limited (a)

 

Yes

 

Yes



Design Speed
 

45 mph

 

40 mph

 

35 mph

 

30 mph



Typical Space Between Streets*
 

1/2 mile

 

1/4 mile

 

260 ft. (c)

 

260 ft. (b)(c)*



Intersection Space Maximum
 

1 mile (c)

 

1/2 mile

 

1/2 mile

 

660 ft. (c)



Intersection Space Minimum
 

660 ft.

 

330 ft.

 

250 ft. (b)

 

250 ft. (b)



Lanes
 

4

 

2

 

2

 

2



Minimum Pavement
 

52 ft. (f)

 

28 ft. (f)

 

24 ft.

 

24 ft.



Pavement Mark/Signing
 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)



Driveway Design
 

Prohibited

 

Ramp-Type (c)

 

Swale-Drive (c)

 

Swale-Drive (c)



Valley Gutter
 

No

 

No

 

Yes

 

Yes



Parking - On Street
 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited



Median
 

Yes

 

No

 

No

 

No



Turn Lanes*
 

Yes (e)

 

Yes (e)

 

Yes (e)

 

No



Traffic Signal
 

As Warranted

 

As Warranted

 

As Warranted

 





Pedestrian Crossing
 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)



Building Setback*
 

10 ft. min.

 

10 ft. min.

 

10 ft. min.

 

10 ft. min.



Approach Widening (Intersection Improvement)*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

As Warranted

 

No



Right-Of-Way*
 

80 ft.

 

80 ft. (c)

 

50–60 ft.

 

50–60 ft.



Design Vehicle (Geom)
 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB 60 & SU

 

WB 60 & SU



Corners (Right-Of-Way)
 

30 ft. chord

 

30-25 ft. chord

 

25 ft. chord (c)

 

25 ft. chord (c)



Bikeways*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Curbing Along Intersection Radii
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



* Further explanation in provisions of §§ 125.50–125.65.


(a)   See § 125.61(A)(2)(b) for Multi-FamilyDevelopment Exception.


(b)   Or 125 ft. for opposing offset “T” intersections.


(c)   Or alternate approved by the City Manager .


(d)   As delineated in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).


(e)   On Collectors–For Collector/Collector Intersections or
Local/Collector Intersections with more than 1,000 vpd.


(f)   The outermost lanes shall be two feet wider than the interior lanes
if Right-Of-Way is available.




 



   125.61(A)(2)   Residential collector Street.  The residential
collector Street serves as the principal circulation facility within the
residential neighborhood. Its function is to collect Traffic from the
interior and deliver it to the closest perimeter intra-neighborhood
transportation between the residential neighborhood and the local centers of
attraction such as neighborhood shopping centers, schools, and neighborhood
parks.



   125.61(A)(2)(a)   Collectors shall penetrate residential Development
without forming a continuous network, thus discouraging through Traffic. When
discontinuity of local collectors is obtained by offsetting the intersections
with the Arterials or other collector Streets, such offsetting shall comply
with the following:



   125.61(A)(2)(a)1.   A collector may intersect an Arterial but only
if aligned with and extending an existing collector which intersects the
Arterial or at a minimum distance of 1,320 feet from the intersection of an
existing collector and the Arterial, or at a minimum distance of 1,420 feet
from the intersection of two Arterials.



   125.61(A)(2)(a)2.   A Local Street may not intersect an Arterial
unless unavoidable in which case the Local Street may intersect an Arterial
but only if aligned with and extending an existing Local Street which
intersects the Arterial or at a minimum distance of 660 feet from any other
intersection of the Arterial, except at a minimum distance of 760 feet from
the intersection of two Arterials.



   125.61(A)(2)(a)3.   A collector may intersect another collector but
only if aligned with and extending an existing collector or at a minimum
distance of 660 feet from any other intersection of the collector.



   125.61(A)(2)(a)4.   A Local Street may intersect a collector if
spaced at a minimum distance of 660 feet from any other intersection or, in
the case of a “T”-type intersection, at a minimum distance of 330 feet
from any other intersection.



   125.61(A)(2)(a)5.   The minimum spacing requirements of this
subchapter may be reduced upon a finding by the City that, given the
particular conditions of the proposed Development, such reduction will not
compromise operational and safety standards.



   125.61(A)(2)(b)   Single-Family residential Lots smaller than one
acre shall not have direct access to four-lane collector Streets. If the
sides of adjoining residential Lots abut the collector Street , with the
house and driveway facing the Local Street, the spacing between intersections
shall be not less than 250 feet, and a Nonvehicular Access Line shall be
provided along the collector Street . When the back of residential Lots abuts
a collector Street a Nonvehicular Access Line shall be provided along the
collector Street . Group parking facilities, as for multi-family Use, when
located along a collector residential Street , shall be served by driveways
having a minimum spacing of 250 feet.



   125.61(A)(3)   Local residential Street.  The primary function of
the Local Street is to provide the access of vehicles to Single-Family
residential Development fronting on the Street. Local Streets shall provide
access to Single-Family residential Development and connect local Traffic
from private driveways to collector Streets. Local Streets are required when
connections of driveways or private Streets to the collector would be
otherwise closer than 250 feet.



   125.61(A)(3)(a)   There shall be a minimum distance of 250 feet
between the intersection of any two Local Streets with a single collector,
except that there may be a minimum distance of 125 feet between “T”
intersections.



   125.61(A)(3)(b)   Local Streets shall be patterned in such a way
that continuous Traffic from one collector to another collector is not
possible.



   125.61(A)(3)(c)   Dead end Streets shall be designed and constructed
with a paved turnaround at the closed end pursuant to the requirements of the
Building Code . Adequate easements or Rights-Of-Way shall be provided for
Construction of the paved surface, Roadway drainage, and Sidewalks adjacent
to the turnaround.



   125.61(A)(3)(d)   A loop Street , a Local Street that begins and
ends at the same collector, shall be subject to the following requirements:



   125.61(A)(3)(d)1.   A loop Street may be designed with a right angle
corner serving as a Cul-De-Sac providing that a recessed circular pavement at
such corner allowing greater Frontage for irregularly shaped Lots is provided.



   125.61(A)(3)(d)2.   A loop Street may begin at a collector and end
at a Local Street provided that the system does not exceed the maximum number
of trips permitted.



   125.61(B)   Commercial Development.



   125.61(B)(1)   Commercial Streets.  Commercial Streets shall be
designed to facilitate the efficient and safe movement of vehicles from the
Trafficways to regional commercial facilities, and from collectors and local
residential Streets to community and neighborhood commercial Development. The
design of commercial Streets shall comply with the standards of Table 6.



   125.61(B)(2)   Pedestrian access.  Neighborhood and community
commercial facilities shall have an efficient and direct pedestrianway
connection to the Residential Areas the facilities are intended to serve. The
design of local commercial facilities shall allow pedestrian and bike riders
direct access from adjacent neighborhood areas, with due consideration to the
elimination of points of conflict between pedestrians and vehicles.



   125.61(C)   Industrial Development.  Industrial Development shall
be designed to provide easy and safe access for incoming goods and services,
and for the personnel operating the industrial facilities. Adequate location
and size shall ensure that noise levels, smells and odors, vibration,
radiation, and other sources of nuisance will not affect residential
Development. Industrial Streets shall be designed to provide direct access
from Arterials and collectors to industrial Local Streets. Local residential
Streets shall not be used to provide access to immediately adjacent
industrial Development. Industrial Streets shall comply with the standards of
Table 6.



 


TABLE 6:  DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STREETS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENTS




Collector (Nontrafficway)

 

Local Streets




Collector

 

Four-lane Collector

 

Two-lane Local

 

Local

 

Cul-de-sac





Typical Volume
 

6,500-20,400 vpd

 

3,000-8,500 vpd

 

500-4,000 vpd

 

0-1,000 vpd (a)



Residential Access
 

Limited (b)

 

Limited (b)

 

Yes

 

Yes



Design Speed
 

45 mph

 

40 mph

 

35 mph

 

30 mph



Typical Space Between Streets*
 

1/2 mile

 

1/4 mile

 

660 feet

 

330 ft.



Intersection Space Maximum
 

1 mile

 

1/2 mile

 

1/2 mile

 

660 ft.



Intersection Space Minimum
 

660 ft.

 

660 ft.

 

330 ft.

 

330 ft.



Lanes
 

4

 

2

 

2

 

2



Minimum Pavement
 

52 ft. (f)

 

28 ft. (f)

 

24 ft.

 

24 ft.



Pavement Mark/Signing
 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)

 

Yes (d)



Driveway Design
 

Ramp/Street (e)

 

Ramp/Street (e)

 

Ramp/Street (e)

 

Ramp/Street (e)



Parking - On Street
 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited

 

Prohibited



Median
 

Yes

 

No

 

No

 

No



Turn Lanes*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Traffic Signal
 

As Warranted

 

As Warranted

 

As Warranted

 

No



Pedestrian Crossing
 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)

 

Intersection



Only (d)



Building Setback*
 

10 foot min.

 

5 foot min.

 

5 foot min.

 

5 foot min.



Approach Widening (Intersection Improvement)*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Right-Of-Way*
 

80 ft.

 

60-80 ft.

 

60 ft.

 

60 ft.



Design Vehicle (Geom)
 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB-60 & SU

 

WB 60 & SU

 

WB 60 & SU



Corners (Right-Of-Way)
 

30 ft. chord

 

30 ft. chord

 

25 ft. chord (e)

 

25 ft. chord



Bikeways*
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

No

 

No



Sidewalks
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



Curbing Along Intersection Radii
 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes



* Further explanation in provisions of §§ 125.50–125.65.


(a)   Cul-De-Sacs may be approved for Traffic volumes more than 1,000 vpd
if an alternate is approved by the City Manager.


(b)   As permitted in § 125.54(B)(2).


(c)   Or 165 ft. for opposing offset “T” intersections.


(d)   As delineated in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).


(e)   Or alternate approved by the City Manager.


(f)   The outermost lanes shall be two feet wider than the interior lanes
if Right-Of-Way is available.




 



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.62  PERVIOUS AREA AND GREENSPACE.



   125.62(A)   The area covered by Structures and impervious surface
shall not exceed 75% for industrial, 70% for commercial, and 60% for
residential Uses . For the purposes of this requirement all other Uses , such
as, but not limited to, utilities, transportation, and office parks, shall be
included in the commercial category. In mixed Use Developments the most
restrictive of the applicable Impervious Area limitations shall be utilized.



   125.62(A)(1)   Pervious Areas may be used to satisfy requirements
for landscaping and setbacks, buffer strips, drain fields, passive recreation
areas, or any other purpose that does not require covering with a material
that prevents infiltration of water into the ground.



   125.62(A)(2)   In the case of the use of an impervious material that
does not cover all the surface to which it is applied, credit towards the
computation of the Pervious Area shall be given according to the percentage
of Pervious Area that is retained.



   125.62(A)(2)(a)   Pervious paving blocks or turf blocks may not be
used within Major Driveways, loading zones, actively used Parking Stalls in
commercial or industrial Developments, or any other area that may cause a
liability to the property Owner .



   125.62(A)(2)(b)   Pervious paving blocks may be used in overflow
parking areas, park and recreation parking facilities, and Reservoir Area .
In all cases where the pervious paving blocks are used where pedestrian
Traffic is prevalent, the block voids shall be planted with a nonrunner
species of grass such as, but not limited to, zoysia and Bermuda grass.



   125.62(B)   Each proposed Development shall include provisions for
the application of best management practices to enhance Retention Areas such
as grass ponds, grass Swales , French drains, or combinations thereof, and
shall meet all requirements of the applicable 208 Areawide Wastewater
Treatment Management Plan.



   125.62(C)   Where one or more of the nine Ecological Communities
listed in Appendix 17-1 of the Broward County Comprehensive Plan are present
within a proposed Development, (except in jurisdictional Wetlands as
determined by Broward County), a minimum of 50% of the Pervious Area required
by this subsection shall consist of these Ecological Communities in
preservation areas.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.63  ARCHAEOLOGICALLY SIGNIFICANT LANDS.



   Proposed site plans that include any land designated as an
Archaeological Site in the City’s Comprehensive Plan or in the Florida Site
File, or designated as an Archaeological Cultural Resource Site shall include
requirements for management of the Archaeological Site. Those requirements
shall be based upon an archaeological report prepared by a professional
archaeologist and submitted by the Applicant prior to site plan application.
The report shall include a brief history of the area, the field survey
methods, the results of the field survey, an assessment of the archaeological
significance, and a proposed plan for management. The requirements for
management shall be approved by the City Manager after consultation with any
other agencies deemed appropriate. It shall be the purpose of the management
plan to provide for protection and preservation of the site to the extent
feasible and to allow salvage Excavation only where other methods of
preservation would not permit reasonable Development of the site.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.64  SIDEWALKS.



   125.64(A)   Generally.  Sidewalks having a minimum width of five
feet shall be constructed adjacent to all developed properties and shall be
located within the abutting Public and Private road Rights-Of-Way, except for
properties abutting State Road 84, US 27 and Interstate 75 or in residential
developments where the minimum lot size is greater than two and one-half
acres.



   125.64(B)   Trafficways.  A minimum five-foot wide Sidewalk shall
be constructed on both sides of all Trafficways, except expressways and
limited access Highways.



   125.64(C)   Sidewalk Construction.  All Sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with the City of Weston Engineering Standards, the
Minimum Construction Standards Applicable to Public Rights-Of-Way under
Broward County Jurisdiction (in the case of Trafficway Roadways), and
applicable FDOT Standard Indexes. Sidewalks shall be concrete and separated
from the road surface by a curb or Swale. At intersections, midblock
crossings, bus stops, and bus bays, and bus shelters, Sidewalk connections to
the road surface or drop curb ramps shall be constructed to provide
accessibility to disabled persons. In accordance with the Florida
Accessibility Code for New Building Construction, at least one accessible
route from on-site Buildings to the external public Sidewalk system must be
provided. Sidewalks shall not be constructed within Utility easements where
existing or future Utility Poles, service boxes, or other obstructions will
reduce the width of the Sidewalk below five feet, or as mandated for
accessibility by the Americans with Disabilities Act.



   125.64(D)   Pedestrian barriers.  The City Manager may require that
a site plan indicate fences, Hedges, berms, other landscaping, or other
barriers on site plans, in order to discourage pedestrians from crossing
hazardous Streets at unsafe points or at numerous points. When possible,
sites shall be designed so as to promote pedestrian Street crossings only at
Traffic Control signals, crosswalks, or intersections.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.65  OUTPARCEL AND MULTI-TENANT PROPERTIES.



   125.65(A)   Outparcels.



   125.65(A)(1)   Generally.  The establishment of commercial
Outparcel tracts to serve as freestanding Structures may be permitted when
the OutparcelStructure complements and serves to better define the principal
commercial Development. To provide for their appropriateness, site standards
are identified for Outparcel Development. The objectives of these standards
are as follows.



   125.65(A)(1)(a)   To assure the principal Developments are not
visually obscured by Outparcel Developments;



   125.65(A)(1)(b)   To maintain architectural continuity with the
principal design features of surrounding Buildings and signage;



   125.65(A)(1)(c)   To encourage complementary amenities;



   125.65(A)(1)(d)   To embellish the adjacent Public Right-Of-Way with
landscaping and other pedestrian features;



   125.65(A)(1)(e)   To provide convenient and safe pedestrian
connection with the principal Development Structures;



   125.65(A)(1)(f)   To provide an On-Site parking and circulation
system that can sufficiently serve the Outparcel; and



   125.65(A)(1)(g)   To permit restrained signage in the form of
monument or Building signage to occur.



   125.65(A)(2)   Standards.



   125.65(A)(2)(a)   Architectural design and signage.  The design and
Construction of all Structures and signs on Outparcels shall be maintained so
as to be compatible with the architectural format and signs of the principal
Buildings comprising the Development. Colors, materials, finishes, and
Building forms and signs shall be coordinated with the Owner and the City so
they are identical with the overall center.



   125.65(A)(2)(b)   Number of Outparcels.  The number of Outparcels
permitted on any commercial tract shall be no more than one Outparcel for
every ten acres of total site area. Likewise, there shall be no less than 500
lineal feet of Street Frontage per Outparcel.



   125.65(A)(2)(c)   Distance between Outparcels.  There shall be a
minimum of 300 lineal feet of open space between Outparcels except on
adjacent properties where there may be 300 lineal feet between Buildings when
separated by a Roadway.



   125.65(A)(2)(d)   Distance between principal and Outparcel
Structures.  There shall be a minimum distance separation of 150 feet from
the Principal Structure to any OutparcelStructure.



   125.65(A)(2)(e)   Number of Buildings on Outparcel.  No more than
one Building may be permitted on each approved Outparcel containing no more
than 15,000 square feet.



   125.65(A)(2)(f)   Height.  Height shall be scaled to surrounding
areas; however, not to exceed one Story with a maximum Height of 18 feet as
measured from the crown of the road.



   125.65(A)(2)(g)   Access. Access to the Outparcel shall be as direct
as possible avoiding excessive movement across Parking Aisles and queuing
across surrounding parking and driving aisles. All access to the Outparcel
must be internalized utilizing the main access drive of the principal retail
center. Storage and service facilities for all Outparcels shall be integrated
within the Building zone and preferably constructed as an integral part of
the Structure. Drive-Through facilities shall be provided on the Outparcel
site exclusively. In no instance shall the circulation and access of the
principal commercial facility and its parking and service be impaired.



   125.65(B)   Multi-tenant properties.  Multi-tenant projects may be
permitted when multiple Buildings are included as part of a single site plan.
To provide for their appropriate Development, the following site standards
are identified for the Development of multi-tenant properties.



   125.65(B)(1)   All Buildings within the site plan shall be identical
in architecture, style, and color.



   125.65(B)(2)   Convenient and safe pedestrian connection between the
various Buildings must be provided.



   125.65(B)(3)   An On-Site parking and circulation system that can
sufficiently serve the project must be provided.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 125.66 BUILDING ELEVATIONS.



   125.66(A)   Machinery prohibited. No Machinery shall be located on
exterior wall planes of a multi-family residential or commercial Building
that is visible from any Rights-of-Way, from pedestrian access ways, and from
areas accessible to the general public.



   125.66(B)   Permanent architectural feature required. All electrical
switchgear located on an exterior wall plane of a multi-family residential or
commercial Building shall be concealed from view from any Rights-of-Way, from
pedestrian access ways, and from areas accessible to the general public by
means of a permanent architectural feature (not landscaping).



   125.66(C)   Exemptions.



   125.66(C)(1)   State or county requirement. Machinery required by
State or county law to be located on exterior wall planes of a multi-family
or commercial Building that is visible from any Right-of-Way, from pedestrian
access ways, and from areas accessible to the general public, shall be exempt
from this Section, provided that there is no viable alternative.



   125.66(C)(2)   Certain machinery.  Machinery for Buildings
enclosing stand-by electric power generating systems shall be exempt from
this Section.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-19-2012)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 126: SIGNS



Section



   126.01   Scope, purpose, substitution and severability



   126.02   Sign permits




Design and Performance Standards




   126.10   Prohibited signs



   126.11   Permanent signs



   126.12   Flag display standards



   126.13   Window signs



   126.14   Building and unit number signs



   126.15   Street identification (name) signs



   126.16   Signs on kiosks



   126.17   Hanging signs



   126.18   Temporary signs



   126.19   Architectural embellishments



   126.20   Sign placement



   126.21   Sign design and maintenance



   126.22   Signs on Rights-Of-Way and public property



   126.23   Non-complying signs



   126.24   Nonconforming signs



§ 126.01  SCOPE, PURPOSE, SUBSTITUTION AND SEVERABILITY.



   126.01(A)   Scope.



   126.01(A)(1)   The provisions of this Chapter shall govern the
number, size, location, and character of all Signs which may be permitted
either as a main or accessory use under the terms of this Chapter. No Signs
shall be permitted on a plot or parcel either as a main or accessory use
except in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.



   126.01(A)(2)   This Chapter does not regulate City signs on property
owned by the City, the Indian Trace Development District, the Bonaventure
Development District, Broward County or the State of Florida, and does not
regulate Traffic Control Devices.



   126.01(A)(3)   In the event of any conflict between this Code and
any declaration of covenants, bylaws, or other restrictions applying to any
property within the City, the language affording the more restrictive
interpretation shall apply.



   126.01(A)(4)   The City specifically finds that these sign
regulations are narrowly tailored to achieve the compelling and substantial
governmental interests of traffic safety and aesthetics, and that there is no
other way for the City to further these interests.



   126.01(B)   Purpose.



   126.01(B)(1)   Florida Constitution.  Article II, Section 7 of the
Florida Constitution provides that "[i]t shall be the policy of the state to
conserve and protect its natural resources and scenic beauty. . . ."  A
beautiful environment preserves and enhances the desirability of the City as
a place to live and to do business. Implementing the Florida Constitution is
a compelling governmental interest.



   126.01(B)(2)   Florida Statutes.  Florida law require cities to
adopt comprehensive plans and implement them through land development
regulations (also known as zoning regulations) and approval of development
orders that are consistent with the comprehensive plan. See F.S. Chapter 163,
Part II. Florida law specifically requires that the City adopt sign
regulations.  See F.S. § 163.3202(2)(f).  Complying with state law is a
compelling governmental interest.



   126.01(B)(2)(a)   City Comprehensive Plan Elements.  The City is
"generally a low intensity residential community with vibrant, compact
commercial areas and employment centers. Weston prides itself on its scenic
vistas and aesthetic standards."  See Comprehensive Plan, Future Land Use
Element, Existing Land Use Conditions and Data. In the Analysis of the Need
for Redevelopment in the Future Land Use Element, the Plan states that
"[t]here exists a need to eliminate and prevent land uses and specific
characteristics of development inconsistent with Weston's unique character
and planned future uses. These inconsistencies are monitored in the permit
and review process which are, to a great degree, further regulated by land
use and zoning constraints. The City will continue to establish and maintain
design and aesthetic standards for buildings, lighting, signage and
landscape."  The Transportation Element addresses Traffic Control Devices:
"Signage. Signing and markings are features of traffic control and operation
that must be considered in the geometric layout of each facility. The FDOT,
Broward County, and the municipalities create and maintain signage on their
functionally assigned roadways." In Table 8E "Known Crash Locations and
Proposed Safety Improvements," the Plan specifically calls for signage
improvements to improve traffic safety.  Implementing the City Comprehensive
Plan is a compelling governmental interest.



   126.01(B)(2)(b)   City Comprehensive Plan Goals, Objectives and
Policies.  Several goals, objectives and policies of the City's
comprehensive plan require the City to maintain its scenic beauty and traffic
safety through its land development regulations and actions:



   Objective 1.2:  " City shall maintain the high aesthetic community
design standards through the enforcement of regulations which guide
development."



   Policy 1.2.1:  "Maintain and enforce effective development and
maintenance regulations."



   Objective 1.3:  " City shall create, preserve and maintain scenic
vistas in keeping with the classic tradition as embodied in the original City
plan."



   Policy 1.3.1:  "Maintain and enforce effective development and
maintenance regulations."



   Objective 1.6:  " City shall develop and implement land use controls
through the zoning code and land development regulations which promote
residential neighborhoods that are attractive, well-maintained and contribute
to the health, safety and welfare of their residents."



   Policy 1.6.1:  "Evaluate and revise the Weston Zoning Code and Land
Use Regulations, as necessary, to reflect the unique characteristics of
Weston and to provide the appropriate instruments to enforce and effectively
carry out the requirements of this plan."



   Goal 1:8  "Protect Weston's natural, historic and cultural resources
and promote cultural resources through well-planned patterns of growth and
development."



   Goal 2.  "To assure the availability of a safe, sound and attractive
residential environment for all residents of the City of Weston."



   Policy 2.1.6:  "The City shall maintain a sign code which regulates
the size and design of all signage."



   Policy 8.5.1:  " City shall continue to protect existing rights-of-way
from building encroachment through implementation of, but not limited to, the
following programs, activities or actions: . . . .



   2.  Inaction [sic] of land development regulations, sign and
landscaping codes that prohibit obstructions within public rights of way; . .
. ."



   Objective 8.12:  "Increase Weston's attractiveness to tourists through
the establishment of a land use pattern and development regulations aimed at
enhancing the area's natural and man-made environments."



   126.01(B)(3)   Caselaw.  In accordance with the U.S. Supreme
Court's cases on sign regulation, the regulations in this Chapter are not
intended to regulate or censor speech based on its content or viewpoint, but
rather to regulate the secondary effects of speech that may adversely affect
the City's substantial and compelling governmental interests in preserving
scenic beauty and community aesthetics, and in vehicular and pedestrian
safety in conformance with the First Amendment. These cases and their
holdings include, but are not limited to:



   126.01(B)(3)(a)   Reed v. Town of Gilbert, ___U.S.___, 135 S. Ct.
2218, 192 L. Ed. 2d 236 (2015) on the topic on noncommercial temporary signs;



   126.01(B)(3)(b)   Metromedia, Inc. v. City of San Diego, 453 U.S.
490 (1981) on the topic of commercial signs and off-premise signs;



   126.01(B)(3)(c)   City of Ladue v. Gilleo, 512 U.S. 43 (1994) on the
topic of political protest signs in residential areas;



   126.01(B)(3)(d)   Linmark Assocs., Inc. v. Township of Willingboro,
431 U.S. 85 (1977) on the topic of real estate signs in residential areas;



   126.01(B)(3)(e)   Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992) on the
topic of election signs near polling places;



   126.01(B)(3)(f)   Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public
Service Commission, 447 U.S. 557 (1980) on the topic of commercial speech; and



   126.01(B)(3)(g)   City Council v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S.
789 (1984) on the topic of signs on Public Property or a Public Place.



   126.01(B)(4)   Impact of Sign clutter.  Excessive signage and Sign
clutter impair the legibility of the environment, and undermines the
effectiveness of governmental signs, Traffic Control Devices and other
required Signs (such as building, unit or house number Signs , street
identification Signs, and building identity Signs) that are essential to
identifying locations for the delivery of emergency services and other
compelling governmental purposes. The intent of these Sign regulations is to
enhance the visual environment of the City, ensure that City residents and
visitors can safely navigate through the City to their intended destinations,
and promote the continued well-being of the City. It is therefore the purpose
of this Chapter to promote aesthetics and the public health, safety and
general welfare, and assure the adequate provision of light and air within
the City through reasonable, consistent and nondiscriminatory standards for
the posting, displaying, erection, use, and maintenance of Signs and Sign
Structures that are no more restrictive than necessary to achieve these
governmental interests.



   126.01(B)(5)   Specific Legislative Intent.  More specifically, the
Sign regulations are intended to:



   126.01(B)(5)(a)   Encourage the effective use of Signs as a means of
communication in the City ;



   126.01(B)(5)(b)   Maintain and enhance the scenic beauty of the
aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic
development and growth;



   126.01(B)(5)(c)   Ensure pedestrian safety and traffic safety;



   126.01(B)(5)(d)   Minimize the possible adverse effect of Signs on
nearby Public Property, Public Places and Private Property;



   126.01(B)(5)(e)   Foster the integration of Signs with architectural
and landscape designs;



   126.01(B)(5)(f)   Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be
caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation,
excessive Height, and excessive Sign Area which compete for the attention of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and are not necessary to aid in wayfinding;



   126.01(B)(5)(g)   Allow Signs that are compatible with their
surroundings and aid orientation, while precluding the placement of Signs
that contribute to Sign clutter or that conceal or obstruct adjacent land
uses or Signs;



   126.01(B)(5)(h)   Encourage and allow Signs that are appropriate to
the zoning district in which they are located and consistent with the land
uses, activities and functions to which they pertain;



   126.01(B)(5)(i)   Curtail the size and number of Signs to the
minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business location,
and the nature of such use, and to allow smooth navigation to these locations;



   126.01(B)(5)(j)   Establish dimensional limits and placement
criteria for Signs that are legible and proportional to the size of the
Parcel and Structure on which the Sign is to be placed, or to which it
pertains;



   126.01(B)(5)(k)   Regulate Signs so that they are effective in
performing the function of identifying and safely directing pedestrian and
vehicular traffic to a destination;



   126.01(B)(5)(l)   Preclude Signs from conflicting with the Principal
Use of the Parcel and adjoining Parcels;



   126.01(B)(5)(m)   Regulate Signs in a manner so as to not interfere
with, obstruct the vision of, or distract motorists, bicyclists or
pedestrians;



   126.01(B)(5)(n)   Except to the extent expressly preempted by state,
Broward County or federal law, ensure that Signs are constructed, installed
and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner, and protect the public from
unsafe Signs;



   126.01(B)(5)(o)   Preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the
aesthetic quality and scenic beauty of all zoning districts of the City ;



   126.01(B)(5)(p)   Allow Traffic Control Devices consistent with
national standards without regulation in this Chapter, because they promote
highway safety and efficiency by providing for the orderly movement of road
users on streets and highways, and by notifying road users of regulations and
providing nationally consistent warnings and guidance needed for the safe,
uniform and efficient operation of all modes of travel, while regulating
private Signs to ensure that their size, location and other attributes do not
impair the effectiveness of such Traffic Control Devices;



   126.01(B)(5)(q)   Protect property values by precluding, to the
maximum extent possible, Signs that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use
of other properties as a result of their size, Height, illumination,
brightness, or movement;



   126.01(B)(5)(r)   Protect property values by ensuring that the size,
number and appearance of Signs are in harmony with Buildings, neighborhoods,
Structures, and conforming Signs in the area;



   126.01(B)(5)(s)   Regulate the appearance and design of Signs in a
manner that promotes and enhances the beautification of the City and that
complements the natural surroundings in recognition of the City's reliance on
its natural surroundings and beautification efforts as a source of economic
advantage as an attractive place to live and work;



   126.01(B)(5)(t)   Classify and categorize Signs by type and zoning
district;



   126.01(B)(5)(u)   Not regulate Signs more than necessary to
accomplish the compelling and important governmental objectives described
herein;



   126.01(B)(5)(v)   Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of
these Sign regulations;



   126.01(B)(5)(w)   Permit, regulate and encourage the use of signs
with a scale, graphic character, and type of lighting compatible with
buildings and uses in the area, so as to support and complement the goals,
objectives and policies set forth in the City's Comprehensive Plan;



   126.01(B)(5)(x)   Establish regulations of the design, erection and
maintenance of signs for the purpose of ensuring equitable access to graphic
communication, while maintaining a harmonious and aesthetically pleasing
visual environment within the City , recognizing that signs form an integral
part of architectural building and site design and require equal attention in
their design, placement and construction; and



   126.01(B)(5)(y)   Be considered the maximum standards allowed for
signage, and regulate signs in a permissive manner so that any sign is not
allowed unless expressly permitted and not expressly prohibited.



   126.01(C)   Substitution of noncommercial speech for commercial
speech. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter to the contrary, to
the extent that this Chapter permits a Sign containing commercial content, it
shall permit a Noncommercial Sign to the same extent. The noncommercial
message may occupy the entire Sign Area or any portion thereof, and may
substitute for or be combined with the commercial message. The Sign message
may be changed from commercial to noncommercial, or from one noncommercial
message to another, as frequently as desired by the Sign’s owner, provided
that the Sign is not prohibited and the Sign continues to comply with all
requirements of this Chapter.



   126.01(D)   Severability.



   126.01(D)(1)   Generally.  If any part, Section, subsection,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this
Chapter is declared unconstitutional by the final and valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, this declaration of
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other part, section,
subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word
of this Chapter.



   126.01(D)(2)   Severability where less speech results.  This
subsection shall not be interpreted to limit the effect of subsection
126.01(D)(1) above, or any other applicable severability provisions in the
code of ordinances or any adopting ordinance. The City Commission
specifically intends that severability shall be applied to these Sign
regulations even if the result would be to allow less speech in the City,
whether by subjecting currently exempt Signs to permitting or by some other
means.



   126.01(D)(3)   Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited
Signs.  This subsection shall not be interpreted to limit the effect of
subsection 126.01(D)(1) above, or any other applicable severability
provisions in the code of ordinances or any adopting ordinance. The City
Commission specifically intends that severability shall be applied to §
126.10 “Prohibited Signs,” so that each of the prohibited Sign types
listed in that Section shall continue to be prohibited irrespective of
whether another Sign prohibition is declared unconstitutional or invalid.



   126.01(D)(4)   Severability of prohibition on Off-Premises Signs. 
This subsection shall not be interpreted to limit the effect of subsection
126.01(D)(1) above, or any other applicable severability provisions in the
code of ordinances or any adopting ordinance. If any or all of Chapter 126
“Signs,” or any other provision of the City Code is declared
unconstitutional or invalid by the final and valid judgment of any court of
competent jurisdiction, the City Commission specifically intends that the
declaration shall not affect the prohibition on Off-Premises Signs in §
126.10(B)(18).



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.02  SIGN PERMITS.



   126.02(A)   Permit required.  Except as provided in this Section,
no permanent or Temporary Sign shall be erected, constructed, posted,
painted, altered, maintained, or relocated until a permit has been issued by
the City.



   126.02(B)   Application procedure.  Before any permit is issued, a
written application, in the form provided by the City , shall be filed,
together with such drawings and specifications as may be necessary to fully
advise the City with the location, construction, materials, manner of
illuminating, method of securing or fastening, the number of Signs applied
for, the consent of the property owner, and the wording of the sign. The
application shall include a copy of a certificate of Use and Business Tax
Receipt for the applicable business. Upon the submission of an application,
the City shall have ten days to determine whether it is complete. If the City
finds that the application is not complete, the City shall provide the
applicant with written notice of the deficiencies within the ten-day period.
Upon resubmission of the application, the City shall have five additional
days to determine whether the applicant’s revisions are sufficient to
complete the application. If they are not, the City will again inform the
applicant of any remaining deficiencies in writing. This process shall
continue until the applicant has submitted a complete application, or demands
that the application be reviewed “as is.”



   126.02(C)   Code requirements.  All Signs shall be constructed in
accordance with the Building Code, including obtaining all required permits.
No Sign shall be approved for use unless it has been inspected and found to
be in compliance with all the requirements of this Chapter and applicable
codes.



   126.02(D)   Application review.  The City shall approve or deny the
Sign permit based on whether it complies with the requirements of this
Chapter. The City shall approve or deny the Sign permit within 30 days after
receipt of a complete application. If denied, the City shall prepare a
written notice of its decision, describing the applicant’s appeal rights,
and send it by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant.
The applicant may file a written notice of appeal to the City Commission
within 30 days after the date of receipt of the City’s written notice. The
City Commission shall hold a public hearing at the next available Commission
meeting that is at least 25 days after the date of receiving the written
notice of appeal, at which the City Commission shall determine whether the
application satisfies all Code requirements. If the City Commission does not
approve the application, then the applicant may seek relief in the Circuit
Court for Broward County, as provided by law.



   126.02(E)   Failure to commence.  Each Sign permit issued by the
City shall become null and void, if installation is not commenced within 90
days from the issuance date of such permit. If no work authorized by such
permit takes place for any continuous 90-day period any time after the work
has commenced, a new Sign permit shall be required prior to resuming the
work, and the fee will be the full amount required for a new permit for such
work.



   126.02(F)   Signs exempt from permitting requirement.  The
following Signs may be erected or constructed without a Sign permit when in
accordance with the Building Code and this Chapter:



   126.02(F)(1)   All Signs or Sign Structures erected or required to
be erected by a governmental agency.



   126.02(F)(2)   Temporary Signs.



   126.02(F)(3)   Changing of the content on a bulletin board, poster
board, display encasement, marquee or other permanent Sign designed so that
the content can be changed without altering the Sign Structure or otherwise
triggering a Sign permit.



   126.02(F)(4)   Flags, whether displayed on poles or in another
fashion. Installation of a permanent flag pole or other permanent mounting
device shall require a building permit. If the flag pole or device is located
on property zoned for other than single-family residential uses, the location
of the flag pole or device must be shown on the site plan for the property.
See § 126.12 for display standards.



   126.02(F)(5)   To the extent that this subsection allows a Sign
displaying commercial content to be exempt from permitting, it shall allow a
Sign with the same size, length of display, appearance, location, display
area, and other physical characteristics to be exempt from permitting if it
displays noncommercial content.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-15, passed 7-6-2015; Am. Ord.
2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 126.10  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   126.10(A)   Prohibited Signs by location.  Unless otherwise
authorized, the following Signs shall be prohibited:



   126.10(A)(1)   Roof Signs;



   126.10(A)(2)   Signs that extend above the Parapet or roof of a
Building;



   126.10(A)(3)   Signs that obstruct the view of another Sign, or
Traffic Control Device;



   126.10(A)(4)   Signs that obstruct any window, door, fire escape,
stairway, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress for
any Building that would cause a violation of the Building Code ;



   126.10(A)(5)   Signs on benches and freestanding shelters;



   126.10(A)(6)   Any Vehicle Sign that can be viewed from a Public
Right-Of-Way and remains stationary for a period in excess of 24 hours,
excluding weekends and holidays;



   126.10(A)(7)   Signs that are towed behind a vehicle; and



   126.10(A)(8)   Signs located on a fence.



   126.10(B)   Prohibited Signs by type.  Unless otherwise authorized,
the following Signs shall be prohibited:



   126.10(B)(1)   Signs that do not comply with the provisions of this
Chapter;



   126.10(B)(2)   Pole Signs;



   126.10(B)(3)   Signs on Lots without a Principal Use;



   126.10(B)(4)   Fixed Projecting Signs;



   126.10(B)(5)   Projected Signs;



   126.10(B)(6)   Signs that may be confused with a Traffic Control
Device;



   126.10(B)(7)   Animated Signs;



   126.10(B)(8)   Signs that emit a sound, odor, or visible matter such
as smoke or vapor;



   126.10(B)(9)   Snipe Signs;



   126.10(B)(10)   Abandoned Signs and dilapidated Signs;



   126.10(B)(11)   Signs that are portable or unattached to a building
or the ground;



   126.10(B)(12)   Signs that are inflatable;



   126.10(B)(13)   Signs that contain a visible light source;



   126.10(B)(14)   Signs containing exposed neon or exposed light
emitting diodes (LED);



   126.10(B)(15)   Externally illuminated Signs where lighting is not
recessed in the ground;



   126.10(B)(16)   Signs with an internally illuminated cabinet;



   126.10(B)(17)   Channel lettering or Logos with internally
illuminated face;



   126.10(B)(18)   Off-premises Signs , except that any lawfully
erected Off-premises Sign that existed on January 1, 2001 shall be treated as
a non-conforming structure and use;



   126.10(B)(19)   Any Sign, other than as may be required by county,
state or federal rule, regulation or law, containing changeable content;



   126.10(B)(20)   Banner Signs; and



   126.10(B)(21)   Painted Signs.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.11  PERMANENT SIGNS.



   126.11(A)   Residential uses.  The following standards apply to all
permanent Signs on residential lots and uses.  Signs with the same physical
and locational characteristics as those permitted below may devote all or
part of their Sign Faces to noncommercial content.



 


RESIDENTIAL USE/STRUCTURE TYPE

 

SIGN TYPE

 

MAXIMUM NUMBER

 

MAXIMUM AREA (sq. ft.)

 

MAXIMUM HEIGHT (ft.)



Multi-family complex
 

Monument and/or Building mounted

 

Two per street frontage

 

32 (Monument)



16 (Building mounted)

 

6 (Monument)



Subdivisions, Planned developments
 

Monument

 

Two per street frontage

 

32

 

6




 



   126.11(B)   Nonresidential uses.  The following standards apply to
all permanent Signs on the site of nonresidential uses.  Signs with the same
physical and locational characteristics as those permitted below may devote
all or part of their Sign Faces containing noncommercial content.



 


TYPE OF USE

 

WALL SIGNS

 

MONUMENT SIGNS

 

DIRECTORY SIGNS

 

DIRECTIONAL SIGNS



Office, Industrial, Institutional




   Max. No.
 

1 per wall face, or 2 for walls over 80 ft. in length (not to exceed 6 for
building)

 

1

 

1 per building

 

1 per vehicular access point



   Max. Area
 

10% of wall face or 80 sq. ft., whichever is less

 

36 sq. ft.

 

18 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.



   Max. Height
 

N/A
Letters not to exceed 60 inches in height

 

6 ft.

 

3 ft.

 

3 ft.



Freestanding Commercial


   Max. No.
 

1

 
1 per parcel (for parcels over 1.5 acres, 1 Sign per street frontage)
 

1 per building

 

1 per vehicular access point



   Max. Area
 

8% of wall face or 40 sq. ft., whichever is less

 

36 sq. ft.

 

18 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.



   Max. Height
 

N/A
Letters not to exceed 36 inches in height

 

6 ft.

 

3 ft.

 

3 ft.



Retail Shopping Center, One Story Office-industrial with Exterior Access : 
Must Comply with Any Approved Uniform Sign Plan.  If Uniform Sign Plan Does
Not Address These Criteria or There is No Uniform Sign Plan, Then The
Following Regulations Apply


   Max. No.
 

1 per first floor store front
Limited to 1 per premises if more than one business or use is located on the
premises

 
1 per street frontage for retail, 1 per parcel for office-industrial
 

1 per building

 

1 per vehicular access point



   Max. Area
 

50% of length of storefront, not to exceed 20 ft.

 

36 sq. ft.

 

18 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.



   Max. Height
 

18 in.

 

6 ft.
Letters not to exceed 12 inches in height

 

3 ft.

 

3 ft.



Mixed Use (Retail and Office Combined)


   Max. No.
 
2 wall Signs shall be permitted on the top of the building, consistent with
§ 126.20; in addition, ground floor retail stores or offices will be allowed
1 Sign per tenant
 

1

 

1 per building

 

1 per vehicular access point



   Max. Area
 
Signs above first floor, 10% of wall face or 80 sq. ft., whichever is
smaller, no Sign may exceed 50% of the lineal building frontage; first floor
signage consistent with retail signage provisions above and § 126.11(C)
 

36 sq. ft.

 

18 sq. ft.

 

6 sq. ft.



   Max. Height
 

N/A

 

6 ft.
Letters not to exceed 12 inches in height

 

3 ft.

 

3 ft.





 



   126.11(C)   Uniform Sign plan.  All Signs in multi-tenant projects
shall be subject to a uniform Sign plan, available for inspection at the City
Clerk’s Office, and shall comply with the following:



   126.11(C)(1)   All Signs mounted to a building shall be uniform in
terms of illumination, material, fabrication and Sign Area.



   126.11(C)(2)   All lettering on Signs shall be comprised of not more
than one font style except for registered stylized trade or service marks.



   126.11(C)(3)   The Sign plan shall be limited to no more than one
color that is consistent with the surrounding architectural standards.



   126.11(C)(4)    If a Sign conforms to the uniform Sign plan but
conflicts with § 126.11(B), then that Sign will be treated as nonconforming
pursuant to § 126.24(a)(2) and, as provided therein, shall comply with this
Chapter at any time that 50% or more of the Signs in the multi-tenant project
are replaced.



   126.11(D)   Permanent Real Estate Leasing Signs.  A permanent Real
Estate Leasing Sign shall only be permitted if it is on a Monument Sign
subject to the following requirements:



   126.11(D)(1)   Only one such Sign shall be allowed per Monument
Sign; and



   126.11(D)(2)   Such Signs on residential or nonresidential lots
shall not exceed two square feet in area.



   126.11(E)   Automated teller machines (ATM).  ATMs may have up to
two square feet of Sign Area.



   126.11(F)   Noncommercial Signs.



   126.11(F)(1)   In single-family and MF1 residential districts the
maximum Sign Area per property shall be eight square feet and the maximum
Height shall be four feet.  Each Noncommercial Sign shall not exceed two
square feet in Sign Area.



   126.11(F)(2)   In nonresidential and MF2 and MF3 residential
districts, the maximum Sign Area per property shall be 16 square feet and the
maximum Height shall be six feet.  Each Noncommercial Sign shall not exceed
four square feet in Sign Area.



   126.11(F)(3)   Each Homeowners' Association gatehouse may display
one Noncommercial Sign that meets the following requirements:



   126.11(F)(3)(a)   Shall be no larger than 16 square feet;



   126.11(F)(3)(b)   Shall be kept in good condition; and



   126.11(F)(3)(c)   Shall be affixed to the Homeowners' Association
gatehouse(s); and



   126.11(G)   Building Entrance Signs.  Each Building may display one
Building Entrance Sign, which:



   126.11(G)(1)   Shall be no larger than six square feet;



   126.11(G)(2)   Shall be kept in good condition;



   126.11(G)(3)   Shall be located within five feet of a Building’s
main entrance; and



   126.11(G)(4)   May incorporate integrated backdrop night lighting
that is shielded to reduce glare.



   126.11(H)   Conflicting Standards.  Where applicable, Signs must
comply with stricter or different requirements of City approvals, including
without limitation development orders, development permits, uniform Sign
plans, planned development design standards and overlay districts.  Where
such Signs conform to a City approval but fail to conform to this Chapter,
they are nonconforming and are regulated as provided in § 126.24.



   126.11(I)   Fuel Stations.  Fuel Stations shall be permitted to
have LED digital signage for the retail price of gasoline in accordance with
applicable law.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016; Am. Ord.
2019-04, passed 5-6-2019)



§ 126.12  FLAG DISPLAY STANDARDS.



   126.12(A)   Maximum height.  Except as otherwise provided herein,
flags shall be displayed on flag poles. Such poles in nonresidential zoning
districts shall not exceed the allowed height of the zoning district or 70
feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles may not be placed on top of buildings or
light poles. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 25 feet.



   126.12(B)   Maximum number and size.



   126.12(B)(1)   The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be
proportional to the flag pole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not
exceed 20% of the vertical height of the pole. In addition, flags are subject
to the following dimensional limitations:



 


Pole Height

 

Maximum Flag Size




Up to 25 feet

 

24 total square feet




25 to 39 feet

 

40 total square feet




40 to 49 feet

 

60 total square feet




50 to 59 feet

 

96 total square feet




60 to 69 feet

 

150 total square feet




70 feet

 

216 total square feet




 



   126.12(B)(2)   Each property shall be allowed a maximum of three
flag poles. A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flag pole. References
to flagpole height in this subsection refer to vertical flagpoles. References
to the number of flags and flag poles and flag dimensions refer to both
vertical flagpoles and mast-arm flagpoles (for example, staffs extending at
an angle from a building).



   126.12(C)   Flags on permanent fixtures other than poles.  Flags
that are attached to the side of a structure without a pole shall not,
individually or cumulatively, cover more than the greater of 24 square feet
or 20% of the Façade of the structure on which the flag is mounted. One flag
is permitted on up to two building Façades.



   126.12(D)   Setback.  A vertical flag pole must be set back from
all property boundaries a distance that is at least equal to the height of
the pole.



   126.12(E)   Condition of flag and pole or other permanent
mounting.  The flag and flag pole or other permanent mounting shall be
maintained in good repair. Flag poles with broken halyards shall not be used,
and torn or frayed flags shall not be displayed.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.13  WINDOW SIGNS.



   A Window Sign that identifies the business or activity on the premises
is permitted, subject to the following provisions:



   126.13(A)   Office/Industrial.  The Signs shall not exceed an
aggregate area equal to 5% of the window glass area on which they are
located. Such signage shall be uniform within a multi-tenant center.



   126.13(B)   Retail.  The Signs shall not exceed an aggregate area
equal to 20% of the window glass area on which they are located.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.14  BUILDING AND UNIT NUMBER SIGNS.



   126.14(A)   Single-family, Townhomes, and Multi-family number Signs.



   126.14(A)(1)   House number Signs for single-family homes shall be
at least three inches in height and shall be either:



   126.14(A)(1)(a)   Attached to that portion of the Structure facing
the street on which the property is addressed so that there is an
unobstructed view of the house numbers; or



   126.14(A)(1)(b)   Located on the mailbox facing the street on which
the property is addressed.



   126.14(A)(2)   House number Signs for townhomes shall comply with
subsection 126.14(A)(1) above, provided that each unit has a separate address
or unit number.



   126.14(A)(3)   All multi-family properties shall have the street
address number not less than four inches in height in reflective material on
a Sign adjacent to the driveway entrance and within five feet of the
Right-Of-Way.  Where the driveway entrance serves more than one address, the
Sign shall have the street address numbers ranging from the lowest number to
the highest number.  Where the street address number is incorporated into
other signage, the street address number shall be the highest text on the
Sign.  The street address number may be added to the top of existing
signage.  All multi-family properties shall comply with this Section not
later than June 30, 2018.



   126.14(B)   Nonresidential number Signs.  Number Signs denoting the
address for nonresidential properties shall have address Signs four inches in
height, and the unit number for each such unit within the building shall be
two inches in height.



   126.14(C)   Additional Nonresidential Signage.  All nonresidential
rear or service doors, and public entrances shall have the street number
located on the door, four inches in Height , and the name of the
establishment, two inches in height, placed no less than five feet from the
bottom of the door.



   126.14(D)   Community Buildings. Buildings owned and/or operated by
community Associations shall have the address, including Building number and
street name, posted on the exterior of the Building at the Building entrance,
and in the lobby of the Building, if a lobby exists, in numbers and letters
at least four inches in height.



   126.14(E)   Community and Commercial Swimming Pools.  Swimming
pools owned and/or operated by community Associations and commercial entities
shall have the address, including Building number and street name, of the
swimming pool or the address of the Building for which the swimming pool is
included, posted so as to be visible from all areas of the swimming pool deck
during both daylight and non-daylight hours, in numbers and letters at least
four inches in height.



   126.14(F)   Building and Unit Number Signs are required so that
persons can safely and clearly identify and navigate to their intended
destination.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-20, passed 9-15-2014; Am. Ord.
2016-12, passed 6-20-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-15, passed 11-6-2017; Am. Ord.
2018-13, passed 9-12-2018)



§ 126.15  STREET IDENTIFICATION (NAME) SIGNS.



   Street identification Signs shall be installed prior to the issuance of
the first building permit within any Development.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.16  SIGNS ON KIOSKS.



   Signs on kiosks must not extend above the top of the kiosk, and are
limited to one square foot of sign area per side of the kiosk.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.17  HANGING SIGNS.



   126.17(A)   Hanging Signs shall only be permitted to the extent
allowed under the applicable approved uniform Sign plan.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.18  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (a)   Temporary Signs shall not be permitted in public or private
Rights-Of-Way. The City has the authority to remove such Signs, and may
charge the person posting the Sign a fee, to be set by resolution of the City
Commission, for such removal.



   (b)   Temporary Signs that are Freestanding Signs shall not be
placed within the sight triangle of an intersection as required by § 125.56
of the City Code.



   126.18(A)   Real Estate Sale and Real Estate Leasing Signs.



 



 

Residential District

 

Nonresidential District



Permit Required
 

No

 

No



Maximum Combined Sign Area
 

Two square feet per parcel

 

Two square feet per parcel



Maximum Height
 

Five feet above grade

 

Six feet above grade



Maximum Duration of Display
 
Signs shall not be erected until the property is offered for sale, rent, or
lease, and shall be removed within three days of closing or the signing of a
lease agreement.
 
Signs shall not be erected until the property is offered for sale, rent, or
lease, and shall be removed within three days of closing or the signing of a
lease agreement.


Other restrictions
 
In retail shopping centers where a permanent Real Estate Leasing Sign
structure does not exist, a temporary Real Estate Leasing Sign may only be
placed in the window of the ground floor premises that is being offered for
lease. If a permanent Real Estate Leasing Sign structure does exist, then the
Real Estate Sale or Leasing Sign must go on it.
 
In retail shopping centers where a permanent Real Estate Leasing Sign
structure does not exist, a temporary Real Estate Leasing Sign may only be
placed in the window of the ground floor premises that is being offered for
lease. If a permanent Real Estate Leasing Sign structure does exist, then the
Real Estate Sale or Leasing Sign must go on it.



 



   126.18(B)   Noncommercial Signs.



 


Regulations

 

Single-Family and MF1 Residential Districts

 

Nonresidential and MF2 and MF3 Residential Districts



Permit Required
 

No

 

No



Maximum Sign Size
 

Four square feet

 

Eight square feet



Maximum Combined Sign Area
 

16 square feet per parcel

 

16 square feet per parcel



Maximum Height
 

Five feet above grade

 

Six feet above grade



Maximum Duration of Display
 

A Sign shall be erected no more than 120 consecutive days in any 12-month
period.

 

A Sign shall be erected no more than 120 consecutive days in any 12-month
period.




 



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-09, passed 4-6-2015; Am. Ord.
2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.19  ARCHITECTURAL EMBELLISHMENTS.



   126.19(A)   Generally.  Architectural embellishments added to a
Structure that meet the definition of Sign shall be treated as Signs, and
must comply with § 126.02 and shall be subject to the standards set forth in
§ 126.11.



   126.19(B)   Requirements.  Architectural embellishments shall
comply with all relevant provisions of § 126.19, § 126.20 and § 126.21 as
well as all other applicable provisions of the City’s Land Development
Chapter. All applications for approval of architectural embellishments shall
meet the following requirements:



   126.19(B)(1)   Architectural embellishments shall be consistent with
the design of the building and compatible with the building and surrounding
structures.



   126.19(B)(2)   No written messages, logos, arrows, flags, banners or
bare bulbs shall be part of the architectural embellishment.



   126.19(B)(3)   Architectural embellishments shall be applied and
constructed strictly in accordance with the site plan. Any deviation from the
approved plan or rendering, in materials or style, will require removal of
the architectural embellishment pursuant to § 126.23.



   126.19(B)(4)   The addition of architectural embellishments to an
existing structure shall require an amendment to the existing site plan and
shall be processed accordingly.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.20  SIGN PLACEMENT.



   126.20(A)   Location.  All signs and Sign Structures shall be
located completely within the boundaries of the site on which the principal
building is located.



   126.20(B)   Setbacks.  Freestanding Signs that are Permanent Signs
may be placed in required setbacks, provided that no Sign shall be permitted
within ten feet of any adjacent property line, within setbacks adjacent to
residential lots, or within required corner sight distance triangles.
Nonresidential freestanding temporary Signs and Monument Signs shall be
placed at least ten feet from the Right-Of-Way. Signs located in private
easements shall require permission of the easement holder.



   126.20(C)   No obstruction.



   126.20(C)(1)   Obstruction to exits.  No Sign shall be erected,
constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit,
window or door opening used as a means of egress.



   126.20(C)(2)   Obstruction to ventilation. No Sign shall be attached
in any form, shape or manner that will interfere with any opening required
for ventilation.



   126.20(D)   Building Identity Signs.  Signs attached or affixed to
buildings shall comply with the following:



   126.20(D)(1)   Such Signs shall be located at the top floor level of
multi-story buildings, and must be placed so that they are centered generally
between the top of the building parapet and the top of the highest window.
When there are two Signs , they must be placed so that they are symmetrical.



   126.20(D)(2)   Such Signs shall not project beyond the corner of a
building.



   126.20(D)(3)   Such Signs shall not project more than eight inches
out from a building wall.



   126.20(D)(4)   The wall area immediately behind the Sign must be the
same color as the wall area surrounding the Sign .



   126.20(D)(5)   Reserved.



   126.20(D)(6)   The content of the Sign shall contain the name of the
building, the owner of the building (if located in the building) or a tenant
located in the building, so that it can serve its intended purpose of
allowing persons to safely and accurately identify and navigate to such
buildings.



   126.20(E)   Directional Signs.  Directional Signs shall be located
along interior driveways and parking lots.



   126.20(F)   Communications Towers.  As provided in §
133.10(A)(17), advertising Signs shall not be placed on a Telecommunication
Tower.



   126.20(G)   Sign Attachment.  The Sign lettering must be attached
directly to the building wall with no intervening setoff other than mounting
hardware.



   126.20(H)   Parking lot space signage. Signage in a parking lot
shall be no greater than 12 inches wide by 18 inches tall.  The parking lot
space signage shall consist of a white background with solid color lettering
on a single post with a vertical clearance of seven feet.  The Sign shall be
placed two feet from the back of the curb or wheel stop.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016; Am. Ord.
2019-09, passed 9-11-2019)



§ 126.21  SIGN DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.



   126.21(A)   Sign integration.  All Signs shall be designed as an
integral part of the total building or project.



   126.21(B)   Colors.  All Signs for a single-tenant building shall
contain no more than four different colors (including the background color)
consistent with the surrounding architectural standards. White, black, and
different shades of the same color shall be considered separate colors. Color
samples must be submitted with any application for Sign review.



   126.21(C)   Logos.  A logo(s) may be used in lieu of a permanent
Sign or as a part of a permanent Sign subject to the following provisions:



   126.21(C)(1)   Logo(s) Used in Lieu of a Permanent Sign. A logo(s),
used in lieu of a permanent Sign, shall be subject to the permanent Sign
regulations for maximum number, area, and Height.



   126.21(C)(2)   Logo(s) Used as a Part of a Permanent Sign.  The
dimensions of a logo(s), used as a part of a permanent Sign, shall be counted
towards and contained within the maximum area and Height allowed for the
permanent Sign.



   126.21(D)   Reverse channel lettering.  Casing may be any approved
color. Illumination shall be white.



   126.21(E)   Materials.  Materials used for Monument Sign Structures
shall be similar to the materials, color, and fabrication used in any wall
signage on the principal buildings on the site.



   126.21(F)   Illumination.



   126.21(F)(1)   Within 1,000 feet of a lot containing a residential
dwelling, no Sign shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. or the close of
business, whichever occurs last. This provision shall not apply to
residential Monument Signs.



   126.21(F)(2)   Signs that are externally illuminated shall have a
lighting fixture that is recessed in the ground. No portion of said fixture
may be installed to remain above the surrounding grade.



   126.21(F)(3)   Light sources used to illuminate signs shall not be
visible from nearby Rights-Of-Way or properties.



   126.21(F)(4)   Signs shall not be constructed of any
light-reflective letters or materials.



   126.21(F)(5)   No backlighting of awning or Canopy Signs shall be
allowed.



   126.21(F)(6)   Signs that are illuminated shall utilize the most
energy efficient means currently available.



   126.21(G)   Maintenance.



   126.21(G)(1)   All Signs shall be maintained as originally permitted
and constructed, in good order with no missing, crooked, misplaced, faded, or
damaged letters or other symbols or materials.



   126.21(G)(2)   No person shall have any Sign that is in a dangerous
or defective condition on any premises he or she owns or controls. Within ten
days of receiving notice of lack of maintenance, all Signs shall be
maintained in a safe presentable and good structural condition, including the
replacement of defective parts, repainting, cleaning and other acts required
for the maintenance of said Sign . If the Sign is not made to comply with the
above standards, the City shall require its removal in accordance with §
126.23.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.22  SIGNS ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   126.22(A)   No Signs shall be allowed in the Public or Private
Right-Of-Way, except Noncommercial Signs erected by or on behalf of a
governmental entity or public utility.



   126.22(B)   No Signs shall be allowed on Public Property or a Public
Place, except those placed by or at the direction of the City, or as may be
required by this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.23  NON-COMPLYING SIGNS.



   126.23(A)   Non-Complying Signs on Public Property.  Any Sign
installed or placed on Public Property or in a Public Place, , except in
conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, or any Sign or Sign
Structure that does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter, shall
be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other
remedies, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person
responsible for the placement of the Sign the full costs of its removal and
disposal.



   126.23(B)   Enforcement Against Non-Complying Signs on Private
Property.  The City may enforce this Chapter by any means available to it by
law, including without limitation Code Enforcement pursuant to Chapter 31 of
the Code.  Only civil penalties shall apply to a violation of this Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



§ 126.24  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   126.24(A)   Signs or Sign Structures made nonconforming upon passage
of this Chapter (originally on March 16, 1998), or on passage of any
amendment thereto, shall be governed by the following regulations:



   126.24(A)(1)   A Sign existing within the City, or an area
subsequently annexed to the City, upon the passage of this Chapter or any
amendment hereof which, because of its Height, Sign Area, location, or other
characteristic, does not conform to this Chapter is hereby declared to be a
nonconforming sign.



   126.24(A)(2)   A nonconforming Sign under § 126.11(C) (uniform Sign
plan) must be removed at any time that 50% or more of the Signs in the
multi-tenant project are replaced.



   126.24(A)(3)   A nonconforming Sign under § 126.10(B)(17) (channel
letter signs) may be retained (provided that both the Sign Face and
illumination are white), until the sign requires more than 50% of the Sign
lettering to be replaced. Nonconforming Signs under § 126.10(B)(17) shall
not be illuminated between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   126.24(A)(4)   In a multi-tenant project with nonconforming Signs
that are permitted to remain pursuant to the provisions of this Section, all
new Signs shall conform to this Chapter.



   126.24(B)   The status afforded Signs under this Section shall not
be applicable to any Sign for which no permit or Sign permit was ever issued;
such Signs are deemed non-complying Signs and are subject to the provisions
of this Chapter governing non-complying Signs .



   126.24(C)   If any nonconforming Sign is damaged by any cause and
either:



   126.24(C)(1)   The cost of repairing the Sign equals 50% or more of
the original invoiced cost of the sign;



   126.24(C)(2)   50% or more of the Sign Area is damaged; or



   126.24(C)(3)   50% or more of the text is damaged



   then its classification as a nonconforming Sign under this Section
shall be automatically revoked and repairs shall be made so that the Sign
shall meet all the requirements of this Chapter.



   126.24(D)   Loss of nonconforming status.  A nonconforming Sign
shall immediately lose its nonconforming status if the Sign is replaced,
abandoned, altered or relocated, and the Sign shall be immediately brought
into compliance with this Chapter (with a new permit secured) or shall be
removed.



   126.24(E)   Nonconforming Sign maintenance and repair.  Nothing in
this Section shall relieve the owner or user of a nonconforming Sign, or the
owner of the property on which the nonconforming Sign is located, from the
provisions of this Chapter, regarding safety, maintenance and repair of Signs.



(Ord. 2010-21, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-12, passed 6-20-2016)



CHAPTER 127: ENGINEERING STANDARDS



Section



   127.01   Glossary of acronyms




General Procedures




   127.10   Engineering permitting procedures



   127.11   Preconstruction responsibilities



   127.12   Inspection requirements during construction



   127.13   Shop drawings



   127.14   Temporary facilities



   127.15   Project closeout




Street Lights, Bridges, Underground Utilities and Easements




   127.20   Street lights, bridges and underground utilities



   127.21   Easements




Roadway Specifications and Details




   127.30   Earthwork and compaction



   127.31   Paving



   127.32   Traffic signals



   127.33   Roads



   127.34   Parking areas



   127.35   Driveways, sidewalks and swales



   127.36   Traffic calming devices



   127.37   Standard roadway details




Drainage Specifications and Details




   127.40   Storm drainage



   127.41   Design criteria



   127.42   Lakes and waterways



   127.43   Standard drainage details



   127.44   City drainage maps




Water and Sewer Specifications and Details




   127.50   Water distribution system



   127.51   Gravity sewage collection system



   127.52   Sewer transmission system specifications



   127.53   Water supply details



   127.54   Standard sanitary sewer details



   127.55   Utility conflict details



§ 127.01  GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS.



   The use of acronyms in this Chapter 127 shall refer to the
organizations as set forth below:



 



AASHTO – Association of American StateHighway and Transportation Officials


ADAAG – Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines


ANSI – American National Standards Institute


ASTM – American Society for Testing and Materials


AWG – American Wire Gauge


AWWA – American Water Works Association


BC-EMPGMD – Broward County Environmental Protection and Growth Management
Department


BCHD – Broward County Health Department


BCHED – Broward County HighwayConstruction & Engineering Division


BCTED – Broward County Traffic Engineering Division


BDD – Bonaventure Development District


DFT – Total Dry Film Thickness


DIP – Ductile Iron Pipe


DIPRA – Ductile Iron Pipe of the Cast Iron Pipe Research Association


FBC – Florida Building Code


FDEP – Florida Department of Environmental Protection


FDOT – Florida Department of Transportation


FPL – Florida Power and Light


IDF – Intensity Duration Frequency


ITDD – Indian Trace Development District


LBR – Limerock Bearing Ratio


LED – Light Emitting Diode


MDFT – Minimum Total Dry Film Thickness


MILS – Millimeter


MUTCD – Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices


NPDES – National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System


NPT – National Pipe Thread


OSHA – Occupational Safety and Health Administration


PSI – Pounds Per Square Inch


PVC – Poly Vinyl Chloride


RPM – Reflective Pavement Markers


SDR – Standard Dimension Ratio


SFWMD – South Florida Water Management District


SSPC – Society for Protective Coatings


UV – Ultraviolet


WLWCD – West Lauderdale Water Control District




 



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



GENERAL PROCEDURES



§ 127.10  ENGINEERING PERMITTING PROCEDURES.



   127.10(A)   Applicability.  These Engineering Standards are a
compilation of the minimum accepted design requirements for engineering and
Construction work, both municipal and private, performed within the limits of
the City. The City is served by two distinct water and Sewer utility systems.
All infrastructure in the Indian Trace Development District (ITDD ),
including the water and Sewer system is governed by City codes and only the
water and Sewer utility in the Bonaventure Development District is governed
by the City of Sunrise codes.



   Engineering permits shall be applied for in writing or electronically
on forms furnished by the  City for all engineering Construction that occurs
within public or private Rights-Of-Way, easements or on Private Property as
described in § 127.10(A)(1) through (A)(12). Contractors applying for
Engineering permits shall be State of Florida certified, or State of Florida
registered along with the applicable Broward County Certification of
Competency.



   127.10(A)(1)   Water distribution systems;



   127.10(A)(2)   Sewerage systems;



   127.10(A)(3)   Sewerage pumping stations;



   127.10(A)(4)   Drainage systems;



   127.10(A)(5)   Stormwater management facilities;



   127.10(A)(6)   Roads;



   127.10(A)(7)   Parking areas;



   127.10(A)(8)   Earthwork;



   127.10(A)(9)   Bulkheads;



   127.10(A)(10)   Driveway aprons and Sidewalk ;



   127.10(A)(11)   Landscaping and irrigation within Rights-Of-Way ;



   127.10(A)(12)   Other items as determined by the City.



   127.10(B)   Submittal Requirements.



   127.10(B)(1)   For a Single Family Residential Driveway Construction:



   127.10(B)(1)(a)   City Engineering Permit Application Form.



   127.10(B)(1)(b)   Owner Builder Affidavit.



   127.10(B)(1)(c)   Property Survey marked to show proposed work (Five
sets).



   127.10(B)(1)(d)   Owner’s Affidavit of Property Survey, certifying
survey reflects the current conditions of the property.



   127.10(B)(1)(e)   Lot Coverage Calculation Sheet.



   127.10(B)(1)(f)   Permit Fees in accordance with the Schedule of
Fees.



   127.10(B)(2)   For Sidewalk repairs within Subdivisions:



   127.10(B)(2)(a)   City Engineering Permit Application Form.



   127.10(B)(2)(b)   Scaled drawings or aerial photographs (Five sets)
containing:



   127.10(B)(2)(b)(i)   Proposed work



   127.10(B)(2)(b)(ii)   Right-Of-Way and property lines



   127.10(B)(2)(c)   Affidavit from the Association President
certifying documents in Section 127.10(B)(2)(b) reflects the current
conditions of the property.



   127.10(B)(2)(d)   Permit Fees in accordance with the Schedule of
Fees.



   127.10(B)(3)   For Milling and Resurfacing of Private Rights-Of-Way
within Subdivisions:



   127.10(B)(3)(a)   City Engineering Permit Application Form.



   127.10(B)(3)(b)   Scaled drawings or aerial photographs in 24 inches
by 36 inches format (Five sets) containing:



   127.10(B)(3)(b)(i)   Proposed work



   127.10(B)(3)(b)(ii)   Right-Of-Way and property lines



   127.10(B)(3)(b)(iii)   All existing and proposed pavement marking
and signage.



   127.10(B)(3)(c)   Affidavit from the Association President
certifying documents in Section 127.10(B)(3)(b) reflects the current
conditions of the property.



   127.10(B)(3)(d)   Certified Engineer’s Cost Estimate with unit
prices and quantities for Construction of all proposed work or a contractor
Construction contract.



   127.10(B)(3)(e)   Permit Fees in accordance with the Schedule of
Fees.



   127.10(B)(4)   For all other Engineering Construction as stated in
127.10(A) except as provided for in 127.10(B)(1), 127.10(B)(2) and
127.10(B)(3):



   127.10(B)(4)(a)   City Engineering Permit Application Form.



   127.10(B)(4)(b)   Survey, signed and sealed by a Professional
Surveyor and Mapper licensed in the State of Florida.



   127.10(B)(4)(c)   Engineering Construction drawings/plans signed and
sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Florida in a
manner consistent with Chapter 61G15-23, Florida Administrative Code and
following the requirements outlined in Section 127.10(C).



   127.10(B)(4)(d)   Other requirements in accordance with Section
127.10(E).



   127.10(B)(4)(e)   Permit Fees in accordance with the Schedule of
Fees.



   127.10(B)(4)(f)   For engineering Construction projects involving
the conveyance of infrastructure improvements to the ITDD, BDD , or City, a
cost recovery fee for administrative review of conveyance documents is
required to be paid by the Applicant. The cost recovery fee shall be as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees.



   127.10(C)   Engineering/UtilityConstruction Plan Requirements. 
Plans reviewed for Engineering Permits require information in sufficient
detail to assure that the minimum standards of the City will be upheld. A
review will be made to ensure that the following information is provided and
that the standard City details are followed. Additional information will be
requested as needed.It shall be the responsibility of the Engineer of Record
to have the plans approved by all other applicable federal, State, county or
local agencies.



   127.10(C)(1)   All drawings are to be submitted on sheets that
measure 24 inches by 36 inches (five folded sets of prints required).



   127.10(C)(2)   A location map shall be included on the drawing.



   127.10(C)(3)   Each sheet shall bear a seal and original signature
of the Engineer of Record and include a title block, north arrow, scale,
date, and references as to source of design information and notes.



   127.10(C)(4)   Horizontal scale shall be between one inch equals 20
feet and one inch equals 60 feet; vertical scale to be between one inch
equals two feet and one inch equals six feet. Regardless of the scale, an
overall layout of the proposed project shall be included on one sheet of the
plans submitted, indicating all phases of construction, existing utilities
and proposed utilities. Where there is more than one sheet of drawings, a
sheet index diagram is required.



   127.10(C)(5)   All Rights-Of-Way and easements shall be clearly
defined, with easements referenced as to whether by Plat or otherwise. All
easements shall be shown on design and as-built drawings.



   127.10(C)(6)   Size and type of material shall be shown for all
water and Sewer mains and service lines. Size and type of valves and other
appurtenances to the systems shall be clearly indicated.



   127.10(C)(7)   The exact location and size of all mains shall be
shown within the Right-Of-Way or within an easement. All service line
locations and sizes shall be indicated on plans. Distances from Right-Of-Way
Lines, property lines and from physical features to the water and Sewer mains
are required on all drawings.



   127.10(C)(8)   Water distribution systems shall be designed so as to
provide a continuous looped system with two independent sources of water
during all phases of construction.



   127.10(C)(9)   All line deflection points shall be indicated
(horizontal and vertical) on the plans. All water mains shall cross over
drainage and Sewer lines. If this is unavoidable, it shall be indicated on
the drawings.



   127.10(C)(10)   Profiles are required for gravity Sewer mains with
the following information: invert elevation, rim elevation, slopes, profile
grade (center line or base line), continuous station measurements, service
laterals, other conflict features such as drainage pipes and material (PVC or
DIP, etc.). Manholes shall not be installed under parking spaces. Manholes
shall be consecutively numbered.



   127.10(C)(11)   Off-set dimensions and detail drawings are required
for all appendages; adjunct or auxiliaries from the main, enlarged sketches
are required for all areas where the details cannot readily be seen.



   127.10(C)(12)   Public and private Roadways shall be labeled and the
names and/or numbers of the Roadways , Streets, avenues, etc. are to be
clearly indicated on the plans. If the property is inside a block, then the
side Streets are to be shown with the names written and distances from the
subject property to the side Streets are to be written. Indicate lot and
block numbers, if applicable.



   127.10(C)(13)   The perimeter boundary lines of property to be
serviced shall be clearly shown.



   127.10(C)(14)   The outlines of buildings to be serviced shall be
shown.



   127.10(C)(15)   Benchmark positions and their vertical values shall
be shown.



   127.10(C)(16)   The lot and block numbers of the property to be
serviced shall be shown. Adjoining lots and block numbers and Owners are to
be shown, reference as to Plat is to be written, legal description of the
property is to be written and indicated on the drawings. The Street or
mailing address shall be shown.



   127.10(C)(17)   Utilities shall be located within Public
Rights-Of-Way or in easements and shall be shown on all as-built drawings.



   127.10(C)(18)   Location of water meters and their sizes with
service line sizes shall be shown. Meters shall be installed in green areas,
at the Right-Of-Way Line and in non-Traffic areas as approved by the City.
One meter per site plan will be permitted unless approved otherwise by the
City.



   127.10(C)(19)   All construction plans for work including paving and
drainage construction shall contain the following:



   127.10(C)(19)(a)   Paving and drainage construction plans;



   127.10(C)(19)(b)   Paving and drainage details;



   127.10(C)(19)(c)   Paving and drainage specifications;



   127.10(C)(19)(d)   Pavement markings and signage plans;



   127.10(C)(19)(e)   Proposed off-site improvements plans;



   127.10(C)(19)(f)   Elevations of ambient ground along the perimeter
of this parcel;



   127.10(C)(19)(g)   As-built information of existing roads, drainage,
Sidewalks , electric poles, light poles and other facilities;



   127.10(C)(19)(h)   Information for lakes and canals;



   127.10(C)(19)(i)   Recorded and proposed easements and Rights-Of-Way
.



   127.10(C)(20)   Easement descriptions shall be written clearly with
a point of beginning and a point of termination. Easements shall be shown on
all plans. The plans shall reflect the description and shall carry additional
information to facilitate construction of the worded description. Street
corners shall be shown and the description should relate the property being
described to the Streets. The scale shall be such to enable the direction of
lines to be clearly observed. Where warranted, the plan shall be on more than
one sheet with proper match lines shown for each Street . The City reserves
the right to approve the description and plans.



   127.10(C)(21)   All pavement or parking areas shall be shown and
referenced; all final planned elevations shall be established.



   127.10(C)(22)   Apart from the showing of all meters, their sizes,
locations etc. on the plan sheet, a summary note shall be written on the
front sheet stating:



   127.10(C)(22)(a)   The number and size of water meters (if
available); and



   127.10(C)(22)(b)   The use for the building; i.e., commercial,
stores, factory, etc.



   127.10(C)(23)   The City reserves the right to approve all drawings
(preliminary design, final designs, preliminary and final Record Drawings),
as to technical representations, engineering consideration/designs,
draftsmanship, clarity, scale, precision, confusion, etc., which drawings
shall at all times be in conformity with City minimum engineering standards,
specifications and practices.



   127.10(C)(24)   Drawings are reviewed for general compliance with
City requirements ONLY. The Engineer of Record shall be completely
responsible for the engineering design, technical competency and accuracy.
The plans are approved with the condition that they SHALL conform to all City
Ordinances, codes, standards and requirements.



   127.10(C)(25)   PlumbingInspector/Fire Department approval does not
constitute approval of water and Sewer construction drawings.



   127.10(D)   Requirements Prior to Engineering Permit Issuance for
Engineering Construction Projects involving the Conveyance of Infrastructure
Improvements to the ITDD, BDD, or City.  The following items shall be
provided before an Engineering Permit will be issued.



   127.10(D)(1)   All Construction improvements to be conveyed shall be
performed within easements, or dedications made to the  ITDD, BDD, or the
City.



   127.10(D)(2)   Delivery of a completed grant of easement on a form
prescribed by the City granting an easement to the ITDD, BDD , or City for
the maintenance, repair and replacement of all facilities to be conveyed to
the City.



   127.10(D)(3)   Delivery of a current opinion of title from an
attorney licensed to practice in Florida certifying the ownership of the
property subject to the grant of easement and indicating any parties required
to join in the grant of easement.



   127.10(D)(4)   A proposed itemized schedule of values that details
the Construction quantities and cost of the improvements to be conveyed to
the City, prepared by the Engineer of Record.



   127.10(E)   Additional Requirements Prior to Engineering Permit
Issuance as required by the City.



   127.10(E)(1)   Drainage Calculations signed and sealed by an
Engineer .



   127.10(E)(2)   A Maintenance of Traffic Plan.



   127.10(E)(3)   BC-EMPGMD approval for any wetland or hazardous
materials issues and sanitary Sewer collection and transmission.



   127.10(E)(4)   FDEP or designated agency approval for water
distribution.



   127.10(E)(5)   SFWMD approval for drainage and surface or ground
water withdrawal for irrigation.



   127.10(E)(6)   FDOT approval.



   127.10(E)(7)   FDEP approval.



   127.10(E)(8)   BCHCED approval.



   127.10(E)(9)   BCTED approval.



   127.10(E)(10)   CityTree removal permit.



   127.10(E)(11)   City of Sunrise approval if water or Sewer
improvements are located in BDD.



   127.10(E)(12)   NPDES permit.



   127.10(E)(13)   Performance Bond.



   127.10(E)(14)   Attendance at a City pre-construction meeting by the
contractor, Owner's representative, the Engineer of Record and others as
deemed necessary by the City Engineer.



   127.10(F)   Applicable Codes.



   127.10(F)(1)   General: All Construction and materials shall conform
to the Standards and Specifications of the City, BC-EMPGMD, BCHD, BCTED,
SFWMD, FDEP, Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and
Maintenance (Florida Greenbook) and all other local and national codes where
applicable.



   127.10(F)(2)   Construction safety: All construction shall be
performed in a safe manner, specifically, the rules and regulations of the
OSHA and the MUTCD shall be strictly observed.



   127.10(F)(3)   All surveys and plans submitted for permit shall use
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88).



   127.10(G)   Exceptions.   An engineering permit shall not be
required for the repainting of existing striping on Roadways and Parking
Stalls; however, the painting of striping on new sealcoat, new asphalt, or
new concrete shall require an engineering permit.



   127.10(H)   Denial or revocation. Whenever a permit required under
this section is denied or revoked because the plan, or the Construction,
erection, alteration, modification, repair, or demolition is found not in
compliance with the requirements of the section and its applicable codes, the
City shall identify the specific plan or project features that do not comply
with the applicable codes, identify the specific code chapters and sections
upon which the finding is based and provide this information to the permit
Applicant.



   127.10(I)   Time Limitation of Permits.



   127.10(I)(1)   Every permit issued shall become null and void if
work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date
the permit is issued.



   127.10(I)(2)   If the work covered by the permit has commenced, is
in progress, has not been completed and is being carried on progressively in
a substantial manner in accordance with § 127.10(I)(6), the permit shall be
in effect until completion of the job.



   127.10(I)(3)   If work has commenced and the permit is revoked,
becomes null and void or expires because of lack of progress or abandonment,
a new permit covering the proposed Construction shall be obtained before
proceeding with the work.



   127.10(I)(4)   If a new permit is not obtained within 180 days from
the date the initial permit became null and void, the City Engineer is
authorized to require that any work which has been commenced or completed be
removed from the site; or alternately, the City may issue a new permit, when
the Applicant reapplies, providing the work in place and the required work to
complete the proposed Construction meets all applicable regulations in effect
at the time the initial permit became null and void and any regulations which
may have become effective between the date of expiration and the date of
issuance of a new permit.



   127.10(I)(5)   The City shall provide written notification to both
the permit holder and the property Owner 30 days prior to the expiration date
of the permit. The notice shall include the projected expiration date and the
steps necessary to continue the permit in an active status. If the City fails
to provide written notification, and the permit expires, the permit holder
may request a one-time 30-day extension of the permit, so they have the
opportunity to revalidate it.



   127.10(I)(6)   Work shall be considered to have commenced and be in
active progress when the permit has received an approved inspection within
180 days of being issued.



   127.10(I)(7)   The fee for renewal, re-issuance and extension of a
permit shall be set forth in the Schedule of Fees.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 1-20-2015; Am. Ord.
2015-14, passed 7-6-2015; Am. Ord. 2016-16, passed 9-12-2016; Am. Ord.
2017-04, passed 5-15-2017; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.11  PRECONSTRUCTION RESPONSIBILITIES.



   127.11(A)   The contractor shall obtain a “SUNSHINE 811”
Certification number and notify CityUtilities at least 48 hours prior to
beginning any excavation.



   127.11(B)   Prior to beginning Construction , the contractor shall
verify the size, location, elevation, and material of all existing utilities
within the area of Construction .



   127.11(C)   The contractor shall be responsible for damage to any
existing utilities.



   127.11(D)   If upon excavation, an existing utility is found to be
in conflict with the proposed Construction or to be of a size or material
different from that shown on the plans, the contractor shall immediately
notify the Engineer of Record, who will in turn notify the City.



   127.11(E)   All NPDES permit requirements shall be installed prior
to beginning of Construction and maintained throughout the Construction .



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.12  INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS DURING CONSTRUCTION.



   127.12(A)   Required inspections.  During construction activities
requiring an engineering permit, the City shall perform inspections of
various portions of the construction activity. The permit holder shall notify
the City for all inspections/appointments 48 hours in advance. The permit
holder shall forward all required documentation to the City.



   127.12(A)(1)   In the event a test or inspection fails, a required
party is not present or the appointment requester fails to cancel within one
hour of the scheduled inspection, the permit holder shall be charged a fee in
accordance with the Schedule of Fees.



   127.12(A)(2)   The permit holder is responsible for the additional
cost of inspections for any construction activities occurring outside normal
working hours (5:00 pm to 8:00 am, Monday through Friday) or on Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays. Arrangements for inspections outside normal working
hours shall be made a minimum of five days in advance of construction
activity. Additional inspections or documentation may be required as
determined by the City.



   127.12(A)(3)   The following Construction activities outlined in §
127.12(B) through § 127.12(H) require inspections. This list is general in
nature and the City may require additional Construction activities not
outlined in § 127.12(B) through § 127.12(H) to be subject to inspections. A
Final Engineering Inspection for all activities shall be required.



   127.12(A)(4)   If approved inspection is not realized within 180
days of the last approved inspection or the date of permit issuance,
whichever is later, then the permit shall become null and void in accordance
with § 127.10(I)(3).



   127.12(B)   Paving installation.



   127.12(B)(1)   Demucking and filling.



   127.12(B)(2)   Stabilized subgrade.



   127.12(B)(3)   Limerock basecourses.



   127.12(B)(4)   Asphalt paving.



   127.12(B)(5)   The following reports are needed during paving
installation:



   127.12(B)(5)(a)   Density test reports (subgrade and basecourse).



   127.12(B)(5)(b)   LBR test reports (subgrade).



   127.12(B)(5)(c)   Calcium carbonate reports (basecourse).



   127.12(B)(5)(d)   Certification of type of asphalt.



   127.12(B)(5)(e)   Inspection reports for all underground utility
lines such as:  water, Sewer , drainage, gas, power, phone, TV, etc.



   127.12(B)(5)(f)   Certificate that the entire pavement area has been
completely demucked and backfilled properly with suitable material.



   127.12(C)   Drainage installation.  All bedding joints and drainage
structures are to be inspected prior to backfill.



   127.12(D)   Sidewalks installation.  Alignment, depth, width and
pedestrian and Accessible ramp details, as indicated in the City code of
ordinances, shall be inspected prior to concrete and asphalt placing. All
protruding reinforcing steel and other stakes shall be guarded to eliminate
the hazard of impalement.



   127.12(E)   Traffic signs, road signs & pavement markings
installation.  Traffic signals shall be inspected prior to turn on, and
field tests consisting of a 48-hour test and a 60-day burn-in period shall
occur prior to final acceptance.



   127.12(F)   Water distribution installation. This applies to water
distribution belonging to ITDD. For BDD water and Sewer refer to City of
Sunrise requirements.



   127.12(F)(1)   Connection to Existing Systems.



   127.12(F)(2)   Filling and Flushing.



   127.12(F)(3)   Hydrostatic Pressure Testing.



   127.12(F)(4)   Chlorination/Bacteriological Sampling. A valid
bacteriological clearance letter from FDEP or the delegated regulatory agency
shall be submitted prior to placement in service.



   127.12(F)(5)   All joints to be inspected prior to backfill.



   127.12(G)   Sewer collection installation.  This applies to Sewer
collection belonging to ITDD. For BDD water and Sewer refer to City of
Sunrise requirements. Prior to acceptance by the City, a FDEP Certification
of Completion shall be submitted.



   127.12(G)(1)   Structures (prior to installation).



   127.12(G)(2)   Connection to Existing Systems.



   127.12(G)(3)   Lamping.



   127.12(G)(4)   Structure Application of Protective Coatings
(external and internal).



   127.12(G)(5)   All joints to be inspected prior to backfill.



   127.12(H)   Sewer transmission installation.  This applies to Sewer
transmission belonging to ITDD. For BDD water and Sewer refer to City of
Sunrise requirements.



   127.12(H)(1)   Connection to Existing Systems.



   127.12(H)(2)   Flushing.



   127.12(H)(3)   Hydrostatic Pressure Testing.



   127.12(H)(4)   Lift Station start-up.



   127.12(H)(5)   All joints to be inspected prior to backfill.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-02, passed 1-20-2015; Am. Ord.
2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.13  SHOP DRAWINGS.



   127.13(A)   Prior to issuance of an Engineering Permit, shop
drawings shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Engineer of Record and the
City in ITDD and the City of Sunrise in BDD for sanitary manholes, fire
hydrants, valves, piping, Lift Stations and other accessories. Catalogue
literature shall be submitted for water and Sewer pipes, fittings and
appurtenances.



   127.13(B)   Individual shop drawings for all precast structures are
required. Catalogue literature will not be accepted for precast structures.



   127.13(C)   Prior to any equipment order for Traffic signals, the
contractor shall submit for approval, equipment specifications or design data
for all material proposed.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.14  TEMPORARY FACILITIES.



   127.14(A)   Temporary utilities.  It shall be the contractor’s
responsibility to arrange for or supply water service, sanitary facilities
and electricity to his or her employees and subcontractors for their use
during construction.



   127.14(B)   Traffic regulation.



   127.14(B)(1)   Maintenance of Traffic in the Public Right-Of-Way
shall be in accordance with the MUTCD and approved by BCTED.



   127.14(B)(2)   All open trenches and holes adjacent to Roadways or
walkways shall be properly marked and barricaded to assure the safety of both
vehicular and pedestrian Traffic.



   127.14(B)(3)   No trenches or holes near walkways or in Roadways or
their shoulders are to be left open during nighttime hours without permission
from the City.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.15  PROJECT CLOSEOUT.



   127.15(A)   Cleaning up.



   127.15(A)(1)   During construction, the project site and all
adjacent areas shall be maintained in a neat and clean manner. Upon final
clean up, the project site shall be left clear of all surplus material or
construction debris. The paved areas shall be swept broom clean.



   127.15(A)(2)   The contractor shall restore or replace, when
notified by the City Engineer, any public or Private Property damaged by the
work, equipment, employees or subcontractors to a condition at least equal to
that existing immediately prior to the beginning of operations.



   127.15(A)(3)   Where material or debris has washed or flowed into or
been placed in lakes, gravity Sewer , ditches, drains, catch basins, or
elsewhere as a result of the contractor’s operations, such material or
debris shall be removed and satisfactorily disposed of during progress of the
work, and the area kept in a clean and neat condition.



   127.15(A)(4)   When working in and around existing drainage canals,
and/or lakes, appropriate silt barriers shall be installed as required by the
City, BC-EMPGMD and other applicable regulatory agencies.



   127.15(B)   Project record documents.  Upon completion of
Construction, the contractor shall submit to the City , As-Built drawings
that depict the final construction conditions.  Two complete signed and
sealed original sets of printed As-Built drawings and two complete sets of
As-Built drawings in digital/electronic format containing files in both PDF
and AutoCad (latest edition). As-Built drawings shall be prepared by
professional surveyor and mapper licensed by the State of Florida and
certified by the Engineer of Record.  As-Built drawings includes sheets
depicting final construction locations and elevations for all water, Sewer,
drainage, pavement, underground structures, inverts, valves, utilities and
other facilities as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. All easements and
buildings are to be clearly shown. All buildings to be serviced are to be
shown. As-Built drawings are to have all the design plan information plus any
changes made during Construction and must be acceptable to the City Engineer



   127.15(B)(1)   The contractor shall maintain accurate and complete
records of work items completed.



   127.15(B)(2)   All “as-built” information submitted to the City
Engineer shall be sufficiently accurate, clear and legible to satisfy the
City Engineer that the information provides a true representation of the
improvements constructed.



   127.15(B)(3)   A letter of certification by the Engineer of Record
shall be submitted to the City.



   127.15(C)   Maintenance bonds.  A 100% maintenance cash bond shall
be held for a period of one Year from the date of the approved Final
Engineering Inspection, for all Construction within the Rights-Of-Way and/or
facilities to be dedicated or conveyed to ITDD , BDD or the City. A
maintenance cash bond shall be in the name of the Owner or Applicant, shall
be in the form prescribed by the City and shall be accompanied by a cashier's
check in the required amount.



   127.15(D)   Maintenance bond release.  For projects with a
maintenance bond, a letter of notification will be mailed to the Owner,
approximately 90 days prior to the maintenance bond expiration date, by the
City . For projects involving building construction, if 50% of the
Certificates of Occupancy have been issued for the buildings in the improved
area, the City will request the developer to arrange for reinspection for the
bonded improvements.



   127.15(E)   Closeout Procedures for Conveyance of Improvements. For
projects involving the conveyance or dedication of Construction improvements
such as water, Sanitary Sewer, or Stormwater facilities, to the ITDD , BDD or
City, the following items shall be submitted for approval by the City. Only
upon approval of the items stated in § 127.15(E), by the City, shall
authorization for the installation of a water meter be granted.



   127.15(E)(1)   Delivery of a completion report by the Engineer of
Record. The report shall include the following items:



   127.15(E)(1)(a)   Verification of the completion of all items on the
final engineering inspection checklist.



   127.15(E)(1)(b)   All applicable reports including density,
bacteriological, lamping, and certification from the applicable State and
Broward County regulatory agencies.



   127.15(E)(2)   A signed and sealed letter by the Engineer of Record
certifying that all improvements have been constructed in substantial
compliance with the permitted plans and meet the acceptable standards of the
City, county and State regulatory agencies.



   127.15(E)(3)   Delivery of a certified schedule of values. A list of
the actual itemized Construction quantities and cost for all improvements to
be conveyed to ITDD, BDD or City, certified by the Engineer of Record.



   127.15(E)(4)   Delivery of a bill of sale conveying the improvements
constructed as part of the project to the ITDD, BDD or City. The bill of sale
shall include as exhibits the following:



   127.15(E)(4)(a)   The legal description of the easement(s) upon
which the improvements are located.



   127.15(E)(4)(b)   A schedule of values of the improvements certified
by the Engineer of Record.



   127.15(E)(5)   Delivery of a contractor’s affidavit in a form
prescribed by the City confirming that all the improvements have been
installed in Public Rights-of-Way or within easements to be granted to the
ITDD, BDD or City, and that all parties furnishing labor, equipment,
materials and supplies for the improvements have been paid in full.



   127.15(E)(6)   Delivery of an Owner’s affidavit in a form
prescribed by the City confirming that all parties furnishing labor,
equipment, materials and supplies for the improvements have been paid in full.



   127.15(E)(7)   If final constructed improvements fall outside
original easement, delivery of a revised grant of easement on a form
prescribed by the City granting an easement to the ITDD, BDD , or City for
the maintenance, repair and replacement of all improvements to be conveyed to
the City by bill of sale.



   127.15(E)(8)   A current opinion of title from an attorney licensed
to practice in Florida certifying the ownership of the property subject to
the grant of easement and indicating any parties required to join in the
grant of easement.



   127.15(E)(9)   Only upon submittal and approval of all closeout
package items stated in § 127.15(E) shall approval for the installation of a
water meter be granted.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-25, passed 11-16-2015; Am.
Ord. 2016-16, passed 9-12-2016; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



STREET LIGHTS, BRIDGES, UNDERGROUND UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS



§ 127.20  STREET LIGHTS, BRIDGES AND UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.



   127.20(A)   Street Lights.



   127.20(A)(1)   All subdivision Plats submitted to the City shall
provide the necessary easements for installation and maintenance of street
lights within the subdivision.



   127.20(A)(2)   The street light poles shall be aluminum poles, with
underground wiring. The design and spacing of the street lights shall conform
to the remainder of the City’s overhead street lighting system.



   127.20(B)   Illumination for Streets.  Private roads in residential
zoning districts shall be allowed in accordance with the following criteria:



   127.20(B)(1)   Street Lighting.  Street lighting shall be provided
to deliver an illumination equal to that provided for public roads, but not
less than an average illumination of one-half Footcandle within the Roadway.
The street light poles shall be made of aluminum which meets the standards
set forth below, and all cables and wires shall be underground. The poles and
lines shall be located outside the Roadway width.



   127.20(B)(2)   Standards for street light poles.  Light poles shall
withstand wind loads as required by Florida Building Code, latest edition.
The pole shall be aluminum and shall be able to carry a minimum weight of 100
pounds at its top. Installation shall be done by direct burial. The pole
material shall meet the following ASTM standards:  D635, A153, A356, A319,
and A307.



   127.20(B)(3)   Design style standards for decorative light poles. 
The design and style of decorative light poles shall be reviewed by the City.



   127.20(C)   Illumination for Parking Areas.  Parking lots for
industrial, commercial and recreational, subdivisions and for residential
subdivisions with multi-Family units or one Family attached units shall be
constructed in accordance with the City Code of Ordinances.



   127.20(D)   Bridges.  Bridges that cross over water bodies, owned
by the City and located outside of the public-Right-Of-Way, require an
engineering permit and shall be subject to review by the City Engineer.



   127.20(E)   Underground utilities.  Within the City, all utilities
including, water, Sewer, telephone, fiber optic cable, television cable,
irrigation, street lighting and electrical systems shall be installed
underground. Primary facilities providing service to the site may be exempted
from this requirement. Utility transformers shall be pad mounted or installed
in a transformer vault. The developer shall provide adequate landscaping with
shrubs and plants to screen all utility facilities permitted above ground.



   127.20(E)(1)   A permit is required for the construction of all new
underground utilities, or related facilities in Public Rights-Of-Way or
ingress/egress easements dedicated for the use of pedestrian and vehicular
Traffic. These facilities shall be designed and installed so as to safely
sustain any vehicular loads that might be placed upon them.



   127.20(E)(2)   Each underground Utility crossing of paved Roadways
shall be made by directional drilling as approved by the City Engineer unless
an alternate method, other than those listed in 127.20(E)(2)(a), is approved
by the City Engineer. For proposed open cuts, drawings shall accompany the
permit application showing proper restoration of the Roadway and location of
the Utility. Written documentation shall be required justifying why the
Applicant believes a deviation from the directional drilling is necessary.



   127.20(E)(2)(a)   Missile boring, horizontal boring, underground
pneumatic boring, impact boring, water jetting, air jetting, air rams,
thumpers or similar methods for the purposes of installing underground
Utilities, conduits, cables and pipes shall not be permitted beneath paved
Roadways within Public and Private Rights-of-Way.



   127.20(E)(2)(b)   Use of the methods described in 127.20(E)(2)(a)
shall be restricted to green areas, beneath driveways and other non-Roadway
locations. When not within a dedicated Utility easement, the property
Owner’s permission shall be required. Any damage as a result of such
activities shall be the responsibility of the permittee.



   127.20(E)(3)   When a plan is required for maintenance of Traffic,
the contractor shall adhere to such plans as approved, in strict accordance
with the provisions of the MUTCD and applicable FDOT indexes throughout the
construction period.



   127.20(E)(4)   All permitted work in rights-of-way shall be done in
strict accordance with the provisions of the OSHA regulations, and all other
applicable codes.



   127.20(E)(5)   Edges of permanent type pavement shall be pre-cut
straight, clean and square beyond any damaged base area. All existing
pavement damaged by utility cuts shall be restored. When the removal of
Sidewalks , curbs or gutters are necessary for construction, they shall be
removed in full sections or a minimum of five feet in length, and all broken
edges cut smooth by use of a suitable power saw or other appropriate means.



   127.20(E)(6)   Telephone, television or other signal carrying cable
installed in an existing or planned paved area in any Public Right-Of-Way,
shall be carried in approved steel, concrete or plastic conduit with a
minimum cover of 30 inches.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord.
2017-04, passed 5-15-2017)



§ 127.21  EASEMENTS.



   127.21(A)   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot
lines shall be provided for public utilities where necessary and shall be at
least 15 feet in total width (12 feet for private), or as determined by the
City to be adequate.



   127.21(B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a lake, there shall
be provided a 25-foot minimum lake maintenance easement conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourses. Parallel Streets or
parkways may be required in connection therewith where necessary for service
or maintenance.



   127.21(C)   Easements may be required for drainage purposes of such
size and location as may be determined by the City Engineer.



   127.21(D)   Easements 15 feet in width shall be dedicated to the
City in the ITDD or the City of Sunrise in the BDD for all water mains, fire
hydrants and meters.



   127.21(E)   No structures below ground, utilities, or gas tanks
shall be placed in easements without approval from the City.



   127.21(F)   Easements 15 feet in width shall be dedicated to the
City in the ITDD or the City of Sunrise in the BDD for all Sewer force mains,
eight-inch gravity lines and manholes.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



ROADWAY SPECIFICATIONS AND DETAILS



§ 127.30  EARTHWORK AND COMPACTION.



   127.30(A)   All organic and other unsuitable material shall be
removed under those areas to be paved and for the full width of the
Right-Of-Way .



   127.30(B)   Suitable backfill shall be used and compacted as
directed by the Engineer of Record. This backfill can be subjected to
standard testing if required by the City Engineer.



   127.30(C)   No blasting will be permitted.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.31  PAVING.



   127.31(A)   General.



   127.31(A)(1)   All underground utilities shall be completed (with
accepted bacteriological and pressure tests) prior to construction of
limerock base.



   127.31(A)(2)   All existing pavement, cut or damaged by
construction, shall be properly restored at the contractor’s expense.



   127.31(A)(3)   Where any proposed pavement is to be connected to
existing pavement, the existing edge of pavement shall be saw cut.



   127.31(B)   Materials.



   127.31(B)(1)   Base course shall be crushed limerock Miami Oolite
with a minimum of 60% carbonates of calcium and magnesium.



   127.31(B)(2)   Asphalt surfaces for Streets shall be two inches
thick with one and one-fourth inch FDOT Type SP-12.5 asphaltic concrete
unless otherwise specified on the plans.



   127.31(B)(3)   Asphalt for parking areas shall be one and one-half
inches thick with two 3/4- inch lifts of Type FDOT Type SP-9.5 modified
asphaltic concrete.



   127.31(B)(4)   Reinforced concrete slabs shall be constructed of
Class 1 concrete with a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI.



   127.31(B)(5)   All driveways shall be restored from edge of road to
edge of Sidewalk and graded to prevent standing water.



   127.31(B)(6)   All grass Swales shall be graded to allow stormwater
to drain from impervious surface to and stored in center of Swale .



   127.31(B)(7)   All sod shall be restored from edge of road to edge
of Sidewalk or impacted areas. New sod used for restoration shall match
existing sod.



   127.31(C)   Installation.



   127.31(C)(1)   Subgrade for Roadway shall be compacted to a minimum
of 98% of the maximum density AASHTO T-180 (latest revision).



   127.31(C)(2)   Base course material for paved areas shall be a
minimum thickness of eight inches placed on a single layer for Streets (six
inches for residential driveways, and designated parking areas).



   127.31(C)(3)   Base course shall be compacted to 98% of the maximum
density as per AASHTO T-180 (latest revision).



   127.31(C)(4)   Installation of the wearing surface shall conform
with the requirements of the FDOT standard specifications for Type 1
asphaltic concrete or the latest revision for the approved Broward County mix.



   127.31(C)(5)   Sidewalk within driveways shall be minimum six inch
thick concrete 3,000 PSI.



   127.31(D)   Testing.



   127.31(D)(1)   The finished surface of the base course and that of
the wearing surface shall not vary more than one-fourth inch from the
template. Any irregularities exceeding this limit shall be corrected.



   127.31(D)(2)   Density tests shall be taken by an independent
testing laboratory, certified by the State of Florida where directed by the
City Engineer.



   127.31(D)(3)   All testing costs shall be paid for by the contractor.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.32  TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   127.32(A)   Design standards.



   127.32(A)(1)   The design and Construction of Traffic signals shall
be in accordance with the following standards:



   127.32(A)(1)(a)   FDOT Standard Plans For Road and Bridge
Construction.



   127.32(A)(1)(b)   Florida Greenbook.



   127.32(A)(1)(c)   MUTCD.



   127.32(A)(1)(d)   Minimum Standards Applicable to Public
Rights-Of-Way under Broward County Jurisdiction.



   127.32(A)(2)   All materials and workmanship shall meet the
requirements of MUTCD, Institute of Transportation Engineers, the National
Electrical Code, Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., Industrial Control
Standards of National Electrical Manufacturers Association , FDOT, BCTED, and
applicable State and local agency standards.



   127.32(A)(3)   All materials used in the construction of Traffic
signals shall be manufactured by a firm engaged in the production of such
materials for at least a five-Year period, and shall be of the
manufacturer’s latest standard design, which complies with latest Broward
County standards.



   127.32(A)(4)   All Traffic signals shall have Weston style poles and
mast arms with attached luminaires. These elements should preferably be
aluminum. For mast arms longer than 60 feet, steel poles and mast arms can be
used. All poles, mast arms and other accessories shall be given adequate rust
protection treatment as specified in these standards.



   127.32(A)(5)   Signal poles should have a height adequate to provide
a minimum 17.5 feet clearance measured from the bottom of signal head to the
crown of the road. The maximum height is determined by vertical sight
distance as stated in the MUTCD. Poles shall be located at the Right-Of-Way
Line (back of the Sidewalk ), whenever possible.



   127.32(A)(6)   Pole positions and conduit routing may be adjusted as
approved by the City Engineer and the BCTED to prevent conflicts with utility
and drainage structures.



   127.32(A)(7)   A minimum of two signal heads shall be provided for
each approach. Heads shall be located from 40 to 180 feet from the stop bar,
where, because of the Roadway geometry, the nearest signal face is 180 feet
or more beyond the stop bar, a supplemental near side signal face shall be
used. Non-permissive left-turn signals shall be three-section consisting of
green arrow, yellow arrow and red ball. Use “left-turn signal” sign
adjacent to non-permissive left turn signal(s). Dual left turn lanes require
two three-section turn signals. Use five-section head cluster for protected
permissive left-turning movements where such movements are warranted.



   127.32(A)(8)   All the signal indications shall be 12-inch glass
lenses and LED for all indications unless otherwise specified by the BCTED



   127.32(A)(9)   Pedestrian signal heads and push buttons are to be
installed at all signalized intersections unless otherwise approved.
Crosswalks shall be a minimum of ten feet wide, with curb-cut ADA compliant
ramps centered at each end. Pedestrian signals are to be aligned within
crosswalks as closely as possible.



   127.32(A)(10)   All “T” intersections shall have a four-phase
full activated controller in a BC 333 cabinet and all four-way intersections
shall have an eight-phase full activated controller in a BC 333 cabinet
unless otherwise specified by the BCTED. A BC 4T cabinet shall be used to
accommodate an existing telephone drop location.



   127.32(A)(11)   Detection for vehicular movement through an approach
shall be accomplished using mast arm mounted video detection cameras. All
video vehicle detection systems shall be approved by the City Engineer prior
to installation.



   127.32(A)(12)   Coaxial cable for video detection are to be placed
in its own separate conduit independent of signal cable conduit.



   127.32(A)(13)   All poles, controllers, detector cabinets and other
elements of the installation shall be grounded using a ground rod assembly or
a ground rod array. The poles shall be grounded for a minimum depth of 60
feet, the loop detector pull boxes shall be grounded for at least ten feet,
and the controller cabinet shall be grounded for at least 110 feet or latest
specification from the BCTED.



   127.32(A)(14)   All overhead street name signs attached to the mast
arms shall be internally illuminated signs. These signs shall be designed and
fabricated only by contractors that are included in the FDOT “Approved List
of Vendors”.



   127.32(B)   Materials.



   127.32(B)(1)   The design of mast arms, poles, and pole foundations
shall be in accordance with the “Standard Specifications for Structural
Supports for HighwaySigns , Luminaires, and Traffic Signals”, AASHTO,
latest edition.  All shop drawings shall be signed and sealed by a
registered structural Engineer .



   127.32(B)(2)   Vehicle detector loop wire shall conform to the
current International Municipal Signal Association specification with the
following exceptions:



   127.32(B)(2)(a)   Loop wire shall be AWG #14 wire stranded 19/27;
PVC insulation 0.032 inch thick, nylon jacket 0.010 inch thick, insulation
voltage rating 600 volts. Temperature rating shall be 90°C maximum.



   127.32(B)(2)(b)   Loop and lead-in to the controller cabinet shall
be one continuous run with no splices. When splices are necessary, the splice
shall be soldered, tapered and an approved waterproof coating applied (Scotch
Guard or approved equal).



   127.32(B)(3)   Video vehicle detection system shall be Video
Trak-905 as manufactured by PEEK SYSTEM or approved equal to latest
specification from the Broward County Traffic Engineering Division. All video
vehicle detection systems shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to
installation.



   127.32(C)   Installation.



   127.32(C)(1)   Pole foundation installations shall be backfilled and
compacted to a firm, stable condition equal to or greater than that of the
surrounding soil. Where applicable, the pole base shall be finished flush
with the adjoining Sidewalk so as to allow an obstruction-free walking
surface.



   127.32(C)(2)   The pole and mast arms shall be so constructed,
connected, and installed that in their final positions the centerline of the
signal arm will maintain a clearance above the Street of not less than 20.25
feet and not greater than 21.25 feet.



   127.32(C)(3)   Separate cables shall be installed to each pole
including separate cables for pedestrian signals. Poles shall have flush
hand-holes, one located near the base and one near the mast arm connection.



   127.32(C)(4)   A one-inch diameter wire access hole with rubber
grommet shall be field drilled and cold galvanized on each signal mast arm by
the contractor. Each location shall be the responsibility of the contractor
to verify prior to drilling.



   127.32(C)(5)   The electrical circuits for luminaires and internally
illuminated street name Signs shall be installed in separate conduits.



   127.32(C)(6)   When steel structures are used, rust protection shall
be provided. The rust protection procedure shall be as follows:



   127.32(C)(6)(a)   After galvanizing but prior to painting, all
galvanized surfaces shall be allowed to cool and vent gases produced during
the cooling process.



   127.32(C)(6)(b)   After galvanized surfaces have been allowed to air
dry, they shall be cleaned to achieve a “brush blast” condition as
defined by SSPC-SP6.



   127.32(C)(6)(c)   Test galvanizing thickness to ensure sufficient
galvanizing remains on the substrate to meet specification.



   127.32(C)(6)(d)   At the upright base and for a length of two feet,
the interior of the pole shall be mechanically cleaned and coated with a
zinc-rich epoxy powder 350°F minimum and 400°F maximum.



   127.32(C)(6)(e)   The exterior surfaces of the pole structure shall
be coated with a urethane or triglycidyl isocyanurate (TGIC) polyester powder
to a minimum dry film thickness of 2.0 MILS (0.020"). The coating shall be
electrostatically applied and cured by heating the steel.



   127.32(C)(6)(f)   The color of the polyester powder shall be Spartan
White or approved equal and similar. Sample chips (two inches by four inches)
shall be included with submittals, at least one of which to become the
property of Broward County, and at least one to be returned marked
“Approved,” if acceptable.



   127.32(C)(6)(g)   After all coatings have sufficiently cured per
manufacturer’s recommendation, poles shall be shipped in protective
wrapping of 3/16 inch U.V.-inhibiting plastic backed packing.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.33  ROADS.



   127.33(A)   Design standards for Streets.



   127.33(A)(1)   Conformity to Broward County Trafficways Plan.  The
design, alignment and cross-section of all Streets, roads and Highways
included on the Broward County Trafficways Plan shall conform to the
requirements of the Broward County Land Development Code.



   127.33(A)(2)   Relation to existing Street system.  The arrangement
of Streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for proper extension of
existing dedicated Streets in existing subdivisions, where such extension is
appropriate.



   127.33(A)(3)   Provisions for platting adjoining unplatted areas. 
The arrangement of Streets in new subdivisions shall be such so as to
facilitate and coordinate with the desirable future platting of adjoining
unplatted property of a similar character, and provide for local circulation
and convenient access to neighborhood facilities.



   127.33(A)(4)   Protection from through Traffic.  Minor and
collector residential Streets shall be laid out and arranged so as to
discourage their use by through Traffic. Residential Streets shall not
connect with industrial areas where avoidable.



   127.33(A)(5)   Arterial Street frontage.  Where a residential
subdivision or Residential Property abuts an existing or proposed arterial
Street, the City may require separate local frontage roads, reverse frontage
with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear
property line, deep lots with or without rear service alleys, or other such
treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and to assure separation of through and local Traffic.



   127.33(A)(6)   Plats adjacent to expressway Right-Of-Way.  Where a
subdivision borders on or contains a Right-Of-Way for an expressway, drainage
canal or waterway, the City may require a Street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such Right-Of-Way at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be
determined with due regard for requirements of approach grades for future
grade separations.



   127.33(A)(7)   Reserve Strips.  Reserve Strips controlling access
to Streets shall be prohibited except where their control is placed within
the jurisdiction of the City.



   127.33(A)(8)   Private Roadway systems.  Private Roadway systems
may be permissible if the private entity enters into an agreement with the
City, acceptable to the City, for construction and maintenance of such
facilities. All private Streets shall be required to meet all requirements
for public Streets.



   127.33(A)(9)   Half Streets.  New half or partial Streets shall not
be permitted.



   127.33(A)(10)   Dead end Streets.  Dead end Streets shall be
prohibited, except where appropriate as a stub to future Street extension, or
when designed as a circular cul-de-sac.



   127.33(A)(11)   Cul-de-sac Streets.



   127.33(A)(11)(a)   Cul-de-sacs, permanently designed as such, shall
be required when dead end Streets exceed 300 feet in length.



   127.33(A)(11)(b)   Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the closed end
with a circular dedicated area not less than 100 feet in diameter for
turnaround purposes.



   127.33(A)(12)   StreetRights-Of-Way.



   127.33(A)(12)(a)   Unless otherwise indicated or required by the
Broward County Trafficways Plan, StreetRights-Of-Way shall not be less than
the following:



 


Street Type

 

Right-Of-Way (feet)



Major or Minor Arterial Roadway
 

106



Collector Roadway (Industrial and commercial areas)
 

80



Collector (Residential)
 

60



Local Roadway (Business and residential)
 

50



Frontage roads
 

50




 



   127.33(A)(12)(b)   Additional Right-Of-Way width may be required to
promote public safety and convenience, or to assure adequate access,
circulation and parking in high density residential areas, commercial areas,
and industrial areas.



   127.33(A)(13)   Street alignment.



   127.33(A)(13)(a)   Curved linear Streets are recommended for
residential collector and local Streets in order to discourage excessive
vehicular speeds and to provide attractive vistas.



   127.33(A)(13)(b)   Whenever a Street changes direction or connecting
Street lines deflect from each other by more than ten degrees, there shall be
a horizontal curve.



   127.33(A)(13)(c)   To ensure adequate sight distance, minimum
centerline radii for horizontal curves shall be as follows:



 

Minor Streets
 
150 feet


Collector Streets
 
300 feet


Secondary arterial Streets and section line roads
 
500 feet


Major arterial thoroughfares
 
750 feet



 



   127.33(A)(13)(d)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
provided between reverse curves on collector Streets, and at least 250 feet
long on major and minor arterials.



   127.33(A)(13)(e)   Site distances at intersections shall be in
accordance with BCTED standards and MUTCD design criteria where none exist in
BCTED standards. The City Engineer may require additional site distances be
maintained.



   127.33(A)(14)   Street intersections.



   127.33(A)(14)(a)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles. No Street shall intersect another at an angle of
less than 60 degrees, except at a “Y” intersection of two minor Streets.



   127.33(A)(14)(b)   Multiple intersections involving the junction of
more than two Streets shall be prohibited.



   127.33(A)(14)(c)   “T” intersections of minor and collector
Streets are to be encouraged.



   127.33(A)(14)(d)   Intersections with arterial Streets shall be
located not less than 660 feet apart, measured from centerline to centerline.



   127.33(A)(14)(e)   Streets entering opposite sides of another Street
shall be laid out directly opposite each other or with a minimum offset of
125 feet between their centerlines.



   127.33(A)(14)(f)   Minimum property line radii at Street
intersections shall be 25 feet for minor Streets and where the angle of
intersection is less than 60 degrees; a greater radius may be required.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.34  PARKING AREAS.



   127.34(A)   Design standards for parking areas.  Parking lots for
industrial, commercial and recreational subdivisions and for residential
subdivisions with multi-Family units or one-Family attached units shall be
constructed in accordance with the following criteria:



   127.34(A)(1)   Pavement construction.  The parking area pavement
shall be constructed of minimum 12 inches compacted and stabilized subgrade
(minimum 40 LBR), minimum eight inches compacted limerock basecourse six
inches for Parking Stalls LBR=100). The pavement shall have a cross slope of
2% and a longitudinal slope of 0.3% minimum for normal crown section. The
pavement shall have a cross slope of 2.0% minimum and a longitudinal slope of
0.5% minimum for inverted crown section on runs greater than 100 feet. The
pavement shall have a cross slope of not less than 1.0% with an average slope
of not less than 2.0% and a longitudinal slope of not less than 0.5% on runs
less than 100 feet. The run is defined as the length of pavement between high
and low elevations points. All outside turning radii shall be minimum 50 feet.



   127.34(A)(2)   Curbing and Wheel Stops.  In landscaped areas, FDOT
Type “D” or "F" curbing shall be installed along all curbed sections
where vehicular impact can be reasonably anticipated. This includes terminal
and interior islands, all turning radii, driveway connections to Public
Rights-Of-Way or private collector Roadway systems, and along all curvilinear
curbed sections with a radius of 100 feet or less. Wheel stops shall be a
maximum height of five inches.



   127.34(A)(3)   Driving Lanes.  Driving lanes shall have a minimum
clear width of 24 feet for two-way Traffic, 15 feet for one-way Traffic and
12 feet for drive-through/drop-off Traffic. When parking spaces are provided
at 60 degrees angle, the one-way driving lane shall be minimum 18 feet clear.
A 24-inch-wide white stop bar shall be provided at the end of each driving
lane. The driving lanes shall be delineated with a double yellow line for a
minimum of 25 feet behind each stop bar location.



   127.34(A)(4)   Parking spaces.  Standard parking spaces shall be
minimum nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. Accessible parking space
shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width by 18 feet in length and in accordance
with FDOT Standard Plans for Road Construction, Index 711-001 (latest
edition) unless modified herein. Parking spaces for parallel parking shall
not be less than nine feet in width and 23 feet in length. Continuous FDOT
Type “D” or “F” concrete curbing or individual six feet long concrete
wheel stops shall be installed for each space. Six-inch wide white lines (and
six-inch wide blue lines as applicable for Accessible parking) shall be
provided on either side of each space identifying the limits of the space.
The number of parking spaces shall conform to the Chapter 125, Land
Development.



   127.34(A)(5)   Pavement markings and signs.  All pavement markings
and signs shall conform to the BCTED, MUTCD, and FDOT standards unless
modified herein. All pavement markings shall be of thermoplastic material,
except for lines for both standard and Accessible parking, for which paint
conforming to Section 710, Painted Pavement Markings, FDOT Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, shall be acceptable.



   127.34(A)(6)   Lighting.  The light poles shall be made of aluminum
and all wires and cables shall be underground. Alternative aesthetic lighting
fixtures may be permissible subject to City approval.



   127.34(A)(7)   Drainage.  All drainage lines and structures shall
be installed in accordance with the “Grading and Drainage Regulations and
Standards”, Broward County Transportation Department, Water Management
Divisions, latest edition. Surface water along inverted crown shall be
allowed to travel only in straight lines. Catch basins shall be provided at
each change of direction.



   127.34(A)(8)   Guardrails.  FDOT type guardrails shall be provided
where the edge of the parking area pavement is closer than 28 feet from the
edge of water of a lake, canal or other waterway. The guardrail shall be
installed in conformance with FDOT Standard Index.



   127.34(A)(9)   Enforcement.  The City shall be responsible to
review plans, issue construction permits, conduct inspections and approve all
parking areas in the City.



   127.34(B)   Property maintenance for private parking lots.



   127.34(B)(1)   All buildings and structures for private parking
shall be maintained in a secure, safe, and attractive condition. Deteriorated
or used metal covering on any such existing or subsequently constructed
carport structure shall be repaired or replaced so as to render same in a
safe and attractive condition that is neither physically nor visually a
blighting influence.



   127.34(B)(2)   Off-street parking facilities shall be identified as
to purpose and as to location when not clearly evident from a Street or
alley. Off-street parking facilities including access aisles and driveways
shall be surfaced FDOT Type S-3 asphaltic concrete course, and maintained in
a smooth, well-graded condition without any potholes, pavement deterioration,
loose aggregate, surface irregularities, and any Traffic/safety hazard.



   127.34(B)(3)   All off-street parking facilities shall be drained so
as not to cause any nuisance on adjacent or Public Property. All surface
stormwater shall be drained off the pavement for proper disposal to the
designated areas or structures within a reasonable time. All drainage lines
and structures shall be maintained properly at all times to insure full
efficiency.



   127.34(B)(4)   All wheel stops, curbing and Sidewalks shall be
maintained properly to ensure safe and convenient vehicle and pedestrian
Traffic at all times. Broken, damaged or loose wheel stops, curbing and
Sidewalks shall immediately be repaired/replaced.



   127.34(B)(5)   All pavement markings and signage shall be maintained
properly at all times to conform to the standards of the MUTCD. All parking
spaces, stop bars, directional arrows, centerlines, edge lines and other
pavement markings shall be painted properly to be clearly visible and well
defined at all times. Stop signs and all other signs shall be maintained
properly at all times as to the size, height, material, design, location,
visibility, clarity and other features to conform to the MUTCD.



   127.34(B)(6)   The off-street parking facilities shall conform at
all times to the site plan as approved by the City, including, but not
limited to the location and size of all regular and Accessible parking spaces.



   127.34(B)(7)   All private commercial parking lots shall be
inspected periodically by the City to insure proper maintenance and
conformity to the approved site plan. The Owner , Tenant , manager, or their
agent shall be notified in writing of any discrepancies and shall, within 20
calendar days from the time of notification, correct the discrepancy.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2015-21, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord.
2018-10, passed 7-2-2018; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.35  DRIVEWAYS, SIDEWALKS AND SWALES.



   127.35(A)   Driveways.  Wherever vehicular entrances and exits are
involved, the number, size and distance apart of entrances and exits and the
specific design thereof shall comply with the established standards and
requirements of the FDOT where a State or Federal Highway is affected, and
with the standards and requirements of the City Engineer in all other
instances. Where both State and City roads are involved, the higher standard
shall apply.



   127.35(B)   Sidewalks.



   127.35(B)(1)   Concrete Sidewalks with a minimum of five feet in
width shall be installed in public Rights-Of-Way . In a private area where
there are no public Rights-Of-Way , concrete Sidewalks with a minimum of five
feet in width shall be installed which shall run parallel to all Streets in
the area.



   127.35(B)(2)   Design specifications shall be in accordance with the
City’s engineering standards, including required accessibility in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines
for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG).



   127.35(C)   Swales.



   127.35(C)(1)   Landscaping and maintenance of Swale areas.



   127.35(C)(1)(a)   All Swale areas and water bank areas shall be
sodded in species normally grown as permanent Lawns in the City.



   127.35(C)(1)(b)   All Swale areas shall be free and clear of shrubs,
Hedges , asphalt, timbers, cement or rock substances.



   127.35(C)(1)(c)   All Swale and water bank areas within shall be
maintained, kept in good repair, and kept free from obstructions which may be
hazardous to the welfare of the general public by the contiguous property
Owner unless done by a Homeowners’ Association .



   127.35(C)(2)   Construction, Maintenance Requirements.  The
following shall be minimum standards for construction and maintenance of
Swale areas:



   127.35(C)(2)(a)   Paved Swales are prohibited except in commercially
or industrially zoned areas wherein the property Owner may pave the Swale
area, provided that prior to paving, a permit is obtained from the City and
the property Owner has provided for subsurface drainage or other facilities
to drain the adjacent land without runoff onto the lands of other property
Owners or onto the Public Right-Of-Way.



   127.35(C)(2)(b)   The use and installation of any type of impervious
paving, limerock, or stabilizing material within the Swale area is prohibited.



   127.35(C)(2)(c)   Bottom of Swales , measured from top of turf,
shall be at least nine inches below the edge of road pavement.



   127.35(C)(2)(d)   Paved areas on Private Property shall not be
permitted to drain on the Public Right-Of-Way.



   127.35(C)(2)(e)   Concrete catch basin aprons may be installed in
the area surrounding the catch basin where, in the judgment of the City
Engineer, such installation will not adversely affect the drainage or
percolation of the Swale in the vicinity. For each instance where a concrete
catch basin apron requested by the property Owner and approved by the City
Engineer, an authorization permit shall be issued by the City Engineer.



   127.35(C)(2)(f)   Concrete valley gutters or curb, and gutters shall
be required in the RoadwaySwale areas where the longitudinal slopes for the
Roadway pavement is less than the 0.5% or where the clear width of the
RoadwaySwale between the edge of Roadway pavement and the Sidewalk is less
than eight feet.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.36  TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES.



   127.36(A)   An engineering permit may only be issued for the
installation of speed humps provided the following criteria are met:



   127.36(A)(1)   Installation requires 67% (minimum) approval by
affected property Owners , which approval shall be obtained by the
utilization of a standard petition form provided by the city. The “affected
property Owners ” for installations within a privately maintained community
or subdivision shall be defined as the entire membership of the Homeowners’
Association . The “affected property Owners ” for installations on a
public cul-de-sac or no-outlet condition Roadway shall be all homeowners with
lots having direct access onto the subject Roadway . The “affected property
Owners ” for installations on a public through Street shall be defined as
all homeowners located within a half mile band width perpendicular to the
centerline of the Roadway extending a half mile along the Roadway in each
direction from the proposed installation.



   127.36(A)(1)(a)   Speed humps may only be installed on Roadways
classified as Local Streets with an average daily Traffic count not to exceed
2,000 average daily trips.



   127.36(A)(1)(b)   A Traffic study performed by a licensed
TrafficEngineer that demonstrates a minimum measured 85th percentile speed of
ten mph greater than the posted speed limit on the subject Roadway shall be
submitted by the Applicant .



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.37  STANDARD ROADWAY DETAILS.



 

Detail No.
 
Description





R-1

 
Residential Street Two-Lane (Undivided)



R-2

 
Arterial Road Multi-Lane



R-3

 
Cul-De-Sac for Residential Streets



R-4

 
Fire Lane Requirements



R-5

 
Driveways



R-6

 
Driveway Spacing, Residential (Non Trafficways)



R-7

 
Driveway Spacing, Commercial and Industrial (Non Trafficways)



R-8

 
Parking Area, Inverted Crown Section



R-9

 
Typical Concrete Curb & Gutter Sections



R-10

 
Sidewalk Joint Details & Typical Construction



R-11 & 12

 
Typical StreetSign Assembly



R-13

 
Handicapped Sign Detail



R-14

 
Procedure for Restoration of Flexible Pavement



R-15

 
Roadway Cut Restoration for Utility Perpendicular Crossing



R-16

 
Pavement Restoration Longitudinal



R-17

 
Trench Detail Unpaved Areas



R-18

 
Multiple Pipe or Ducts (4" Diameter or Smaller)



R-19

 
Standard Brick Pavers Detail



R-20

 
Standard Mast Arm Assembly



R-20A & B

 
Standard Mast Arm Notes



R-21

 
Minimum Clearance Between Road and Waterway



R-22

 
Speed Table Signing and Pavement Marking Detail



R-22A

 
Speed Table Signing and Pavement Marking Detail



R-23

 
Roundabout Detail (Plan View with Signage)



R-23A

 
Roundabout Detail (Striping)



R-23B

 
Roundabout Detail (Sections)




 



[Note: To view these images in PDF, click HERE]



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-15, passed 12-5-2011)







 



R-1 - Residential Street Two-Lane (Undivided)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-2 - Arterial Road Multi-Lane



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-3 - Cul-De-Sac for Residential Streets



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-4 - Fire Lane Requirements



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-5 - Driveways



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-6 - Driveway Spacing, Residential (Non Trafficways)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-7 - Driveway Spacing, Commercial and Industrial (Non Trafficways)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-8 - Parking Area, Inverted Crown Section



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-9 - Typical Concrete Curb & Gutter Sections



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-10 - Sidewalk Joint Details & Typical Construction



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-11 - Typical Street Sign Assembly



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-12 - Typical Street Sign Assembly



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-13 - Handicapped Sign Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-14 - Procedure for Restoration of Flexible Pavement



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-15 - Roadway Cut Restoration for Utility Perpendicular Crossing



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-16 - Payment Restoration Longitudinal



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-17 - Trench Detail Unpaved Areas



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-18 - Multiple Pipe or Ducts (4" Diameter or Smaller)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-19 - Standard Brick Pavers Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-20 - Standard Mast Arm Assembly



Date: December, 2011



 







 



R-20A - Standard Mast Arm Notes



Date: December , 2011



 







 



R-20B - Standard Mast Arm Notes



Date: December, 2011



 







 



R-21 - Minimum Clearance Between Road and Waterway



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-22 - Speed Table Signing and Pavement Marking Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-22A- Speed Table Signing and Pavement Marking Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-23- Roundabout Detail (Plan View with Signage)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-23A - Roundabout Detail (Striping)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



R-23B - Roundabout Detail (Sections)



Date: February, 2010



DRAINAGE SPECIFICATIONS AND DETAILS



§ 127.40  STORM DRAINAGE.



   127.40(A)   General.



   127.40(A)(1)   Catch basin grates and rim elevations as shown on
plans may be adjusted to conform to new or existing grades after approval
from the Engineer of Record is obtained who shall consult with the City prior
to any adjustment.



   127.40(A)(2)   Distances and lengths shown on plans and profile
drawings shall be referenced to the center of structures.



   127.40(A)(3)   All catch basin grates shall be oriented to align
with centerline or radius of drive.



   127.40(B)   Materials.



   127.40(B)(1)   All stormwater pipes and conduits shall conform to
the FDOT Design Manual and Standard Plans for Road and Bridge Construction,
latest edition.



   127.40(B)(2)   The rip rap headwalls, which will be provided on an
as needed basis, shall be constructed of sand/cement with a minimum 2000 PSI
compressive strength to meet FDOT standards. The bags shall be permeable
burlap, cloth or paper. A concrete cap shall be poured on top of sand/cement
rip rap bags with a minimum of 3000 psi compression strength.



   127.40(B)(3)   All drainage structures shall be precast concrete.
Block or poured-in-place catch basins will be allowed only where pre-cast is
problematic and only upon approval of the City Engineer. The minimum wall and
slab thickness shall be eight inches and the minimum reinforcing shall be No.
4 bars at 12 inches each way, unless otherwise indicated. Concrete shall be
minimum compressed strength of 3,500 PSI at 28 days.



   127.40(C)   Installation.



   127.40(C)(1)   Pipe shall be placed on stable granular material,
free of rock formation, other foreign formations, and constructed to uniform
grade and line.



   127.40(C)(2)   Backfill material shall be well graded granular
material, well tamped in layers, not to exceed six inches.



   127.40(C)(3)   Provide a minimum protective cover of 18 inches over
storm Sewer and avoid unnecessary crossing by heavy construction vehicles
during construction.



   127.40(C)(4)   The contractor shall notify the local water control
district at least 24 hours prior to the start of the construction and
inspection.



   127.40(D)   Storm Drainage pre-treatment/exfiltration system.



   127.40(D)(1)   Any conflict with existing or proposed utilities
shall immediately be brought to the attention of the City Engineer. Any
impermeable material encountered in the excavation for the drainfield shall
be removed as directed by the City Engineer.



   127.40(D)(2)   The trench liner shall be used on the sides and top
of a drainfield ditch. The top section of the material shall be lapped a
minimum of 24 inches and the contractor shall take extreme care in
backfilling to avoid bunching of the fabric.



   127.40(D)(3)   Perforated pipe within the drainfield shall have
three-eighths-inch perforations 360 degrees around the pipe with
approximately 120 perforations per foot of pipe.



   127.40(D)(4)   Perforated pipe shall terminate five feet from the
drainage structure. The remaining five feet shall be non-perforated pipe.



   127.40(D)(5)   Pipes shall terminate at an additional catch basin or
a clean out structure.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.41  DESIGN CRITERIA.



   127.41(A)   Site location.  The Applicant shall indicate the
location, zoning, land use and points of discharge.



   127.41(B)   Water quantity.  Each water management system is to be
designed to act as part of the overall basin system. During a design storm
event the discharge from each project will be controlled or limited by the
available capacity of the receiving City water body. Discharge control
structures with a pollution retardant baffle will be required for all
individual projects.



   127.41(C)   Water quality.



   127.41(C)(1)   Retention/Detention Criteria.  Retention/detention
in the overall system, including Swales, lakes, canals, etc., shall be a
modification of the following SFWMD Permits:



 



Indian Trace Development District


Permit No. 06-0079-S


Application No.: 070815-3


Drainage Basin:  C-11 West


SFWMD Receiving Body:  C-11 West Canal




Bonaventure Development District


Permit No. 06-0067-S


Application No.: 070213-17


Drainage Basin:  North New River


SFWMD Receiving Body:  North New River




 



   127.41(C)(2)   Underground Exfiltration Systems.  Underground
exfiltration systems shall be in accordance with the latest SFWMD
requirements as described in “Design of Exfiltration Trenches to Meet SFWMD
Regulatory Criteria”.



   127.41(D)   Finished floor.  All habitable structures shall not be
lower than one foot above the 100-Year flood elevation, as determined from
the DERD 100-Year flood elevation map; Federal Flood Insurance Rate Maps (as
shown on “Floodways and Base Flood Elevations Map”; engineer’s flood
elevation; or eight inches above the adjacent crown of road for commercial or
six inches above the crown of road for residential.



   127.41(E)   Storm Sewers.  Storm Sewer designs shall be in
accordance with the Florida Department of Transportation Zone 10 Rainfall
Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves (IDF Curves and SFWMD) published design
criteria and computational methods (latest edition).



   127.41(F)   Best management practice.  The Best Management Practice
for water pollution control through stormwater and wetland management shall
be in accordance with the latest edition National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System and the latest edition of the FDEP Erosion and Sediment
Control Criteria.



   127.41(G)   Road crown.  All Roadways and parking lots (public and
private) shall have a minimum crown elevation or edge of pavement of inverted
crown shall be the greater of the DERD ten-Year Criteria Map; engineer’s
ten-Year one-day elevation; or as indicated on the “Drainage Basins” Map.



   127.41(H)   Grading.  Final grades shall slope shall be away from
structures and drain toward the on-site drainage inlets and collection
system. A grading plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City/ITDD/BDD.
Said plan shall clearly indicate that no runoff from the Applicant’s
project shall discharge or flow onto adjacent property or into Public
Property. The minimum slope for Roadways shall be 0.5% and 1% for
RoadwaySwales. The maximum run between high points and low points shall be
300 feet.



   127.41(I)   Permit elevations.  The City maintains two stormwater
development districts that are subdivided into several basins and sub-basins
as shown on Map ID: W-10-24.1, The City Drainage Basin. Control Elevations
and minimum Crown of Road elevations shown in the Table below is a summary of
the SFWMD permit requirements and shall be maintained for any new permits or
permit modifications.



 


Area

 

Control Elevation

 

Crown of Road





Indian Trace Dev. District


Basin No. 1
 
 


   Increment I
 

4.5

 

6.9



   Increment II
 

4.5

 

6.9



   Increment II Mitigation
 

6.0

 

NA



   Increment III
 

5.0

 

6.9



   Increment III Mitigation
 

7.7

 

-



Basin No. 2
 

4.5

 

6.5



Basin No. 3
 

4.5

 

6.9



Bonaventure Dev. District


WLWCD
 

4.5

 

6.8





 



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.42  LAKES AND WATERWAYS.



   127.42(A)   Lake maintenance.



   127.42(A)(1)   All property Owners whose property abuts a lake
within the City shall be required to remove all trees, shrubs, bushes,
structures, docks, fences and/or any other such unpermitted obstruction along
the lake maintenance easement.



   127.42(A)(2)   All property Owners found to not be in compliance
with subsection 127.42(A)(1) above shall receive notice from the City, by
regular mail, notifying them that they are not in compliance with this
Ordinance and notifying them that they shall comply with the terms hereof
within 90 days from the date of the notice. Property Owners may apply to the
City within that 90-day compliance period for an additional 90 days to come
into compliance.



   127.42(A)(3)   Failure to comply shall result in the removal or
destruction of all obstruction(s) by the City without liability or
responsibility.



   127.42(B)   Waterways.



   127.42(B)(1)   Design Standards.



   127.42(B)(1)(a)   Development proposals containing proposed
lakes/canals shall supply written conceptual approval from the SFWMD (if
applicable FDEP, Department of Natural Resources, and/or Army Corps of
Engineers along with the application for development proposal. Should
lakes/canals be approved, construction shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable regulatory agency.



   127.42(B)(1)(b)   All development shall meet the requirements of
BC-EMPGMD and SFWMD to control stormwater runoff, for the purpose of
preventing flooding in adjacent areas, or pollution of water bodies.



   127.42(B)(1)(c)   Where a development proposal includes provisions
for deposit of fill, shores resulting from such deposition shall not exceed a
slope of four horizontal to one vertical above three feet below the design
water elevation.



   127.42(B)(1)(d)   After construction, natural vegetation shall be
retained or replaced on the site in order to minimize and stabilize erosion
and decrease pollution of the water body.



   127.42(B)(1)(e)   For lots or parcels which are cleared adjacent to
water bodies, silt screens shall be placed between the construction site and
the water body to prevent erosion and siltation.



   127.42(B)(1)(f)   No waterway or portion thereof shall be created
within a public road Right-Of-Way or within reservations dedicated for
Roadway purposes.



   127.42(B)(2)   Permit Required.



   127.42(B)(2)(a)   No waterway shall be created unless a permit for
same has been first approved in writing by the City Engineer.



   127.42(B)(2)(b)   Application for such approval shall be made to the
City Engineer, by letter, or upon such form as shall be prescribed, stating
the reason for alteration or construction of the waters. This letter shall be
accompanied by five sets of plans prepared by an Engineer showing the
location proposed cross-sections, structures in or across the waterway, and
other details as may be required by the City Engineer.



   127.42(B)(2)(c)   The City Engineer shall inspect waterways and all
structures in or across any waterway during their construction period.
As-built drawings shall be submitted to the City Engineer upon completion of
all work in or across the waterway with as-built cross-sections of the
waterway every 100 feet, or as often as may be necessary to determine the
change in cross-section area.



   127.42(B)(3)   Waterway Use.



   127.42(B)(3)(a)   No firm or corporation shall obstruct any public
waterway within the City by any means whatever.



   127.42(B)(3)(b)   No Person shall allow or permit any material to
wash, run or flow from property owned by or under the control of any such
Person into any public waterway within the City in such a way that the
waterway shall thereby become obstructed or polluted.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2019-12, passed 9-23-2019)



§ 127.43  STANDARD DRAINAGE DETAILS.



 

Detail No.
 
Description





D-1

 
Storm Sewer Manhole Frame and Cover



D-2

 
Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Type J



D-3

 
Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Type J



D-4

 
Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Type P



D-5

 
Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Types P & J, General Notes



D-6

 
Junction Box, Manhole Top & Precast Concrete Riser



D-7

 
Storm Sewer Inlets, Types C & E



D-8

 
Concrete to Metal Pipe Jacket



D-9

 
Pollution Retardant Baffle



D-10

 
Exfiltration Trench



D-11

 
Typical Section, Lake Culvert Outfall



D-12

 
Typical Lake Section




 



[Note: To view these images in PDF, click HERE]



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)







 



D-1 - Storm Sewer Manhole Frame and Cover



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-2 - Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Type J



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-3 - Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Type J



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-4 - Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Type P



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-5 - Inlet, Manhole & Junction Box, Types P & J, General Notes



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-6 - Junction Box, Manhole Top & Precast Concrete Riser



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-7 - Storm Sewer Inlets, Types C & E



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-8 - Concrete to Metal Pipe Jacket



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-9 - Pollution Retardant Baffle



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-10 - Exfiltration Trench



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-11 - Typical Section, Lake Culvert Outfall



Date: February, 2010



 







 



D-12 - Typical Lake Section



Date: February, 2010



§ 127.44  CITY DRAINAGE MAPS.



 

Detail No.
 
Description



M-1

 
Drainage Basins



M-2

 
Floodways and Base Flood Elevations



 



[Note: To view these images in PDF, click HERE]



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)







 



M-1 - Drainage Basins



Print Date: 3-24-2010



 







 



M-2 - Floodways and Base Flood Elevations



Print Date: 3-22-2010



WATER AND SEWER SPECIFICATIONS AND DETAILS



§ 127.50  WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.



   The following specifications are for ITDD, a dependent utility for the
City. Refer to the City of Sunrise for water and Sewer specifications in BDD.



   127.50(A)   General.



   127.50(A)(1)   The contractor shall notify the City and the Engineer
of Record no later than 48 hours prior to making connections to existing
systems. A City representative and the Engineer of Record shall be present.



   127.50(A)(2)   No connections to the existing lines shall be
permitted until pressure tests, for the water mains, and bacteriological
tests have been performed and the system is acceptable to the City and the
line has received bacteriological clearance by the BCHD.



   127.50(A)(3)   Cleaning of newly installed piping systems shall be
accomplished using flushing methods. Open flushing shall not be allowed
without prior approval of the City. All water will be metered for testing
purposes.



   127.50(A)(4)   All water mains shall cross above Sewer and drainage
lines with adequate cover and separation. If crossing above is not possible,
it shall be indicated on the plans with required separation.



   127.50(A)(5)   A three-foot horizontal separation shall be
maintained between water lines and all existing and proposed obstructions
(i.e. catch basins, concrete poles, etc.).



   127.50(B)   Materials.



   127.50(B)(1)   Pipe.  The water main may be PVC or D.I.P. when less
than ten inches in diameter and shall be designed for a minimum working
pressure of 150 PSI. Water mains ten inches or larger shall be D.I.P.



   127.50(B)(1)(a)   PVC pipe shall be ASTM 1120 pressure pipe with
iron O.D., Class 150 (DR 18), conforming to ANSI/AWWA C900 (latest revision)
or C905 (latest revision) and shall have push-on rubber gasket joints.



   127.50(B)(1)(b)   D.I.P. shall be Class 350 wall thickness (up to 12
inches), Class 300 (14 to18 inches), Class 250 (20 inches or greater) with
interior cement lining conforming to ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51-91, or latest
revision. The pipe shall withstand a working pressure of 350 PSI. The joints
shall be bell and spigot push-on type or mechanical joint. Pipe shall conform
with the physical and chemical requirements as set forth in the Handbook of
Ductile Iron Pipe of the Cast Iron Pipe Research Association and shall be
restrained appropriately.



   127.50(B)(2)   Fittings.  Fittings shall be ductile iron compact
mechanical joint type providing restraint and shall be Class 350 through 24
inches conforming to ANSI/AWWA C153/A21.53 (latest revision), and Class 250
in sizes 24 inches and larger, conforming to ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10 (latest
revision), complete with glands, gaskets, bolts and nuts. All fittings shall
be cement lined and seal coated with the same as pipe.



   127.50(B)(3)   Water Valves.



   127.50(B)(3)(a)   Valves shall be gate valves (12 inches or less),
or butterfly valves (greater than 12 inches).



   127.50(B)(3)(a)1.   Gate valves shall be iron body, fully resilient
seat, bronze mounted non-rising stem, double disc, rated at 200 PSI and
conforming to ANSI/AWWA C509-94 (latest revision). Exposed valves shall be
outside screw and yoke type. Gate valves shall be Mueller, Clow, American
Darling, or approved equal.



   127.50(B)(3)(a)2.   Butterfly valves and operators shall conform to
ANSI/AWWA C504 (latest revision) standard for rubber-seated butterfly valves.
Valves shall be Class 150 A or B and shall be Mueller, Pratt, Clow, DeZurik,
or approved equal.



   127.50(B)(3)(b)   Air Release Valves.



   127.50(B)(3)(b)1.   Water Main Air Release Valves - Valve body and
cover shall be of cast iron construction, ASTM A126-A. All internal parts
shall be of stainless steel, ASTM A240 - Type 304 for the float and ASTM A296
- Type 316 for the linkage. The venting orifice shall be 3/16 inches in
diameter with brass seat. The inlet opening shall be a two-inch NPT screwed
connection. The overall height shall not exceed 13 inches. Valves shall be
manufactured by Valve and Primer Corporation, model number APCO 200A, or
approved equal.



   127.50(B)(3)(b)2.   Main valves shall be located on an extension of
the Right-Of-Way Line unless dimensioned otherwise.



   127.50(B)(3)(b)3.   Main valves shall be installed away from parking
areas. If this is unavoidable, proper measures shall be taken to avoid the
parking of vehicles over the valves. Hydrant valves shall be installed as
close to the main as possible.



   127.50(B)(3)(b)4.   The distance from the top of the valve actuator
nut to final grade shall be a minimum of 12 inches and a maximum of 18 inches.



   127.50(B)(3)(b)5.   One blue reflective pavement marker shall be
provided in the center of the nearest lanes of road pavement adjacent to
valve.



   127.50(B)(4)   Service Connections.



   127.50(B)(4)(a)   Service saddles shall be Ductile Iron epoxy or
nylon coated with double stainless steel straps or single wide strap. Saddles
shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C111/21.11 and ASTM A 588 (latest revision).



   127.50(B)(4)(b)   Service lines shall be polyethylene tubing as
described in ANSI/AWWA C901, or latest revision with a working pressure of
200 PSI (DR 9). Pipe joints shall be of the compression type totally confined
grip seal and coupling nut. Polyethylene shall be extruded from PE 3408 high
molecular weight materials and shall conform to ASTM D2737.



   127.50(B)(4)(c)   Corporation stops shall be manufactured of brass
alloy in accordance with ASTM B62 with threaded ends and shall be Ford or
approved equal.



   127.50(B)(4)(d)   Meter stops shall be the 90-degree lockwing type
and shall be of bronze construction in accordance with ASTM B62. Meter stops
shall be closed button design and resilient “O” ring sealed against
external leakage at the top. Stops shall be equipped with a meter coupling
nut on the outlet sides, as manufactured by Mueller, Ford or approved equal.



   127.50(B)(4)(e)   All meters (two inches and smaller) and meter
boxes will be supplied and installed by the City at the Owner ’s expense.
Meters larger than two inches will have special installation requirements.



   127.50(B)(5)   Tapping Sleeves.  Tapping sleeves shall be ductile
iron or stainless steel with mechanical joints and be Clow, or approved equal.



   127.50(B)(6)   Valve Boxes.



   127.50(B)(6)(a)   Valve boxes for water mains and Sewer force mains
shall be U.S. Foundry Model 7500, marked “Water” or “ Sewer ”, or
approved equal.



   127.50(B)(6)(b)   Valve boxes for blow off assembly shall be U.S.
Foundry Model 7630 (No. 3) or approved equal.



   127.50(B)(7)   Retainer Glands.  Retainer glands shall conform to
ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11 (latest revision). All glands shall be manufactured
from ductile iron as listed by Underwriters Laboratories for 250 psi minimum
water pressure rating. Clow Corporation, EBAA Iron, or approved equal.



   127.50(B)(8)   Double check-valve backflow prevention assembly. 
The assembly shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C510 (latest revision) and be capable
of withstanding a working pressure of at least 150 PSI without damage to
working parts or impairment of function. It shall consist of two internally
loaded, independently operating check valves, located between two tightly
closing resilient-seated shut off valves, with four properly placed
resilient-seated test cocks.



   127.50(B)(9)   Fire Hydrants.



   127.50(B)(9)(a)   Fire hydrants shall have a minimum five and
one-fourth inch valve opening and shall open against the pressure and closing
with the flow. Hydrants shall be American, model number B-84-B or approved
equal. Hydrants shall meet or exceed ANSI/AWWA C502 (latest revision), C503
(latest revision), and shall comply with Factory Mutual Research Corporation
and Underwriters Laboratories UL246 Standard.



   127.50(B)(9)(b)   Three blue reflective pavement markers shall be
provided in the center of the nearest lanes of road pavement adjacent to all
fire hydrant locations.



   127.50(B)(9)(c)   Hydrants shall be painted “fire hydrant red with
white fluorescent caps.”



   Refer to Land Development Regulations for Hydrant Spacing and other
specifications.



   127.50(C)   Installation.



   127.50(C)(1)   General.  Connection of all new systems to existing
mains shall be done using one of the three following methods:



   127.50(C)(1)(a)   Method A per BCHD Standards, which involves a
reduced size temporary connection between the existing main and the new main.



   127.50(C)(1)(b)   Method B per BCHD Standards, which involves a
direct connection between the new and existing mains using two gate valves
separated by a sleeve with a vent pipe.



   127.50(C)(1)(c)   Method C approved by the BCHD, which includes one
tapping valve and one additional gate valve requiring disinfection of the new
system prior to conducting the pressure test.



   127.50(C)(2)   Bedding.  Bedding and initial backfill (12 inches
above pipe) for all pipe shall be sand with no rock larger than one inch in
diameter. Pearock or three-fourth-inch washed rock will be used in water or
where unsuitable bedding exists at the discretion of the City. All other fill
shall not have rock larger than six inches in diameter.



   127.50(C)(3)   PVC Pipe.



   127.50(C)(3)(a)   PVC pipe, where approved by the City Engineer,
shall be installed in accordance with the Uni-Bell Plastic Pipe Association
’s Guide for Installation of PVC Pressure Pipe for Municipal Water
Distribution Systems.



   127.50(C)(3)(b)   PVC pipe shall be installed with a minimum of
36-inch cover.



   127.50(C)(3)(c)   Detector tape shall be installed the full length
of all PVC mains approximately 18 inches below grade, color side up.



   127.50(C)(4)   Ductile Iron Pipe.



   127.50(C)(4)(a)   D.I.P. shall be installed in accordance with
ANSI/AWWA C600 or latest revision.



   127.50(C)(4)(b)   D.I.P. shall be installed with a minimum of 30
inch-cover.



   127.50(C)(4)(c)   Identification tape shall be installed the full
length of all D.I.P. mains approximately 18 inches above the main, color side
up.



   127.50(D)   Water distribution system testing.



   127.50(D)(1)   The physical connection of the new system to the
existing system shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the BCHD.



   127.50(D)(2)   The complete water system shall be pressure tested
and disinfected. The pressure test shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C600
(latest revision).



   127.50(D)(3)   The pressure test shall be witnessed by a
representative of the City and the Engineer of Record.



   127.50(D)(4)   Sampling points shall be provided at the locations
shown on the plans as approved by the BCHD.



   127.50(D)(5)   Before acceptance for operation, the water system
shall be disinfected in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C651 (latest revision) with
approved bacteriological samples and proper documentation by the BCHD.
Collection of samples is the contractor’s responsibility and will be
witnessed by a City representative.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.51  GRAVITY SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM.



   The following specifications are for ITDD, a dependent utility for the
City. Refer to the City of Sunrise for water and Sewer specifications in BDD.



   127.51(A)   Materials.



   127.51(A)(1)   Sewer Pipe and Fittings.



   127.51(A)(1)(a)   PVC Sewer pipe and fittings shall be non-pressure
polyvinyl chloride pipe conforming to ASTM D3034, SDR 26, or equal with
push-on rubber gasket joints unless otherwise noted.



   127.51(A)(1)(b)   D.I.P. shall be double cement lined, conforming to
ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4-90 or latest revision, minimum pressure Class 350
(unless otherwise specified).



   127.51(A)(1)(c)   All fittings and accessories shall be as
manufactured or supplied by the pipe manufacturer.



   127.51(A)(2)   Manholes.



   127.51(A)(2)(a)   Manholes shall be precast per ASTM C478 Type 2
with 4,000 psi concrete and grade 60 steel. Monolithically poured bases only.



   127.51(A)(2)(b)   Manhole openings are to be sealed with anti-hydro
cement or approved equal. No molding plaster will be allowed.



   127.51(A)(2)(c)   Manhole joints shall be sealed with “Ramnek”
gaskets or approved equal and with anti-hydro cement on the inside and
outside.



   127.51(B)   Installation.



   127.51(B)(1)   Pipe and Fittings.



   127.51(B)(1)(a)   Sewer pipe shall be installed in accordance with
ASTM D2321.



   127.51(B)(1)(b)   D.I.P. shall be installed in accordance with
ANSI/AWWA C600 or latest revision.



   127.51(B)(1)(c)   Bedding and initial backfill (12 inches) over
Sewer mains and services shall be sand with no rock larger than one inch in
diameter. Pearock or three-fourth-inch washed rock will be used in water or
where unsuitable bedding exists at the discretion of the City. All other fill
shall not have rock larger than six inches in diameter.



   127.51(B)(1)(d)   Pipe connection into manhole wall shall be ductile
iron pipe grouted in-place or cast-in neoprene rubber boot, or equal as
approved by the City.



   127.51(B)(1)(e)   No Sewer shall be in the back yard of a
residential lot without City approval.



   127.51(B)(1)(f)   Gravity lines between manholes shall be eight-inch
minimum diameter.



   127.51(B)(2)   Manholes, Valve Vaults, Wet Wells.



   127.51(B)(2)(a)   Manholes shall be set plumb to line and grade on
firm clean subgrade providing uniform bearing under the base.



   127.51(B)(2)(b)   All openings and joints shall be sealed
water-tight.



   Manholes, Valve Vaults, Wet Wells, and Metal shall receive the
following coatings:



   127.51(B)(3)   Coatings.



   127.51(B)(3)(a)   System No. 1 Exterior of New Pre-Cast Concrete,
Valve Vault, Wet Well Ring Sections



   127.51(B)(3)(a)1.   Surface Preparation.  All curing oils, form
oils, laitance, soluble salts and loose concrete shall be removed. Concrete
shall be dry and thoroughly clean before coatings.



   127.51(B)(3)(a)2.   Prime Coat.  None required.



   127.51(B)(3)(a)3.   Top Coat.  Coal tar epoxy at eight MILS DFT per
coat.



   127.51(B)(3)(a)4.   MDFT:  16 MILS DFT for two-coat system. Allow
minimum of 24 hours drying time between coats.



   127.51(B)(3)(a)5.   Color.   First Coat – Red



               Second Coat – Black



   127.51(B)(3)(b)   System No. 2 – Interior of New Concrete, Valve
Pits.



   127.51(B)(3)(b)1.   Surface Preparation.  Concrete. All curing
oils, form oils, laitance, soluble salts and loose concrete shall be removed.
Concrete shall be dry and thoroughly clean before coatings. Concrete shall be
cured 28 days, brush off blast.



   127.51(B)(3)(b)2.   Filler/Surfacer.  Concrete substrate surface
with cracks and/or voids greater than one-half inch depth or width or areas
where underlying aggregate has been exposed shall be patched with filler and
surfacer. Material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s
application instructions.



   127.51(B)(3)(b)3.   Prime Coat.  Vinyl Ester 12.0 to 18.0 mils DFT
or polyamide epoxy, Tnemec Series 66 or 69 Hi-Build, 4 mils DFT.



   127.51(B)(3)(b)4.   Top Coat.  Vinyl Ester 12.0 to 18.0 mils DFT or
polyamide epoxy, Tnemec Series 66 or 69 Hi-Build, 8 mils DFT.



   127.51(B)(3)(b)5.   MDFT.  Minimum 30 MILS of DFT for two-coat
vinyl ester system or 12 mils MDFT polyamide epoxy system. Time between coats
and method of application shall be as per manufacturer’s written
instructions.



   127.51(B)(3)(b)6.   Color.   First Coat – Beige (5002)



               Second Coat – Gray (5001)



   127.51(B)(3)(c)   System No. 3 – Submerged Metal – Domestic
Sewage, Pump Station Wet Well Piping.



   127.51(B)(3)(c)1.   Surface Preparation.  Abrasive blast or
centrifugal wheel blast, SSPC-SP5.



   127.51(B)(3)(c)2.   Prime Coat.  Polyamide, anti-corrosive, epoxy
primer, one coat, 2.5 MDFT.



   127.51(B)(3)(c)3.   Top Coat.  Coat-tar epoxy, two coats, 16 MDFT.



   127.51(B)(3)(c)4.   MDFT.  18.5 mils MDFT for system.



   127.51(B)(3)(d)   System No. 4 – Exposed Metal – Moderate
Corrosive Conditions, Valve Pit Piping and Valves.



   127.51(B)(3)(d)1.   Surface Preparation.  Abrasive blast or
centrifugal wheel blast, SSPC-SP10.



   127.51(B)(3)(d)2.   Prime Coat.  Polyamide, anti-corrosive, epoxy
primer, one coat, 2.5 MDFT.



   127.51(B)(3)(d)3.   Top Coat.  Polyamide epoxy, Tnemic Series 66 or
69, two coats, 8 MDFT.



   127.51(B)(3)(d)4.   MDFT.  10.5 mils DFT for three coats.



   127.51(B)(3)(e)   System No. 5 – Existing Concrete Tank Lining –
Domestic Sewage, Pump Station Wet Wells.



   127.51(B)(3)(e)1.   Surface Preparation.  Abrasive, Hydro/grit,
blast, 4,000 PSI.



   127.51(B)(3)(e)2.   Surface Restoration.  Approved cement
resurfacing treatment.



   127.51(B)(3)(e)3.   Prime Coat.  Epoxy primer in accordance with
manufacturer’s recommendations compatible with surface restoration
treatment.



   127.51(B)(3)(e)4.   Top Coat.  Epoxy compatible with surface
restoration treatment (see Section 03769).



   127.51(B)(3)(e)5.   MDFT.  60 MDFT for system.



   127.51(B)(3)(f)   System No. 6 – Existing Concrete Exposed.



   127.51(B)(3)(f)1.   Surface Preparation.  Abrasive blast, 4,000 PSI
(see Section 03769).



   127.51(B)(3)(f)2.   Coating.  Three coats, Polyamide epoxy, Tnemec
Series 66 or 69 Hi-Build Epoxoline.



   127.51(B)(3)(f)3.   MDFT.  12 MILS DFT for three-coat application.



   127.51(B)(4)   Service lines.



   127.51(B)(4)(a)   Minimum slope of all service lines shall be as
indicated in the Florida Building Code.



   127.51(B)(4)(b)   Service laterals shall terminate at a depth 30
inches below finished grade.



   127.51(B)(4)(c)   Each Service Connection shall be capped
water-tight.



   127.51(B)(4)(d)   The end of each Service Connection shall be marked
with a two inches by four inches treated stake painted red, extending 18
inches (min.) above grade.



   127.51(B)(4)(e)   Contractor shall rough-in riser to one foot above
finished grade and plug. At project completion, cut back to finished grade.



   127.51(B)(4)(f)   Connection of services to building’s Plumbing
shall be coordinated with the CityBuilding Department.



   127.51(B)(4)(g)   Cover over service lines shall be 18 inches
minimum, 24 inches maximum below finished grade and 24 inches under pavement.



   127.51(B)(4)(h)   Polyethylene shall be bedded in backfill of sand
with no rock greater than one inch in diameter.



   127.51(B)(4)(i)   Meter stops shall have eight to ten inches cover
or as required for proper meter/box installation.



   127.51(B)(4)(j)   Water services under pavement shall be encased in
a Schedule 80 PVC sleeve for the full length of the pavement and for two feet
beyond the edge.



   127.51(B)(4)(k)   The end of each Service Connection shall have a
blue metallic locator and shall be marked with a two inches by four inches
treated stake, painted blue, extending 18 inches (minimum) above grade unless
indicated otherwise.



   127.51(B)(4)(l)   Connection to new Sewer main that has not been
certified or accepted is prohibited (all testing and certification on mains
shall be completed prior to plumber connection). Permission shall be granted
from City for all new connections.



   127.51(B)(4)(m)   Service laterals shall be installed along the lot
line extension of each platted lot at the time of main installation, and
shall be terminated at the property line or as close thereto as is practical
for each residence or business location.



   127.51(B)(4)(n)   Each service lateral shall include an approved
six-inch clean-out section at the property line and at 75 feet (maximum)
intervals, and shall terminate with a capped wye fitting for future house
connections.



   127.51(B)(4)(o)   The minimum size for any service lateral shall be
six inches and the minimum depth at the Right-Of-Way Line shall be 36 inches
(30 inches for ductile iron service laterals).



   127.51(B)(4)(p)   Service laterals requiring cuts into the pavement
after installation of the main and paving of the Roadway , shall require
separate permits, permit fees and bonds and are to be avoided, if possible.



   127.51(B)(4)(q)   Service laterals may not be stubbed into manholes
except at terminal manholes and where approved by the City Engineer. The
invert of the lateral at the manhole, where entry is permitted, shall meet a
shaped, solid concrete invert that will conduct the effluent, without
turbulence, to the invert at the manhole outlet.



   127.51(C)   Testing.



   127.51(C)(1)   After construction of the Sewer System , the entire
system shall be lamped. Sewer lamping shall be witnessed by the Engineer of
Record and a representative from the City.



   127.51(C)(2)   After construction of the Sewer System , the City or
the Engineer of Record may require a visual infiltration and/or exfiltration
test to be performed on the entire system or any part thereof.



   127.51(C)(3)   An air test may be substituted for the water
exfiltration test, upon approval of the City.



   127.51(C)(4)   Manhole exfiltration leakage shall not exceed four
gallons per day per unit.



   127.51(C)(5)   Sewer pipe exfiltration leakage shall not exceed ten
gallons per day per inch diameter per mile in a two-hour test period for any
section tested.



   127.51(C)(6)   Visible manhole and Sewer pipe infiltration leakage
shall not be permitted.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.52  SEWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS.



   The following specifications are for ITDD, a dependent utility for the
City. Refer to the City of Sunrise for water and Sewer specifications in BDD.



   127.52(A)   General.



   127.52(A)(1)   The contractor shall notify the City and the Engineer
of Record no later than 48 hours prior to making connections to existing
systems. A City representative and the Engineer of Record shall be present.



   127.52(A)(2)   No connections to the existing lines shall be made
until pressure tests for the Sewer force mains, and the system is acceptable
to the City and DERD.



   127.52(A)(3)   Cleaning of newly installed piping systems shall be
accomplished using flushing methods. Open flushing shall not be allowed
without prior approval of the City. All water used for testing purposes shall
be metered.



   127.52(A)(4)   All force mains shall cross above drainage lines with
adequate cover and separation. If this crossing is not possible, it shall be
indicated on the plans.



   127.52(A)(5)   A three-foot lateral separation shall be maintained
between water/ Sewer lines and all existing and proposed obstructions (i.e.
catch basins, concrete poles, etc.).



   127.52(B)   Materials.



   127.52(B)(1)   The Sewage force main shall be D.I.P. PVC for pipe
less than ten inches in diameter may be allowed but only if approved by the
City.



   127.52(B)(1)(a)   PVC pipe shall be ASTM 1120 pressure pipe with
iron O.D., Class 150 (DR 18), conforming to ANSI/AWWA C900-89 or C905-88 or
latest revision and shall have push-on rubber gasket joints.



   127.52(B)(1)(b)   D.I.P. shall be Class 350 wall thickness (up to 12
inches), Class 300 (14 inches to 18 inches), Class 250 (20 inches or greater)
with interior cement lining conforming to ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51 (latest
revision). Sewage pipe shall be either double cement conforming to ANSI/AWWA
C104/A21.4 (latest revision), or polyethylene lined conforming to ANSI/AWWA
C105/A21.5-88 or latest revision, or approved equal. The pipe shall withstand
a working pressure of 350 PSI. The joints shall be bell and spigot push-on
type, mechanical joint or flanged. Flanged pipe shall conform with the
physical and chemical requirements as set forth in the Handbook of Ductile
Iron Pipe of the Cast Iron Pipe Research Association .



   127.52(B)(2)   Fittings.  Fittings shall be ductile iron compact
restrained mechanical joint type and shall be Class 350 through 24 inches
conforming to ANSI/AWWA C153/A21.53 (latest revision), and Class 250 in sizes
24 inches and larger, conforming to ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10 (latest revision),
complete with glands, gaskets, bolts and nuts. All fittings shall be cement
lined and seal coated with the same as pipe.



   127.52(B)(3)   Valves.  Valves shall be plug valves for Sewer force
mains.



   127.52(B)(3)(a)   Air Release Valves.



   127.52(B)(3)(a)(1)   SewerForce Main Air Release Valves - System
shall be a combination of one Sewage air release valve and one Sewage
air/vacuum valve with dual isolation plug valves. Both valve bodies and
covers shall be of cast iron construction, ASTM A126-B. All internal parts
shall be of stainless steel, ASTM A240 - Type 304 and ASTM A276 - Type 303.
The venting orifice shall be 5/16 inches in diameter with stainless steel
seat. The inlet openings shall be a minimum of two-inch NPT screwed
connection for both valves. The valves shall be fully capable of operation in
Sewage force main. Both valves shall include a back-flushing feature for
periodic cleaning of the internal mechanism. The overall height shall not
exceed 22 inches. Valves shall be manufactured by Val-Matic Corporation, or
approved equal.



   127.52(B)(4)   Detector Tape.  Detector tape shall be three inches
wide green tape for force main with a metallized foil core laminated between
two layers of plastic film. The “CAUTION FORCE MAIN BURIED BELOW” shall
be printed at 30-inch intervals along the tape. Tape shall be placed 18
inches below grade above all PVC mains and services or as recommended by
manufacturer. Non-metallic tape shall be used above ductile iron pipe.



   127.52(B)(5)   Tapping Sleeves.  Tapping sleeves shall be Clow, or
approved equal.



   127.52(B)(6)   Valve Boxes.



   127.52(B)(6)(a)   Valve boxes for water mains and Sewer force mains
shall be U.S. Foundry Model 7500, marked “Water” or “ Sewer ”, or
approved equal.



   127.52(B)(6)(b)   Valve boxes for blow off assembly shall be U.S.
Foundry Model 7630 (No. 3) or approved equal.



   127.52(B)(7)   Retainer Glands.  Retainer glands shall conform to
ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11 (latest revision). All glands shall be manufactured
from ductile iron as listed by Underwriters Laboratories for 250 PSI minimum
water pressure rating. Clow Corporation, EBAA Iron, or approved equal.



   127.52(B)(8)   Megalugs Series 1100, or equal shall be used for
restraint. Concrete Thrust Blocks are not allowed.



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 127.53  WATER SUPPLY DETAILS.



 

Detail No.
 
Description





W-1

 
Water Main Separation



W-2

 
Plug Valve and Box Detail



W-3

 
Gate Valve and Valve Box Detail



W-4

 
Valve Box Concrete Collar Detail



W-5

 
Water Service Connection Details



W-6

 
Typical Service Connection for 5/8", 1", 1-1/2" or 2" Meter



W-7

 
Meter Box Detail U.S. Foundry No. 7630



W-8

 
Meter Installation for 1-1/2"or 2" Meter



W-9

 
Water Meter Locations



W-10

 
Looped Water Main System



W-11

 
Fire Hydrant Detail



W-12

 
Guard Post Detail



W-13

 
Fire Hydrant- Fire Dept. Connection Location



W-14

 
Standard Fire Dept. Connection Detail



W-15

 
Standard Fire Hydrant Placement Detail



W-16

 
Typ. Fire Hydrant/Fire Dept. Connection Island Detail



W-17

 
Sampling Point Detail



W-18

 
Utility Crossing General Requirements



W-19

 
Typical Connection to Existing Main



W-20

 
Type 1 Private Fire Protection 4", 6" @ 8" Diameter Connection



W-21

 
Type 2 Private Fire Protection 4", 6" @ 8" Diameter Connection



W-22

 
Type 3 Private Fire Protection 2" Diameter Connection



W-23

 
Backflow Preventer



W-24

 
Manual Blow Off



W-25

 
PVC Pipe Locating Wire and Identification Tape Detail




 



[Note: To view these images in PDF, click HERE]



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)







 



W-1 - Water Main Separation



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-2 - Plug Valve and Box Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-3 - Gate Valve and Valve Box Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-4 - Valve Box Concrete Collar Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-5 - Water Service Connection Details



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-6 - Typical Service Connection for 5/8", 1", 1-1/2"or 2" Meter



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-7 - Meter Box Detail U.S. Foundry No. 7630



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-8 - Meter Installation for 1-1/2" or 2" Meter



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-9 - Water Meter Locations



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-10 - Looped Water Main System



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-11 - Fire Hydrant Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-12 - Guard Post Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-13 - Fire Hydrant- Fire Dept. Connection Location



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-14 - Standard Fire Dept. Connection Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-15 - Standard Fire Hydrant Placement Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-16 - Typ. Fire Hydrant/Fire Dept. Connection Island Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-17 - Sampling Point Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-18 - Utility Crossing General Requirements



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-19 - Typical Connection to Existing Main



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-20 - Type 1 Private Fire Protection 4", 6" @ 8" Diameter Connection



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-21 - Type 2 Private Fire Protection 4", 6" @ 8" Diameter Connection



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-22 - Type 3 Private Fire Protection 2" Diameter Connection



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-23 - Backflow Preventer



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-24 - Manual Blow Off



Date: February, 2010



 







 



W-25 - PVC Pipe Locating Wire and Identification Tape Detail



Date: February, 2010



§ 127.54  STANDARD SANITARY SEWER DETAILS.



 

Detail No.
 
Description





S-1

 
Wye Branch Connection



S-2

 
Deep Service Lateral



S-3

 
Shallow Service Lateral



S-4

 
Two-Way Cleanout



S-5

 
Precast Outside Conflict Manhole



S-6

 
Precast Shallow Manhole (6'-0" depth and greater)



S-7

 
Eccentric Manhole (6'-0" depth and greater)



S-8

 
Precast Outside Drop Manhole



S-9

 
Inside Drop Manhole



S-10

 
Manhole Coupling Detail



S-11

 
Manhole Flow Channels



S-12

 
Gate Valve and Valve Box Detail



S-13

 
Manual Air Release Valve



S-14

 
Air Release Valve Detail



S-15

 
Offset Air Release Valve Detail



S-16

 
Air Release Valve Access Cover



S-17

 
Automatic Blow Off




 



[Note: To view these images in PDF, click HERE]



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)







 



S-1 - Wye Branch Connection



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-2 - Deep Service Lateral



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-3 - Shallow Service Lateral



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-4 - Two-Way Cleanout



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-5 - Precast Outside Conflict Manhole



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-6 - Precast Shallow Manhole (6'-0" depth and greater)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-7 - Eccentric Manhole (6'-0" depth and greater)



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-8 - Precast Outside Drop Manhole



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-9 - Inside Drop Manhole



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-10 - Manhole Coupling Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-11 - Manhole Flow Channels



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-12 - Gate Valve and Valve Box Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-13 - Manual Air Release Valve



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-14 - Air Release Valve Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-15 - Offset Air Release Valve Detail



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-16 - Air Release Valve Access Cover



Date: February, 2010



 







 



S-17 - Automatic Blow Off



Date: February, 2010



§ 127.55  UTILITY CONFLICT DETAILS.



 

Detail No.
 
Description



WS-1

 
Utility Crossing General Requirements



WS-2

 
Standard Utility Crossing



WS-3

 
Restrained Joint Requirements Combined Vertical Offset Under Conflict



WS-4

 
Restrained Joint Requirements Combined Horizontal Offset Over Conflict



WS-5

 
Flowable Fill Bedding between Crossing Pipes



 



[Note: To view these images in PDF, click HERE]



(Ord. 2010-20, passed 10-4-2010)







 



WS-1 - Utility Crossing General Requirements



Date: February, 2010



 







 



WS-2 - Standard Utility Crossing



Date: February, 2010



 







 



WS-3 - Restrained Joint Requirements Combined Vertical Offset Under Conflict



Date: February, 2010



 







 



WS-4 - Restrained Joint Requirements Combined Horizontal Offset Over Conflict



Date: February, 2010



 







 



WS-5 - Flowable Fill Bedding between Crossing Pipes



Date: February, 2010



CHAPTER 128: BUILDING CODES - ADOPTED



Section



   128.01   Building Code adopted



   128.02   Permits and related fees



§ 128.01  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The Building Code is adopted as the regulations governing the
Construction of all new Buildings and Structures, and all alterations,
additions and repairs in any new or existing Building or Structure in the
City.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 128.02  PERMITS AND RELATED FEES.



   City permit and related fees shall be established and amended by
resolution of the City Commission.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 129: MINIMUM HOUSING



Section



   129.01   Scope and application



   129.02   Construction by court



   129.03   Separate and distinct offenses



   129.04   Compliance with minimum standards



   129.05   Minimum standards for space



   129.06   Minimum standards for light



   129.07   Minimum standards for ventilation



   129.08   Minimum standard for protection against the elements



   129.09   Minimum sanitary standards



   129.10   Minimum standards for heating facilities



   129.11   Additional minimum standards



   129.12   Repairs and installations



   129.13   Minimum standards applicable to lessees and lessors



   129.14   Minimum standards applicable to public lodging
establishments



   129.15   Requirements for premises adjacent to dwelling structures



   129.16   Enforcement



§ 129.01  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   129.01(A)   This Chapter applies to:



   129.01(A)(1)   Every Structure or Building located within the City
that is a Dwelling and is used as a Dwelling or has become unoccupied; and



   129.01(A)(2)   Buildings or Structures other than residential or
Dwelling Units to the extent provided herein.



   129.01(B)   This Chapter establishes minimum standards for the
occupancy of Dwellings and Dwelling Units . It does not replace or modify
standards established by other codes or ordinances for the Construction ,
replacement or repair of Buildings .



   129.01(C)   This Chapter is not intended to regulate in the field
governed by F.S. Chapter 553, or the Building Code .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.02  CONSTRUCTION BY COURT.



   When applicable and whenever possible, a court shall not construe the
Minimum Housing Chapter to conflict with F.S. Chapter 553, or the Building
Code .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.03  SEPARATE AND DISTINCT OFFENSES.



   129.03(A)   Continuing violations.  Each day a violation continues
or is committed shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.



   129.03(B)   Multiple occupant citing.  An Owner, occupant, lessor
or lessee may be cited separately for each occupant of a Dwelling living in
conditions that violate the Minimum Housing Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.04  COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   129.04(A)   No Owner , agent or operator shall occupy, allow another
to occupy or let to another for occupancy a Dwelling Unit t that does not
comply with the minimum standards set forth in §§ 129.05 through 129.13.



   129.04(B)   Every lessee of a Dwelling Unit shall comply with the
minimum standards set forth in § 129.13(A).



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.05  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SPACE.



   129.05(A)   Each Dwelling and Dwelling Unit shall have a minimum
Gross Floor Area of not less than 150 square feet for each occupant.



   129.05(B)(1)   Every Habitable Room in a Dwelling or Dwelling Unit
occupied for sleeping purposes shall have, at a minimum:



   129.05(B)(1)(a)   Gross Floor Area of not less than 70 square feet
and, when occupied by more than one occupant, it shall have a Gross Floor
Area of not less than 50 square feet for each occupant; and



   129.05(B)(1)(b)   A width of eight feet.



   129.05(B)(2)   In determining occupancy of a room used for sleeping
purposes, children ten years old and younger shall be counted as one-half an
occupant.



   129.05(C)   Every Habitable Room in a Dwelling or Dwelling Unit
shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet for at least 50% of
the floor area of the room. Any portion of a Habitable Room having a ceiling
height of five feet or less shall not be included in computing the Gross
Floor Area of the room.



   129.05(D)   Every Dwelling Unit shall have a minimum of 24 square
feet of total shelving in wall or base cabinets for storage of cooking
utensils. Usable storage shelving in a cooking range or under a sink may be
included as meeting this requirement. All cabinet doors shall be properly
maintained in good condition.



   129.05(E)   Every Dwelling or Dwelling Unit shall have a minimum of
12 square feet of floor area of closet space for the first bedroom and six
square feet of floor area of closet space for each additional bedroom.
Kitchen cabinet or pantry space shall not be considered as space meeting this
requirement. All closets shall have a shelf, a rod and a minimum height of
six feet.



   129.05(F)   In calculating the Gross Floor Area of a room to
determine compliance with this section, no space occupied by an accumulation
of stored materials, including but not limited to papers, magazines, books,
clothing, boxes, laundry and supplies, shall be counted as a part of the
Gross Floor Area .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.06  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT.



   129.06(A)   Every Habitable Room, except interior rooms, shall have
at least one window with a minimum total area of not less than 10% of the
floor area of the room or a skylight with a minimum total area of not less
than 15% of the floor area of the room.



   129.06(A)(1)   Windows and skylights shall face directly to the
outdoors.



   129.06(A)(2)   A window shall be deemed not to face directly to the
outdoors, and shall not be included in the required minimum total window
area, if exterior walls of adjacent Buildings or other light-obstructing
Structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a
level above the ceiling of the room in which the window occurs.



   129.06(B)   Every Habitable Room shall contain:



   129.06(B)(1)   At least two separate, properly installed and
operational floor or wall-type electric outlets; or



   129.06(B)(2)   One properly installed and operational floor or
wall-type electric outlet and one properly installed and operational
ceiling-type electric light fixture.



   129.06(C)   Every bathroom, shower room or water closet compartment
shall contain at least one properly installed and operational ceiling or
wall-type electric light fixture.



   129.06(D)   Every hall, stairway and other space or area located
within or on the exterior of a Dwelling or Dwelling Unit shall have
operational electric lighting facilities:



   129.06(D)(1)   Capable of providing not less than one Footcandle of
light throughout the hall, stairway, other space or area; and



   129.06(D)(2)   The availability of light from those facilities shall
be controlled by the occupants at all times.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.07  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR VENTILATION.



   129.07(A)   Every Habitable Room, bathroom, shower room or water
closet compartment shall be ventilated directly to the outdoors. Such
ventilation shall be provided by a window or skylight area capable of being
opened to provide ventilation, or by functioning mechanical ventilation that
complies with the Building Code and other regulatory codes of the State of
Florida, Broward County and the City.



   129.07(B)   Every window or other device capable of providing
ventilation to the outdoors shall be properly fitted with a screen adequate
for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects.



   129.07(C)   For every Dwelling or Dwelling Unit without functioning
air conditioning, each door opening directly to outdoor spaces shall be
equipped with a self-closing screen door capable of providing protection
against mosquitoes, flies and other insects.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.08  MINIMUM STANDARD FOR PROTECTION AGAINST THE ELEMENTS.



   Every Dwelling or Dwelling Unit , including windows, doors and Roofs ,
shall be capable of withstanding penetration by wind, rain, other water,
heat, cold, and smoke or other airborne contaminants.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.09  MINIMUM SANITARY STANDARDS.



   129.09(A)   Dwelling Units.  Each Dwelling or Dwelling Unit, shall
have the following:



   129.09(A)(1)   A minimum of one flush water closet, lavatory basin
and a bathtub or shower;



   129.09(A)(2)   An approved source of Potable Water ;



   129.09(A)(3)   An approved type of kitchen sink; and



   129.09(A)(4)   Adequate receptacles for the storage of Household
Waste .



   129.09(B)   Each kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub and shower
shall be supplied with hot and cold water. The water heating facility shall
be adequate to supply 20 gallons of not less than 120°F water per day for
each occupant.



   129.09(B)(1)   Water heating facilities shall be properly installed,
connected and maintained in a Good State Of Repair.



   129.09(B)(2)   No electric water heater shall be allowed in any
bathroom unless the water heater and all electrical connections are totally
encased in a nonconductive material or the water heater is installed in such
a manner as to avoid any probability of shock hazard.



   129.09(C)   All Plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to
approved water, Sewer or gas systems. Where a Sewer System is not available,
drain lines shall be connected to an approved septic tank.



   129.09(D)   Every Plumbing fixture, water pipe, waste pipe, gas line
and drain line shall be maintained in good, sanitary working condition.



   129.09(E)   Every supplied facility and piece of equipment to be
utilized by a Tenant or occupant, including tenant-owned equipment, shall be
maintained in a safe, sanitary and properly operating condition.



   129.09(F)   Floor surfaces in bathrooms, shower rooms and kitchens
shall be covered with asphalt, vinyl-plastic, rubber tile, ceramic tile,
terrazzo or linoleum or other durable, waterproof, nonabsorbent material, and
such floors shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
No finished flooring material that requires “face nailing” shall be used.



   129.09(G)   Every occupied Dwelling or Dwelling Unit shall have a
properly installed cooking facility consisting of a stove having a minimum of
two top burners, and all necessary Utility connections shall be provided in
each Dwelling or Dwelling Unit for said cooking facility.



   129.09(H)   Every occupied Dwelling or Dwelling Unit shall be kept
free of human or Animal waste.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.10  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR HEATING FACILITIES.



   129.10(A)   Every Dwelling or Dwelling Unit occupied, let or
intended to be let for occupancy shall have adequate space-heating
facilities. A space-heating facility shall be adequate only if it contains
permanent space-heating equipment capable of:



   129.10(A)(1)   Heating two-thirds of all Habitable Rooms to a
minimum air temperature of 68°F to be measured three feet above the floor
when the outside temperature is 45°F; or



   129.10(A)(2)   A Capacity of five BTUs per hour of input per cubic
foot of Habitable Room space within two-thirds of the Habitable Room. The
five BTUs per hour input standard is based on a heating unit with 70% rating
of input to output efficiency; an appropriate correction factor will be
applied when the proposed heating unit exceeds an input to output efficiency
rating of 70%. Heating units supplied on the basis of this calculation shall
otherwise comply with the standards set forth in this Chapter.



   129.10(B)   Every heating facility or device, whether permanent,
portable or temporary, must comply and be maintained in accordance with the
Building Code and other regulatory codes of the State of Florida, Broward
County and the City. Oil heaters, gas heaters, and wood stoves must be
connected to a properly installed vent, said vent conforming to the
provisions of the Building Code .



   129.10(C)   Any portable heating device approved by the Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., or a properly installed fireplace may be used as an
accessory heating unit.



   129.10(D)   Accessory heating units shall be deemed to be
supplementary to a permanent heating facility and shall not be considered
when calculating the adequacy of the permanently installed heating equipment.



   129.10(E)   Only approved accessory heating units shall be used in
any Dwelling or Dwelling Unit .



   129.10(F)   The use of unsafe heating or cooking stoves and the use
of cooking stoves, including ovens, for heating purposes is prohibited.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.11  ADDITIONAL MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   129.11(A)   Gutters and downspouts affixed to any Dwelling or
present on any property adjacent to a Dwelling , where in existence, shall be
maintained in a Good State Of Repair.



   129.11(B)   Inside and outside stairways, porches, balconies,
hallways, corridors and all appurtenances thereto shall be maintained in a
safe condition and capable of supporting the loads set forth in the Building
Code and other regulatory codes of the State of Florida, Broward County and
the City. No stair riser shall exceed eight inches and no stair tread shall
be less than nine inches. Protective railings or handrails shall be required
on any unenclosed Structure over three feet from the ground level and on
every interior or exterior stair or stairwell of more than four risers, and
shall be located in accordance with the requirements of the Building Code .



   129.11(C)   All deteriorating parts and areas shall be properly
maintained and suitably protected from the elements.



   129.11(D)   Chimneys, smoke pipes, flues and ventilating pipes and
ducts shall be maintained in a safe, properly operating condition.



   129.11(E)   Every Plumbing fixture, water pipe, drain, waste pipe,
and gas pipe shall be maintained in a Good State Of Repair, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions.



   129.11(F)   All electrical wiring and accessories shall be
maintained in a Good State Of Repair.



   129.11(G)   All accessory Structures included shall be kept clean
and maintained in reasonably good repair, free from pest infestations.



   129.11(H)   Exterior Premises shall be kept free from excessive
growth of weeds, grass and other flora. The term “excessive” shall be
interpreted as a condition, the existence of which could be detrimental to
the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the Premises or to the
public.



   129.11(I)   Each Dwelling or Dwelling Unit shall provide privacy for
and accessibility to toilet and bath facilities as follows:



   129.11(I)(1)   All water closets, urinals, bathtubs and showers
shall be located in a room or rooms that afford privacy to the user;



   129.11(I)(2)   Rooms containing water closets, urinals, bathtubs or
showers shall be not more than one story removed from the Dwelling Unit of
any occupant sharing the facilities; and



   129.11(I)(3)   Toilet and bath facilities shall be accessible
without going outside of the Building or without going through a Dwelling
Unit of another occupant.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.12  REPAIRS AND INSTALLATIONS.



   Repairs and installations shall be made so as to comply with all
provisions of the Building Code and other regulatory codes of the State of
Florida, Broward County and the City.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.13  MINIMUM STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO LESSEES AND LESSORS.



   129.13(A)   Unless otherwise agreed in writing between a lessee and
lessor of a Dwelling or Dwelling Unit , a lessee shall:



   129.13(A)(1)   Keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of
the Dwelling or Dwelling Unit he or she occupies or controls, including all
equipment, sanitary facilities, yards, courts, driveways, Lawns and Shrubbery;



   129.13(A)(2)   Dispose of Rubbish , Garbage , Lawn and Shrubbery
cuttings, leaves and other waste materials as provided by Law or ordinance.
All Garbage shall be placed in proper disposal facilities or storage
Containers as required in this Chapter;



   129.13(A)(3)   Exterminate and control rodents, vermin and other
pests within the Dwelling or Dwelling Unit he or she occupies or controls;



   129.13(A)(4)   Not allow Animals or pets to be kept in any Dwelling
or Dwelling Unit or on any Premises in such a manner so as to create an
unsanitary condition or a nuisance; and



   129.13(A)(5)   Maintain in a safe, sanitary and proper operating
condition, each facility or piece of equipment owned and utilized by the
lessee.



   129.13(B)   The lessor of a Dwelling , and if applicable, the
lessor’s agent or operator, shall, jointly and severally:



   129.13(B)(1)   Maintain the common, shared or public areas of
Dwellings in a clean and sanitary condition. Common, shared or public areas
shall include yards, courts, driveways, Lawns and Shrubbery;



   129.13(B)(2)   Maintain the exterior Premises so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon; and



   129.13(B)(3)   Control and exterminate rodents, vermin and other
pests in all public or shared areas, and in adjacent areas when infestation
of said areas is caused by the failure of the Owner , his or her agent or
operator to control and exterminate said rodents, vermin and other pests.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.14  MINIMUM STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO PUBLIC LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS.



   Public lodging establishments, including, but not limited to, Hotels ,
Motels, resort condominiums, and roominghouses, shall comply with the
regulations set forth in F.S. Chapter 509.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.15  REQUIREMENTS FOR PREMISES ADJACENT TO DWELLING STRUCTURES.



   The Owner of property adjacent to a Dwelling shall keep such property
free from excessive growth of weeds, grass, and other flora, and Rubbish ,
Trash , Garbage and Refuse .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 129.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Minimum Housing Chapter shall be enforced by a Building Code
Officer as provided in Chapter 31 of the Code .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 130: UNSAFE STRUCTURES



Section



   130.01   Purpose



   130.02   Findings of fact



   130.03   Scope and application



   130.04   Construction by court



   130.05   Unoccupied buildings



   130.06   Unsafe structures



   130.07   Separate and distinct offenses



   130.08   Enforcement



§ 130.01  PURPOSE.



   The Unsafe Structures Chapter is established to provide standards and
requirements for maintenance, repair, closure, disposition and demolition of
Structures or Premises that have, through wear, neglect or use, become
unsafe, unstable or a nuisance to occupants of the Structures or the public
at large. The Unsafe Structures Chapter is also intended to provide standards
for the closure, disposal and demolition of Structures or Premises that have
become unoccupied for a significant period of time. The Unsafe Structures
Chapter is not intended to regulate the field governed by F.S. Chapter 553,
or the Building Code .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 130.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   The City Commission finds that:



   130.02(A)   The Unsafe Structures Chapter is a critical means of
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public by remedying or
eliminating the dangers posed by Structures that have become unoccupied,
unsafe, unstable or a public nuisance;



   130.02(B)   Diligent and strict enforcement of the Unsafe Structures
Chapter is critical to preventing:



   130.02(B)(1)   The dangers posed by the collapse of unsafe or
unstable Structures;



   130.02(B)(2)   Fires, the risk of which is heightened in unsafe
Structures or unoccupied Buildings ;



   130.02(B)(3)   The spread of disease, including but not limited to
tetanus, malaria and West Nile virus;



   130.02(B)(4)   The use of unsafe Structures or unoccupied Buildings
for criminal endeavors, including but not limited to assault, battery, sexual
assault, sexual battery, arson, and drug use; and



   130.02(B)(5)   A decline in property values in areas adjacent to a
Structure that is unoccupied, unsafe, unstable or a public nuisance.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 130.03  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   The Unsafe Structures Chapter applies to Structures that have, through
wear, neglect or misuse, become unsafe, unstable or a nuisance to occupants
of the Structures or the public at large. The Unsafe Structures Chapter may
apply to unoccupied Buildings .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 130.04  CONSTRUCTION BY COURT.



   When applicable and whenever possible, a court shall not construe the
Unsafe Structures Chapter to conflict with F.S. Chapter 553, or the Building
Code .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 130.05  UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS.



   Unoccupied Buildings are Buildings that have not been occupied or used
for a period of 60 days. Owners of unoccupied Buildings shall seal off,
secure and maintain as secured all entrances and openings to the Building .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 130.06  UNSAFE STRUCTURES.



   130.06(A)   Owners shall prevent Structures from becoming unsafe.



   130.06(B)   Owners shall correct physical conditions that render
Structures unsafe as provided by the Building Code and the City Code .



   130.06(C)   A Structure shall be deemed unsafe if:



   130.06(C)(1)   There is substantial accumulation of Debris or other
combustible materials therein;



   130.06(C)(2)   The physical condition of the Structure creates a
hazard with respect to a means of ingress or egress for the purpose of
providing fire protection to the Building or Structure ;



   130.06(C)(3)   There is a falling away, hanging loose or loosening
of the sheet rock, drywall, siding, block, brick, Roof tiles or other
Building materials;



   130.06(C)(4)   There is deterioration or damage to any of the
Structure ’s load-bearing or Roof members;



   130.06(C)(5)   The Structure , or any part thereof, is partially
destroyed;



   130.06(C)(6)   There is water damage to the interior of the
Structure that affects the structural integrity of the Structure or creates
an unsanitary or hazardous condition;



   130.06(C)(7)   There is sagging or leaning out of plumb of any part
of the Structure ;



   130.06(C)(8)   The electrical or mechanical systems have
deteriorated or been damaged to the point of creating a hazardous condition;



   130.06(C)(9)   The Plumbing or sanitary systems have deteriorated or
been damaged to the point of creating an unsanitary or hazardous condition;



   130.06(C)(10)   The Structure has been contaminated or infected with
toxic mold or any other biological contaminant; or



   130.06(C)(11)   There is no approved Potable Water supply for the
required Plumbing fixtures.



   130.06(D)   The Building Official may otherwise declare a Structure
to be unsafe if wear, neglect or misuse has caused a condition that weakens
the structural integrity of the Structure .



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 130.07  SEPARATE AND DISTINCT OFFENSES.



   130.07(A)   Continuing violations.  Each day a condition continues
after the initial citation for the condition shall be considered a separate
and distinct citable offense.



   130.07(B)   Multiple citations.  An Owner may be cited separately
for each condition which renders the Owner’s Structure unsafe.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 130.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Unsafe Structures Chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Official.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 131: FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   131.01   Intent and purpose



   131.02   City to administer



   131.03   Authority to use Rights-Of-Way



   131.04   Permits to work in Rights-Of-Way



   131.05   Rights-Of-Way permit fees



   131.06   Work without a permit



   131.07   Subsurface utility engineering research



   131.08   Location of facilities



   131.09   Least disruptive technology



   131.10   Exceptions



   131.11   Removal and relocation of facilities



   131.12   Rights-Of-Way restoration



   131.13   Protection of facilities



   131.14   General obligations of permittees



   131.15   Enforcement of permit obligations



   131.16   Indemnification



   131.17   Statutory exceptions



Poles, Wires and Conduits



   131.30   Authority of City to direct placing and removing



   131.31   Removal of condemned poles



Additional Provisions Relating to All Right-Of-Way Users



   131.40   Termination



   131.41   Continuing police powers



   131.42   Civil penalties and non-exclusive remedies for violations



   131.43   No warranties or representations by City



   131.44   Preemption



§ 131.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The City Commission finds and declares that:



   131.01(A)   The City has acquired, built and maintained
Rights-Of-Way to promote the general health, safety and well-being of its
citizens;



   131.01(B)   Utilities locate their facilities in the Rights-Of-Way
to ensure that all citizens receive adequate Utility service;



   131.01(C)   Frequent Construction in the Rights-Of-Way by Utilities
and other users contributes to early deterioration and degradation of the
Rights-Of-Way ;



   131.01(D)   In response to the foregoing, and to protect and limit
deterioration of the Rights-Of-Way , the City hereby adopts uniform
regulations for the Construction of facilities in the Rights-Of-Way ;



   131.01(E)   The regulations embodied herein have been made as broad
as possible to serve as standards of quality to maintain the necessary
uniformity in the utilization of Rights-Of-Way ;



   131.01(F)   Some Right-Of-Way users are under Franchises with the
City, others are not. It is the intent of this Chapter that it apply to all
users of the Rights-Of-Way including those under a City Franchise and those
for whom no Franchise is required, but excluding providers of Communications
Services and Personal Wireless Services as defined in Chapter 1 of this Code.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.02  CITY TO ADMINISTER.



   The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration of this
Chapter.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.03  AUTHORITY TO USE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   131.03(A)   Franchise requirement.  Each Person who occupies, uses,
or seeks to occupy or use, the Rights-Of-Way or has any facilities located in
the Rights-Of-Way, or seeks to have facilities located in any Rights-Of-Way,
shall be required to obtain a Franchise from the City unless otherwise
required by Law. This requirement shall apply to the Owner of such facilities
and not a contractor or agent of the Owner.



   131.03(B)   Permit requirement.  No Person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities
or any part thereof located in any Rights-Of-Way without first being granted
a permit by the City. Nothing herein shall be construed to require additional
information by an agent or contractor of a permittee where the permittee has
already complied with this Section. Nothing herein shall be construed to
repeal or amend any provision of any Law, this Code, or City policy
permitting Persons to plant or maintain Medians or Swales in the area of
Rights-Of-Way between their property and the Street curb. Persons planting or
maintaining Medians or Swales shall not be deemed to use or occupy the
Rights-Of-Way, and shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any
other requirements for planting or maintaining such Medians or Swales under
this Chapter so long as they are in full compliance with any other applicable
provision of Law.



   131.03(C)   Coordination with City.  Each Person shall coordinate
with the City, to the extent feasible and practical, its Construction of
facilities, in order to reduce the frequency of Construction, Excavation and
obstructions in the Rights-Of-Way.



   131.03(D)   Diagrams.  Each Person shall, to the extent feasible,
provide to the City accurate record diagrams indicating the horizontal and
approximate vertical location, relative to the boundaries of the
Rights-Of-Way, of all facilities which it owns or over which it has control
and which are located in any Rights-Of-Way. This information shall be
provided with the specificity and in the CAD format required by the City or,
if different, the CAD format used by the Person, provided that the City can
import such diagrams into its format for inclusion in the mapping system used
by the City. Record drawings shall be certified by a professional Engineer or
land surveyor registered by the State of Florida, except for such engineers
or surveyors who may be exempt from registration by Florida Statutes. For
facilities installed prior to October 16, 2000, the City shall accept record
diagrams in a non-CAD format, and the Person shall not be required to prepare
new diagrams of existing facilities.



   131.03(E)   Non-permitted facilities.  If any non-permitted
facilities are found in the Rights-Of-Way and no Person claims ownership
within 45 calendar days after written notification by the City of the
location of such facilities, such facilities shall be deemed Abandoned and
the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at Law or in equity,
including but not limited to taking possession of such facilities.



   131.03(F)   Discontinuance and Abandonment.  A permittee who has
determined to discontinue all operations in the City must notify the City of
the assumption by another Person of ownership of such facilities, obtain
permission from the City to Abandon such facilities in place or provide the
City with an acceptable plan for disposition of such facilities. If a
permittee fails to comply with this subsection, such facilities shall be
deemed Abandoned and the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at
Law or in equity, including but not limited to taking possession of the
facilities.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.04  PERMITS TO WORK IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   131.04(A)   Permit requirement.  Except as otherwise provided in
the Code, no Person may construct in any Rights-Of-Way without first having
obtained a permit from the City.



   131.04(B)   A permit will allow the holder to construct in that part
of the Rights-Of-Way described in such permit and to hinder free and open
passage over the specified portion of the Rights-Of-Way by placing facilities
described therein, subject to applicable permit terms.



   131.04(C)   A permit is valid only for the dates and the area of
Rights-Of-Way specified in the permit, unless modified by the City.



   131.04(D)   Each Registrant shall coordinate with the City, to the
extent feasible and practical, its Construction of facilities, in order to
reduce the frequency of Construction , Excavation and obstructions in the
Rights-Of-Way .



   131.04(E)   Permits issued under this Chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for
inspection by CityInspectors and authorized City personnel.



   131.04(F)   All permit requests shall be in the form specified by
the City and shall contain at a minimum:



   131.04(F)(1)   Evidence that the Person requesting the permit is a
permittee or proof that the Person requesting the permit has authority to
apply for a permit on behalf of a permittee.



   131.04(F)(2)   A maintenance of Traffic plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with
uniform Traffic control standards as designated by the City, to prevent
injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular Traffic.



   131.04(F)(3)   If the Person requesting the permit is proposing to
install facilities on new Poles , a statement that it is not feasible to
locate its facilities on existing UtilityPoles along the proposed route or
beneath the surface and a summary of the factual basis for the statement.



   131.04(F)(4)   If the Person requesting the permit is proposing an
underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed
within the Rights-Of-Way :



   131.04(F)(4)(a)   A statement that the permittee has verified that
it is not feasible to locate its facilities in existing ducts and conduits.



   131.04(F)(4)(b)   The location, depth, size and quantity of proposed
new ducts or conduits; and



   131.04(F)(4)(c)   A description of the excess space that may be
available for use by other utilities after installation of the new facilities



   131.04(F)(5)   A preliminary Construction schedule and estimated
completion date.



   131.04(F)(6)   Name, address and telephone number of the Person’s
primary contact Person and of the Person to contact in case of an Emergency.



   131.04(G)   Except in the case of an Emergency, no permit will be
granted to any Person:



   131.04(G)(1)   Required to apply for a permit who has not done so;



   131.04(G)(2)   Not in substantial compliance with the requirements
of this Chapter or, if applicable to management of the City’s Rights-Of-Way
, with the requirements of any other provision of this Code of which the
Person has received notice;



   131.04(G)(3)   With an outstanding debt which is due and payable to
the City arising out of the requirements of this Chapter as they relate to
the City’s Rights-Of-Way . This provision shall not apply where the City is
legally prohibited from requiring payment of a debt as a condition of issuing
a permit.



   131.04(G)(4)   Where there exists grounds for the revocation of a
permit, until such Person has corrected any such failure or default.



   131.04(H)   The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the Person requesting the
permit thereunder in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
to ensure the structural integrity of the Rights-Of-Way , to protect the
property and safety of other users of the Rights-Of-Way , and to minimize the
disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public.



   131.04(I)   The permittee will comply with all reasonable
requirements of the City with respect to the use or occupation of the
City’s Rights-Of-Way as adopted from time to time by ordinance or
resolution.



   131.04(J)   City’s right to inspect.  The City shall have the
right to inspect the permittee’s system located In The Public Rights-Of-Way
and its installation construction and maintenance to insure compliance with
the terms of the permit.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.05  RIGHTS-OF-WAY PERMIT FEES.



   131.05(A)   Established.  Permit fees shall be established by
resolution of the City Commission.



   131.05(B)   Payment of permit fees.  No permit shall be issued
without prior payment of permit fees where required.



   131.05(C)   Non-refundable fees.  Permit fees that were paid for a
permit that the City has revoked for a breach are not refundable.



   131.05(D)   Joint submissions.  Persons requesting permits are
encouraged to make joint submissions for permits to work in the Rights-Of-Way
at the same place and time.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.06  WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   131.06(A)   Non-Emergency situations.  Except in the case of an
Emergency or in the case of Routine Maintenance as defined in Chapter 1 of
this Code, any Person who constructs in Rights-Of-Way without a permit must
subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for said permit,
deposit with the City the fees necessary to correct any damage to the
Rights-Of-Way and comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter.



   131.06(B)   Emergency situations.  Each permittee shall promptly
notify the City of any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be
an Emergency and which would require construction other than routine
maintenance. The permittee may then proceed to take whatever action is
necessary to respond to the Emergency. If such Emergency will require work in
the Rights-Of-Way and occurs during times other than regular business hours,
the permittee may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to
respond to the Emergency and shall promptly notify the City of such actions
as soon as possible. In the event that the City becomes aware of an Emergency
regarding a permittee’s facilities, the City shall, where practicable,
attempt to contact the local representative of each permittee affected, or
potentially affected, by the Emergency. In any event, the City may take
whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the Emergency, the
reasonable cost of which shall be borne by the permittee whose facilities
occasioned the Emergency. Each permittee shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any facilities that it or its facilities damages at any time, or
that are damaged during an Emergency caused by the permittee or its
facilities except where the damage to another permittee’s facilities is
caused by the other permittee’s failure to comply with the requirements of
F.S. § 556.105.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.07  SUBSURFACE UTILITY ENGINEERING RESEARCH.



   131.07(A)   Prior to commencing the Construction of Underground
Facilities in the Rights-Of-Way , a permittee shall conduct whatever
subsurface engineering research is reasonable and necessary to determine the
location of existing underground Structures so as to prevent the same from
being disturbed by the permittee’s Construction . At a minimum the
permittee shall comply with the procedures set forth in F.S. § 556.105.



   131.07(B)   The permittee shall bear the cost of compliance with
this Section.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.08  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   131.08(A)   The City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the
placement of new or additional facilities within the Rights-Of-Way if there
is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests of permittees to
occupy and use the Rights-Of-Way . The City shall strive to the extent
possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the Rights-Of-Way
, but may, to the extent permitted by law, prohibit or limit placement of new
or additional facilities in any Rights-Of-Way , as required because of
condition of the Rights-Of-Way , the protection of existing facilities in the
Rights-Of-Way , and future City plans for public improvements and Development
projects which have been determined by the City Commission to be in the
public interest.



   131.08(B)   It is understood that there may be within the City
various Utility easements or Rights-Of-Way which the City does not have the
unqualified right to authorize permittees to use. Therefore, in granting
permits, the City does not warrant or represent as to any particular easement
or Right-Of-Way or portion thereof, that it has the right to authorize the
permittee to construct thereon.



   131.08(C)   To the extent required by current Florida Administrative
Code regulations, a permittee shall install its facilities underground in
areas where existing power or Communications Service Facilities are
underground, or in areas where no facilities are installed above ground. In
areas where existing communications or power facilities are installed above
ground, a permittee may install such facilities above or underground in its
discretion.



   131.08(D)   Permittees shall not place any fixtures or facilities
where the same would interfere with any Utility or provider of Communications
Services equipment. Permittees shall locate lines and equipment in such a
manner as not to interfere unnecessarily with the usual travel on Streets,
other Utilities providers and the rights of adjacent property Owners .



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.09  LEAST DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGY.



   All Construction or maintenance of facilities shall be accomplished in
the manner that will result in the least amount of damage and disruption to
the Rights-Of-Way . Trenchless Technology shall be required in all
non-pervious areas for all users.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.10  EXCEPTIONS.



   The City may grant an exception to any requirement of this Chapter if a
permittee demonstrates, with written evidence satisfactory to the City, that
the exception will not create any threat to the public health, safety or
welfare, or the operations of other Utilities ; and either



   131.10(A)   The increased economic burden and the potential adverse
impact on the permittee’s Construction schedule resulting from the strict
enforcement of the requirements of such sections actually or effectively
prohibits the ability of the permittee to provide Utility services in
violation of federal Law; or



   131.10(B)   The requirement unreasonably discriminates against the
permittee in favor of another Person in violation of federal Law.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.11  REMOVAL AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   131.11(A)   Unless otherwise provided by applicable Law, the
permittee must promptly, permanently remove or relocate or both, its
facilities in the Rights-Of-Way whenever the City reasonably requires, with
advance written notice, such removal or relocation or both, and shall restore
the Rights-Of-Way to the same condition as they existed prior to said removal
or relocation or both. Unless otherwise provided by Law, the costs associated
therewith shall be borne by the permittee.



   131.11(B)   If a permittee fails to commence removal or relocation
of its facilities as designated by the City, within 30 calendar days of the
issuance of the City’s removal order, or if a permittee fails to
substantially complete such removal or relocation, including all associated
repair of the Rights-Of-Way of the City, within 12 months thereafter, the
City shall have the right to authorize any work to be done to effect the
removal or relocation or both of the facilities. Unless otherwise provided by
statute, the costs associated therewith shall be borne by the permittee.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.12  RIGHTS-OF-WAY RESTORATION.



   131.12(A)   Permittee shall restore the Rights-Of-Way or any part
thereof, including any Landscaping therein, affected by any work or
facilities of the permittee to their condition prior to the permittee’s
Construction therein.



   131.12(B)   If a permittee fails to restore the Rights-Of-Way as
required in subsection 131.12(A) above, within 20 calendar days of a written
demand by the City to do so, the City may restore the Rights-Of-Way itself,
and the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 calendar days of
billing. Any written demand herein shall be deemed received five calendar
days after the date postmarked or on the date of delivery if delivered by
hand-delivery.



   131.12(C)   The permittee shall perform the work according to the
standards and with the materials specified by the City. The City shall have
the authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the Restoration. The City
in exercising this authority shall be guided by the following standards and
considerations:



   131.12(C)(1)   The number, size, depth and duration of the
Excavations, disruptions or damage to the Rights-Of-Way ;



   131.12(C)(2)   The Traffic volume carried by the Rights-Of-Way ;



   131.12(C)(3)   The character of the neighborhood surrounding the
Rights-Of-Way ;



   131.12(C)(4)   The condition of the Rights-Of-Way prior to the
Excavation ;



   131.12(C)(5)   The remaining life-expectancy of the Rights-Of-Way
affected by the Excavation ;



   131.12(C)(6)   Whether the relative cost of the method of
Restoration to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of
an accelerated depreciation of the Rights-Of-Way that would otherwise result
from the Excavation , disturbance or damage to the Rights-Of-Way ; and



   131.12(C)(7)   The likelihood that the particular method of
Restoration would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the
Rights-Of-Way that would otherwise take place.



   131.12(D)   The permittee shall guarantee its Restoration work and
shall maintain the same and correct any improper Construction at its sole
cost for 12 months following its completion. During this 12-month period, it
shall, upon notification from the City, correct all Restoration work to the
extent necessary using the method required by the City. Said work shall be
completed within 20 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.13  PROTECTION OF FACILITIES.



   Unless otherwise provided by applicable Law, when the City performs
work in the Rights-Of-Way and such work affects a Registrant ’s facilities,
the Registrant shall make such adjustments to its facilities as may be
required by the City. Unless otherwise provided by applicable Law, the costs
associated with any City work reasonably necessary to protect the Registrant
’s facilities will be billed to that Registrant and must be paid within 30
calendar days from the date of billing. In the event that Registrant fails to
adjust its facilities as required, the City may do such work as is necessary.
Unless otherwise provided by statute, the costs associated therewith will be
billed to that Registrant and must be paid within 30 calendar days from the
date of billing. The City shall give reasonable, and where practicable, prior
written notice to a Registrant of any work that involves maintaining,
supporting, or moving a Registrant ’s facilities.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.14  GENERAL OBLIGATIONS OF PERMITTEES.



   131.14(A)   The Construction performed in the Rights-Of-Way shall be
done in conformance with specifications as promulgated by the City and set
forth in any and all applicable codes. Any change in the City’s
specifications or codes shall be duly noticed, as required by Law.



   131.14(B)   Within five calendar days of the time the work under any
permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the City.



   131.14(C)   The permittee shall make the work site available to the
City and to all others as authorized by Law for inspection at all reasonable
times during the execution and upon completion of the work.



   131.14(D)   Obtaining a permit does not relieve permittee of its
duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to
pay all fees required by any other city, county, state, or federal rules,
Laws or regulations.



   131.14(E)   Except in the case of an Emergency, no
Rights-Of-WayConstruction may be performed when climatic conditions are
unreasonable for such work.



   131.14(F)   A permittee shall not so obstruct Rights-Of-Way in a
manner that will interfere with the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways.



   131.14(G)   Private vehicles may not be parked within or adjacent to
a permit area. Vehicles and machinery necessary for permitted Construction
work will be allowed to be parked in or adjacent to the permit area during
periods when they are in use. No such vehicles shall remain in the permit
area when they are not in use unless specifically authorized in the permit.



   131.14(H)   Prior to any Excavation in the Rights-Of-Way for
Construction , installation, repair or maintenance, the permittee shall call
to locate any underground equipment in accordance with F.S. Chapter 556. All
permittees shall be members of the Sunshine State One Call of Florida, Inc.
or any successor alert and warning system to protect and locate its
underground equipment.



   131.14(I)   Construction standards.  A permittee shall construct,
maintain, install, remove and/or repair its facilities in the Rights-Of-Way
in compliance with all applicable Construction standards as established by
all local, State or federal Law. Permittee shall use and exercise due
caution, care, skill and expertise in performing work in the Rights-Of-Way
and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard the work site areas. At all
times, permittee shall keep the work site areas in a clean and secure manner
and prevent unnecessary risk of injury to workers, City employees and members
of the public.



   131.14(J)   Installation and Construction schedule; inspections. 
In the interest of the public’s health, safety and welfare, permittees
shall cooperate with the City in coordinating the use of the Rights-Of-Way.
Upon request by the City, a permittee shall coordinate work under a permit
with any other Construction, installation or repair that may be occurring or
soon scheduled to occur in the subject Rights-Of-Way and reasonably alter its
Construction schedule as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and
disturbance in the Rights-Of-Way.



   131.14(K)   Maintenance.  A permittee shall maintain its facilities
in the Rights-Of-Way in a safe condition.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.15  ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATIONS.



   131.15(A)   The City may order the suspension of work under a permit
and ultimately may revoke any permit, without refunding any fees, in the
event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any condition of
the permit. The types of substantial breach by permittee may include, but are
not limited to:



   131.15(A)(1)   The violation of any material provision of the permit;



   131.15(A)(2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision
of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or
deceit upon the City or its citizens;



   131.15(A)(3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the process
of permittee’s request for a permit;



   131.15(A)(4)   The failure to maintain and protect pedestrian and
vehicular Traffic;



   131.15(A)(5)   The failure to properly restore the Rights-Of-Way ; or



   131.15(A)(6)   The failure to correct a violation of the
permittee’s obligations under this Chapter within the specified time of an
order to do so issued by the City.



   131.15(B)   If the City determines that the permittee has committed
a substantial breach of a term or condition of the permit, the City shall
make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand
shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the
permit. Further, a substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the City
to place additional or revised conditions on the permit.



   131.15(C)   Within five calendar days of receiving notification of
the breach, permittee shall contact the City with a plan, acceptable to the
City, for its correction. Permittee’s failure to so contact the City, or
the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee’s
failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for
revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s failure to so contact the
City, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or
permittee’s failure to implement the approved plan, shall be cause for the
City to reject any further permit requests until it is cured to the City’s
satisfaction.



   131.15(D)   If a permittee works in the Rights-Of-Way without a
permit, permittee’s permit may be revoked and the permittee shall not be
allowed further permits for one full year, except for Emergency repairs and
service requirements as mandated by State or federal regulations.



   131.15(E)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also
reimburse the City for the City’s reasonable costs, including Restoration
costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred
in connection with such revocation.



   131.15(F)   The City may issue an immediate stop work order where
the permittee’s Construction poses a serious threat to the health, safety
or welfare of the public until such time as such serious threat has abated.
Upon issuance of such order the permittee shall immediately cease all work in
the Right-Of-Way except that the permittee shall take all actions necessary
to clean and secure all work areas and, to prevent any damage or degradation
of City property or any facilities in the Rights-Of-Way .



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.16  INDEMNIFICATION.



   131.16(A)   A permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless
and at City’s option, pay for an attorney selected by City, to defend the
City and the City’s consultants, Engineers , attorneys and assigns and
their officials, employees and agents (collectively referred to as
“indemnities”) and each of them from and against all loss, costs,
penalties, fines, damages, claims, expenses (including attorneys’ fees) or
liabilities (collectively referred to as “liabilities”) by reason of any
injury to or death of any Person or damage to or destruction or loss of any
property arising out of, resulting from, or in connection with:



   131.16(A)(1)   The performance or non-performance of the services
contemplated by this Chapter which is or is alleged to be directly or
indirectly caused, in whole or in part, by any act, omission, default or
negligence (whether active or passive) of the permittee or its employees,
agents or subcontractors (collectively referred to as “permittees”),
regardless of whether it is, or is alleged to be, caused in whole or in part
(whether joint, concurrent or contributing) by any act, omission, default or
negligence (whether active or passive) of the Indemnities, or any of them; or



   131.16(A)(2)   The failure of the permittee to comply with any of
the paragraphs herein or the failure of the permittee to conform to statutes,
ordinances, or other regulations or requirements of any governmental
authority, federal or State, in connection with the actions taken under this
Chapter.



   131.16(B)   The indemnification obligations under this Chapter shall
not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages,
compensation, or benefits payable by or for the permittee and/or Persons
employed or utilized by the permittee, in the performance of the actions
taken under this Chapter, under any insurance required by this Chapter
including, but not limited to, workers’ compensation acts, disability
benefit acts, or other Employee benefit acts.



   131.16(C)   The obligations of the permittee under this Chapter
shall not extend to the liability of the consultant, the consultant’s
consultants, and agents and employees or any of them arising out of:



   131.16(C)(1)   The preparation or approval of maps, drawings,
opinions, reports, surveys, change orders, designs or specifications; or



   131.16(C)(2)   The giving of or the failure to give directions or
instructions by the consultant, the consultant’s consultants, and agents
and employees of any of them provided such giving or failure to give is the
primary cause of the injury or damage.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.17  STATUTORY EXCEPTIONS.



   No requirement set forth in this Chapter shall apply to any Utility
that is exempted from complying with such a requirement under State or
federal Law or regulation.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



POLES, WIRES AND CONDUITS



§ 131.30  AUTHORITY OF CITY TO DIRECT PLACING AND REMOVING.



   To the extent permitted by Law, it shall be within the authority of the
City to so direct the placing of Poles and wires in the Streets, alleys and
public places in the City that the same shall cause as little obstruction as
possible, either to public travel or public use of such thoroughfares or to
private use and enjoyment of adjacent property. The City shall have authority
to compel the removal of unnecessary or unsafe Poles to the extent permitted
by Law.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.31  REMOVAL OF CONDEMNED POLES.



   Any Person or company owning and using any such Poles who shall fail or
refuse, after five days’ notice from the City, to remove any Pole deemed by
the City unsuitable, unsafe or improperly located or the location of which
the City shall require to be changed, shall be considered a Violator of this
Chapter and subject to suitable penalty by the court, and the erection or use
of any Poles rejected or condemned by the City shall subject the offender,
upon conviction, to the penalty provided in F.S. § 162.62.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ALL RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS



§ 131.40  TERMINATION.



   131.40(A)   The City may declare a forfeiture in termination of, and
revoke and cancel all rights granted under this Chapter including any
permits, registration, or user agreement where applicable, if:



   131.40(A)(1)   A federal or State authority suspends, denies, or
revokes a permittee’s certification to provide services;



   131.40(A)(2)   The permittee’s use of the Public Rights-Of-Way
presents a danger to the general public and other users of the Public
Rights-Of-Way ; or



   131.40(A)(3)   The permittee has Abandoned its system.



   131.40(B)   Prior to such termination by the City resulting from a
violation by the permittee of any of the provisions of this Section, the
provider shall be served with a written notice setting forth all matters
pertinent to such violation, and describing the action of the City with
respect thereto. The permittee shall then have 60 calendar days after service
of such notice within which to cure the violation, or within which to present
a plan, satisfactory to the City, to accomplish the same. In the event of
such termination, the permittee shall, within a reasonable time following
demand by the City, remove or Abandon its facilities and take such steps as
are necessary to render every portion of the system remaining within the
Public Rights-Of-Way of the City safe, and shall thereupon be deemed to have
Abandoned same in its entirety; and the same shall thereupon become the sole
property of the City without payment to the provider. If the City agrees to
the Abandonment , the permittee shall incur, from that time forward, no
future obligations with respect to the facilities.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.41  CONTINUING POLICE POWERS.



   The permittee shall at all times during the life of its permits and/or
user agreement with the City be subject to all lawful exercise of the police
power of the City and to all lawful non-discriminatory regulations as the
City subsequently enacts based on its existing police powers or additional
powers given it in the future.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.42  CIVIL PENALTIES AND NON-EXCLUSIVE REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   131.42(A)   Pursuant to F.S. Chapter 162, in addition to any other
judicial or administrative remedies or penalties provided by Law, rule,
regulation or ordinance, any Person who violates any of the provisions of
this Chapter, any lawful cease or desist or stop work order of the City, any
notice to correct a violation or any assurance of voluntary compliance, or
any other lawful order of the City, or any condition, limitation or
restriction on the permission granted a provider under this Chapter to occupy
the City’s Rights-Of-Way , shall be subject to the judicial or
administrative imposition and recovery of a civil penalty in an amount of not
more than $250.00 per first offense and up to $500.00 for repeat violations.
If any violation of this Chapter is judicially determined to have caused
irreparable injury, then the Violator shall be subject to a civil penalty of
not more than $5,000.00. Each day during any portion of which a violation
occurs or continues to occur constitutes a separate offense. Such monies
recovered by the City shall be deposited in a separate City fund to use
exclusively for enforcement of this Chapter. This Section shall be enforced
in a manner consistent with F.S. Chapter 162.



   131.42(B)   It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any of
the provisions of this Chapter. In addition to any other judicial or
administrative remedies provided by Law, rule, regulation, ordinance, or this
Chapter, the City shall have the following judicial remedies available to
enforce the provisions of this Chapter:



   131.42(B)(1)   The City may institute a civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to seek temporary or permanent declaratory or
injunctive relief to enforce compliance with or prohibit the violation of any
of the provisions of this Chapter.



   131.42(B)(2)   The City may institute a civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction or an appropriate administrative proceeding to impose
and recover the civil penalties referred to in subsection 131.42(A) above.



   131.42(B)(3)   The City may institute a civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to seek restitution and other equitable relief to
recover any sums and costs expended by the City for tracing, investigating,
preventing, controlling, abating or remedying any violation of any of the
provisions of this Chapter.



   131.42(C)   The City may recover its attorneys’ fees in any civil
action instituted hereunder in which it substantially prevails.



   131.42(D)   All judicial and administrative remedies in this Chapter
are independent and cumulative.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.43  NO WARRANTIES OR REPRESENTATIONS BY CITY.



   The City makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness
or suitability of its property for the installation of the permittees, cables
or conduits or equipment and any performance of work or costs incurred by the
permittee or provisions of services shall be at the permittee’s sole risk
and expense.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 131.44  PREEMPTION.



   In the event any provision of this ordinance is specifically preempted,
or judicially determined to be preempted by State or federal Law, then the
preempted provision shall automatically be deemed null and void and the
superseding provision of State or federal Law shall prevail.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 132:  PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGULATIONS FOR COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
PROVIDERS



Section



   132.01   Intent and purpose



   132.02 through 132.09  Reserved



   132.10   Registration for placing or maintaining communications
facilities in public Rights-Of-Way



   132.11   Placement or maintenance of a communications facility in
public Rights-Of-Way



   132.12   Compensation for use of Rights-Of-Way



   132.13   Suspension of permits



   132.14   Appeals



   132.15   Conditional use of public Rights-Of-Way



   132.16   Termination of registration



   132.17   Transfer of control, sale or assignment of assets



   132.18   Indemnification



   132.19   Insurance



   132.20   Construction bond



   132.21   Security fund



   132.22   Reports and records; inspections



   132.23   Abandonment of a communications facility



   132.24   Administration



   132.25   Enforcement remedies



   132.26   Force majeure



   132.27   Reservation of rights



§ 132.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   132.01(A)   It is the intent of the City to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare by:



   132.01(A)(1)   Providing for the placement and maintenance of
Communications FacilitiesIn The Public Rights-Of-Way within the City;



   132.01(A)(2)   Adopting and administering reasonable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with State and federal Law, including F.S. §
337.401 and §§ 610.102 – 610.117, the City’s home-rule authority, and
in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of
1996 and other federal and State law;



   132.01(A)(3)   Establishing reasonable rules and regulations
necessary to manage the placement and maintenance of Communications
FacilitiesIn The Public Rights-Of-Way by all Communications Services
Providers, Cable and Video Service Providers , and certificate holders; and



   132.01(A)(4)   Minimizing disruption to the Public Rights-Of-Way .



   132.01(B)   In regulating its Public Rights-Of-Way , the City shall
be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and State Laws.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§§ 132.02 THROUGH 132.09  RESERVED.



§ 132.10  REGISTRATION FOR PLACING OR MAINTAINING COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   132.10(A)   Registration required.  A Communications Services
Provider, Cable or Video Service Provider or certificate holder that desires
to place or maintain a Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way in the
City shall first register with the City in accordance with this Section.
Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this Chapter, a Registrant
may place or maintain a Communications FacilityIn The Public Rights-Of-Way.



   132.10(B)   Scope of registration.  A registration shall not convey
any title, equitable or legal, In The Public Rights-Of-Way. Registration
under this Chapter governs only the placement or maintenance of
Communications FacilitiesIn Public Rights-Of-Way. Registration does not
excuse a Communications Services Provider, Cable or Video Service Provider
from obtaining appropriate access or PoleAttachment agreements before
locating its facilities on the City’s or another Person’s facilities.
Registration does not excuse a Communications Services Provider, Cable or
Video Service Provider from complying with all applicable Law, including City
ordinances, codes or regulations, including this Section.



   132.10(C)   Required information.  Each Communications Services
Provider, Cable or Video Service Provider that desires to place or maintain a
Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way in the City shall file a
single registration with the City that shall include the following
information:



   132.10(C)(1)   Name of the Applicant ;



   132.10(C)(2)   Name, address and telephone number of the Applicant
’s primary contact Person in connection with the registration and of the
Person to contact in case of an Emergency;



   132.10(C)(3)   A copy of federal or State certification authorizing
the Applicant to do business in the State of Florida and to provide service
in the City;



   132.10(C)(4)   Acknowledgment that Applicant has received and
reviewed a copy of this Chapter, and, when applicable, the current
Communications Services tax rate established by the City;



   132.10(C)(5)   Evidence of the insurance coverage and submission of
a security fund when required by this Section.



   132.10(D)   Effectiveness.  The City Manager shall review the
information submitted by the Applicant. If the Applicant submits information
in accordance with subsection 132.10(C), the registration shall be effective
and the City shall notify the Applicant of the effectiveness of registration
in writing. The effectiveness of a registration shall not relieve the
Applicant of the obligation to obtain any and all necessary permits before
any work is commenced If the City determines that the information has not
been submitted in accordance with subsection 132.10(C) above, the City shall
notify the Applicant in writing of the non-effectiveness of registration, and
reasons for the non-effectiveness. The City shall so notify an Applicant
within 30 calendar days after receipt of registration information from the
Applicant.



   132.10(E)   Cancellation.  A Registrant may cancel a registration
upon written notice to the City that the Registrant will no longer place or
maintain any Communications FacilitiesIn Public Rights-Of-Way and will no
longer need to obtain permits to perform work In The Public Rights-Of-Way. A
Registrant cannot cancel a registration if the Registrant continues to place
or maintain any Communications FacilitiesIn Public Rights-Of-Way.



   132.10(F)   Nonexclusive registration.  Registration shall be
nonexclusive. Registration shall not establish any right or priority to place
or maintain a Communications Facility in any particular area In Public
Rights-Of-Way within the CityRegistrants are expressly subject to any future
amendment to or replacement of this Chapter and further subject to any
additional City ordinances, as well as any State or federal Laws that may be
enacted.



   132.10(G)   Renewal and change of registration information.  By
April 1 of even numbered years, a Registrant shall renew its registration in
accordance with the registration requirements in this Chapter. Within 30
calendar days of any change in the information required to be submitted
pursuant to subsection 132.10(C), a Registrant shall provide updated
information to the City. If no information in the then-existing registration
has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure
to renew a registration may result in the City restricting the issuance of
additional permits until the Registrant has complied with the registration
requirements of this Chapter.



   132.10(H)   Permit required.  In accordance with applicable City
ordinances, codes or regulations and this Chapter, a permit shall be required
of a Communications Services Provider, Cable or Video Service Provider that
desires to place a Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way. An
effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit.
Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting requirements shall
continue to apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a Registrant
having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.11  PLACEMENT OR MAINTENANCE OF A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY IN PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   132.11(A)   Compliance with State and local Law.  Registrant agrees
at all times to comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the
State statutes and City ordinances, codes and regulations in placing or
maintaining a Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way. A Registrant
shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of
the City.



   132.11(B)   Permits.  A Registrant shall not commence to place a
Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way until all applicable permits
have been issued by the City and the Registrant has complied with all
applicable processes required by City or other appropriate authority, except
in the case of an Emergency. Registrant shall provide prompt notice to the
City of the placement or maintenance of a Communications FacilityIn Public
Rights-Of-Way in the event of an Emergency. Registrant acknowledges that as a
condition of granting such permits, the City may impose reasonable rules or
regulations governing the placement or maintenance of a Communications
FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of
Public Rights-Of-Way specifically identified in the permit. The City may
issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as Routine
Maintenance and repair activities, which may otherwise require individual
permits or may impose lesser requirements.



   132.11(C)   Construction proposal required.  As part of any permit
application to place a new or replace an existing Communications FacilityIn
Public Rights-Of-Way, the Registrant shall provide a proposal for
Construction of the Communications Facility that sets forth at least the
following:



   132.11(C)(1)   An engineering plan signed and sealed by a Florida
Registered Professional Engineer , or prepared by a Person who is exempt from
such registration requirements as provided in F.S. § 471.003, identifying
the location of the proposed facility, including a description of the
facilities to be installed, where it is to be located, and the approximate
size of facilities and equipment that will be located In Public Rights-Of-Way
;



   132.11(C)(2)   A description of the manner in which the facility
will be installed (i.e. anticipated Construction methods and/or techniques);



   132.11(C)(3)   A maintenance of Traffic plan for any disruption or
obstruction of the Public Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.11(C)(4)   Information on the ability of the Public
Rights-Of-Way to accommodate the proposed facility, if available (such
information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the
extent obtained from other Persons with facilities In The Public
Rights-Of-Way );



   132.11(C)(5)   If appropriate given the facility proposed, an
estimate of the cost of Restoration to the Public Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.11(C)(6)   The timetable for Construction of the project or each
phase thereof, and the areas of the City which will be affected; and



   132.11(C)(7)   Such additional information requested by the City
that is reasonably necessary to review the permit application.



   132.11(D)   Power to prohibit or limit placement.  The City shall
have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
Communications Facilities within the Public Rights-Of-Way if there is
insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests to place and maintain
facilities in that area of the Public Rights-Of-Way, for reasons of Traffic
conditions, public safety, the protection of existing facilities In The
Public Rights-Of-Way or to accommodate City plans for public improvements or
projects that the City determines are in the public interest and to the
extent not prohibited by applicable Law.



   132.11(E)   No unreasonable interference.  All Communications
Facilities shall be placed and maintained so as not to interfere unreasonably
with the use of the Public Rights-Of-Way by the public and so as not to cause
unreasonable Interference with the rights and convenience of property Owners
who adjoin any of the Public Rights-Of-Way. The Registrant shall endeavor to
install all Communications Facilities underground. To the extent not
inconsistent with public service commission regulations, the City may require
the use of Trenchless Technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the
installation of facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way as well as joint
trenching or the collocation of facilities in existing conduit. In making
such requests, the City shall take into consideration several factors
including inconvenience to the public and other users of Rights-Of-Way and
the economic and technical feasibility of such requests. The Registrant shall
be liable for the displacement, damage or destruction of any property,
Irrigation system or Landscaping as a result of the placement or maintenance
of its facility within the Public Rights-Of-Way. The appropriate City
official may issue such rules and regulations concerning the placement or
maintenance of a Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way as may be
consistent with this Chapter and other applicable Law.



   132.11(F)   Notification of work on Rights-Of-Way.  Prior to the
commencement of any major work by the Registrant pertaining to the placement
and maintenance of communication facilities within the Public Rights-Of-Way,
the City Manager may require the Registrant to issue notice of the work using
reasonable means to property Owners whose property either adjoins or lies
within 200 feet of such Rights-Of-Way (the “notification area”). The
notification area may be expanded at the City’s discretion and notice shall
be affected in a manner deemed appropriate by the City Manager.



   132.11(G)   Compliance with applicable Law.  All safety practices
required by applicable Law or accepted industry practices and standards shall
be used during the placement or maintenance of Communications Facilities. A
Registrant’s system shall comply with the FCC’s rules and regulations of
the Emergency Alert System when applicable.



   132.11(H)   Restoration of Rights-Of-Way.  A Registrant shall, at
its own expense, restore the Public Rights-Of-Way to at least its original
condition before such work In Public Rights-Of-Way, subject to the City’s
satisfaction upon inspection. Registrant shall warrant its Restoration for a
period of 12 months after completion of such Restoration. If the Registrant
fails to make such Restoration within 20 calendar days after completion of
Construction, or such other time as may be required by the City, the City may
after written notice to the Registrant, perform such Restoration using City
employees, agents or contractors, and charge all costs of the Restoration
against the Registrant in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, and require
reimbursement within 30 calendar days after the submission of the bill by the
City to the Registrant.



   132.11(I)   Removal and relocation.  Removal or relocation at the
direction of the City of a Registrant’s Communications FacilityIn Public
Rights-Of-Way shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. §§ 337.403 and
337.404.



   132.11(J)   Permit scope.  A permit from the City constitutes
authorization to undertake only certain activities on Public Rights-Of-Way in
accordance with this Chapter, and does not create a property right or grant
authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest In
The Public Rights-Of-Way.



   132.11(K)   Maintenance of Rights-Of-Way.  A Registrant shall
maintain its Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way in a manner
consistent with accepted industry practice, standards and applicable Law, and
perform, at its expense, any tests designed to demonstrate compliance with
the requirements of this Chapter and applicable Law, and shall provide, upon
request, a copy of the test results promptly to the City.



   132.11(L)   Compliance with local, State, and federal Law.  All
Construction, installation and maintenance of a Registrant’s Communications
FacilitiesIn The Public Rights-Of-Way shall comply with the National
Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, the Florida Building
Code and all laws established by all local, State or federal Law and accepted
industry practices or standards. Registrant shall use and exercise due
caution, care and skill in performing work In The Public Rights-Of-Way and
shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas.



   132.11(M)   Excavation safety.  In connection with ExcavationIn The
Public Rights-Of-Way, a Registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the
Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S.
Chapter 556.



   132.11(N)   Request to coordinate.  In the interest of the
public’s health, safety and welfare, upon request of the City; a Registrant
shall coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any
other work, Construction, installation or repairs that may be occurring or
scheduled to occur within a reasonable time frame in the subject Public
Rights-Of-Way. The City may require a Registrant to alter reasonably its
placement or maintenance schedule for permitted work as necessary so as to
minimize disruptions and disturbance In The Public Rights-Of-Way. The City
may provide a more definite time frame based on specific CityConstruction or
maintenance schedules.



   132.11(O)   Worker identification required.  A Registrant shall
cause all its field employees and field contract workers to wear a picture
identification badge indicating that they work for the provider. This badge
shall be clearly visible to the public. Upon request, employees must provide
a company telephone number for City employees and subscribers to contact. A
Registrant or contractor shall also require all company vehicles to
prominently display the name under which the Registrant or contractor is
doing business, and logo, if any, in a manner clearly visible to the public.



   132.11(P)   No interference.  A Registrant shall not place or
maintain its Communications Facilities or equipment so as to interfere,
displace, damage or destroy any facilities, including but not limited to,
sewers, gas or water mains, storm drainage, pipes, cables or conduits of the
City, landscaped areas and Swales, or any other RegistrantPerson’s
facilities lawfully occupying the Public Rights-Of-Way of the City. Further,
a Registrant shall not place or maintain its Communications Facilities,
company or contractor vehicles, or related equipment so as to interfere with
the safety of the notification area.



   132.11(Q)   No warranties or representations.  City makes no
warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability or
availability of Public Rights-Of-Way for the Registrant’s Communications
Facilities and any performance of work or costs incurred by Registrant or
provision of services shall be at Registrant’s sole risk. Nothing in this
Chapter shall affect the City’s authority to add, vacate or AbandonPublic
Rights-Of-Way and City makes no warranties or representations regarding the
availability of any added, vacated or AbandonedPublic Rights-Of-Way for
Communications Facilities.



   132.11(R)   Inspections.  The City shall have the right to make
such inspections of facilities placed or maintained In Public Rights-Of-Way
as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter. In the event
the City determines that a violation exists with respect to Registrant’s
placement or maintenance of facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way that is
not considered to be an Emergency or danger to the public health, safety or
welfare, the City will provide Registrant no less than three calendar days
written notice setting forth the violation and requesting correction.



   132.11(S)   Installation location plans.  A permit application to
place a new or replace an existing Communications FacilityIn Public
Rights-Of-Way shall include plans showing the location of the proposed
installation of facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way. If the plans so
provided require revision based upon actual installation, the Registrant
shall promptly provide revised plans or “as-builts” upon completion of
any installation or Construction. The plans shall be in a digitized format
showing the two-dimensional location of the facilities based on the City’s
geographical database, or other format acceptable to the City. The Registrant
shall provide such plans at no cost to the City. The City shall maintain the
confidentiality of such plans and any other information provided in
accordance with F.S. § 202.195.



   132.11(T)   Reservation of rights.  The City reserves the right to
place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water,
electric, storm drainage, communications, and other facilities, cables or
conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead
installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the
CityIn Public Rights-Of-Way occupied by the Registrant. Registrant may allow
City facilities to be co-located within City’s Public Rights-Of-Way through
the use of a joint trench during Registrant’s Construction project. Such
joint trench projects shall be negotiated in good faith by separate agreement
between Registrant and City and may be subjected to other CityRights-Of-Way
requirements. The City further reserves without limitation the right to
alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation
or width of the Public Rights-Of-Way within the limits of the City and within
said limits as same may from time to time be altered.



   132.11(U)   Temporary support of authorized work.  Subject to
applicable Law, a Registrant shall, on the request of any Person holding a
permit issued by the City, temporarily support, protect, raise or lower its
Communications Facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The
expense of such temporary support, protection, raising or lowering of
facilities shall be paid by the Person requesting the same, and the
Registrant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The
Registrant shall be given not less than 30 calendar days advance written
notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. If the City requests the
temporary support, protection, raising or lowering of a facility for a public
purpose, the City shall not be charged for the temporary support, protection,
raising or lowering of the facility.



   132.11(V)   Installation of Telecommunications Towers, Antennas and
equipment facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way.  For the purposes of this
subsection 132.11(V), to the extent not expressly prohibited by federal Law,
StateLaw, the City Code or applicable Florida Public Service Commission rules
and regulations, the standards contained herein apply prospectively for all
new Antennas and Equipment Facilities, as defined by City Code, and a legally
maintained light Pole and/or UtilityPoleIn The Public Rights-Of-Way shall be
referred to as a (“vertical Structures”). An Antenna and/or Equipment
Facility placed In The Public Rights-Of-Way shall be subject to the following
criteria:



   132.11(V)(1)   No Telecommunications Towers may be installed or
placed In The Public Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.11(V)(2)   No Equipment Facility may be installed or placed In
The Public Rights-Of-Way , with the exception of existing equipment
facilities installed to support an Antenna that has been placed on a vertical
Structure , with the consent of its Owner , subject to the standards
contained in this subsection 132.11 (V);



   132.11(V)(3)   Any Antenna or Equipment Facility installed In The
Public Rights-Of-Way shall be subject to all site plan review and approval
and permitting requirements of the City;



   132.11(V)(4)   No Communications Services Provider or Registrant may
Overlash an Antenna for the provision of Communications Services onto an
AttachmentIn The Public Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.11(V)(5)   No Equipment Facility shall be placed on the ground
In The Public Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.11(V)(6)   No back up power sources including, but not limited
to, generators and fuel storage tanks, may be installed or placed In The
Public Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.11(V)(7)   An Equipment Facility used in association with an
Antenna mounted on a vertical Structure shall be placed in any of the
following areas:



   132.11(V)(7)(a)   Underground In The Public Rights-Of-Way ; or



   132.11(V)(7)(b)   On an adjacent property in accordance with the
City Code , with the consent of the property Owner , provided that all the
wiring is underground.



   132.11(V)(8)   A provider of Communications Services that wants to
mount an Antenna on a vertical Structure must submit an application in
accordance with the City’s Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Chapter,
register with the City pursuant to § 132.10 herein, and comply with all
indemnification, insurance and security fund requirements contained herein.
An application pursuant to this Section shall not be deemed a Collocation
application;



   132.11(V)(9)   An Antenna may be mounted on an existing vertical
Structure , with the consent of its owner, provided the height of the Antenna
does not extend more than ten feet above the top of the vertical Structure .
An existing vertical Structure may be modified, replaced or rebuilt to
accommodate an Antenna so long as the height of the vertical Structure is not
increased by more than ten feet;



   132.11(V)(10)   An Antenna that is mounted to a vertical Structure
located adjacent to real property used as a Single-Family Residence shall be
flush mounted to the vertical Structure ;



   132.11(V)(11)   An Antenna that is mounted to a vertical Structure
shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless
required by an applicable federal, State, or local rule, regulation or Law
including, but not limited to, the City’s Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities Chapter;



   132.11(V)(12)   An Antenna that is mounted to a vertical Structure
shall comply with any applicable FCC Emissions Standards;



   132.11(V)(13)   The design, Construction , setback, installation and
Landscaping of an Antenna mounted to a vertical Structure and an Equipment
Facility used in association with an Antenna shall comply with applicable Law
including, but not limited to, the Florida Building Code and the City’s
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Chapter;



   132.11(V)(14)   No commercial advertising shall be allowed on an
Antenna mounted to a vertical Structure ;



   132.11(V)(15)   Any accessory equipment and related housing In The
Public Rights-Of-Way that is used in conjunction with an Antenna mounted to a
vertical Structure shall comply with any applicable local rules, regulations,
ordinances, or laws governing the placement, Landscaping and design of such
equipment;



   132.11(V)(16)   An Owner of an Antenna or equipment that places an
Antenna or Equipment Facility underground In The Public Rights-Of-Way shall
maintain appropriate membership in the one call notification system or
participate in any other applicable notification center for subsurface
installations as provided by Florida Statutes; and



   132.11(V)(17)   An Owner of an Antenna or Equipment Facility which
places an Antenna or Equipment FacilityIn The Public Rights-Of-Way pursuant
to this subsection 132.11 (V) is subject to any applicable provisions
governing placement, maintenance or enforcement contained in this Chapter as
determined by the City Manager.



   132.11(W)   Small Wireless Facilities.



   132.11(W)(1)   Registration required; Application.  A Person that
desires to place or maintain a Small Wireless Facility in Public
Rights-Of-Way within the City shall first register with the City in
accordance with Section 132.10 of the City Code.  As part of any permit
application to place a new or replace an existing Small Wireless Facility in
the Public Rights-Of-Way, the Registrant shall provide a proposal to the City
that includes the information required under Section 132.11(C)&(S) of the
City Code, to the extent such information may be requested under applicable
State law, and information documenting compliance with the Applicable Codes,
including but not limited to the design standards applicable to Small
Wireless Facilities.



   132.11(W)(2)   Application process.  Within 14 days after receiving
a complete application for a permit for a Small Wireless Facility, the City
shall determine and notify the Applicant by electronic mail as to whether the
application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the City
shall specifically identify the missing information.  An application is
deemed complete if the City fails to provide notification to the Applicant
within 14 days. Pursuant to F.S. § 337.401(7), as amended from time to time,
a complete application for a Small Wireless Facility is deemed approved if
the City fails to approve or deny the application within 60 days after
receipt of the application.  If the City does not use the 30-day negotiation
period provided above, the parties may mutually agree to extend the 60-day
application review period. The City shall grant or deny the application at
the end of the extended period. A permit issued pursuant to an approved
application shall remain effective for 1 year unless extended by the City .



   132.11(W)(3)   Location; alternative location procedure.  Within 14
days after the date of filing a complete application for a Small Wireless
Facility, the City may request that the proposed location of a Small Wireless
Facility be moved to another location in the Public Rights-Of-Way and placed
on an alternative City Utility Pole or support structure or may place a new
Utility Pole. The City and the applicant may negotiate the alternative
location, including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing
requirements for ground-based equipment, for 30 days after the date of the
request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative
location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant must notify the City of
such acceptance and the application shall be deemed granted for any new
location for which there is agreement and all other locations in the
application. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant must notify the
City of such non-agreement and the City shall grant or deny the original
application within 90 days after the date the application was filed. A
request for an alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative
location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in writing and
provided by electronic mail.



   132.11(W)(4)   Written approval or denial.  The City shall notify
the applicant of approval or denial of an application by electronic mail. 
The City shall approve a complete application unless it does not meet the
Applicable Codes.  If the application is denied, the City shall specify in
writing the basis for denial, including the specific Code provision(s) on
which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant by
electronic mail on the day the City denies the application. The applicant may
cure the deficiencies identified by the Cityand resubmit the application
within 30 days after notice of the denial is sent to the Applicant. The City
shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after receipt or
the application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to
the deficiencies cited in the denial.



   132.11(W)(5)   Consolidated application.  An Applicant seeking to
Collocate Small Wireless Facilities within the City may, at the applicant’s
discretion, file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the Collocation of up to 30 Small Wireless Facilities.  If the application
includes multiple Small Wireless Facilities, the City may separately address
Small Wireless Facility Collocations for which incomplete information has
been received or which are denied.



   132.11(W)(6)   Height.  The height of a Small Wireless Facility
shall not exceed 10 feet above the Utility Pole or Structure upon which the
Small Wireless Facility is to be collocated.  The height for a new Utility
Pole is limited to the tallest existing Utility Pole as of July 1, 2017,
located in the same Right-of-Way, other than a Utility Pole for which a
waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within 500
feet of the proposed location of the Small Wireless Facility. If there is no
Utility Pole within 500 feet, the height of the Utility Pole upon which the
Small Wireless Facility is to be collocated shall not exceed 50 feet.



   132.11(W)(7)   Design standards.



   132.11(W)(7)(a)   Location Context, Color, Stealth, and Concealment
Requirements.  Small Wireless Facilities shall be designed in such a manner
that they are compatible with the existing visible infrastructure located
within the City’s Rights-Of-Way to minimize any negative visual impact on
the surrounding areas.  Small Wireless Facilities shall be designed with a
hard durable finish and shall utilize Stealth design features that enhance
compatibility with adjacent uses wherever possible.  The Antenna associated
with a Small Wireless Facility that is mounted or otherwise attached to a
vertical Structure shall be enclosed within to the vertical Structure.  The
Antenna and other components of the Small Wireless Facility shall be painted
white.  Such Antennas shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or
illuminations unless required by an applicable federal, State, or local rule,
regulation or Law, and commercial advertising shall be prohibited.  The
Antenna associated with a Small Wireless Facility shall be concealed
completely inside an enclosure or encasement that shall be painted white. 
Any vertical Structure, including any Utility Poles or other Antenna Support
Structures, supporting or associated with a Small Wireless Facility shall be
round and tapered and painted white consistent with the existing City Utility
Pole s located within the Public Rights-of-Way. This subsection shall not
prevent the use of a top-mounted shroud design provided that the Antenna
associated with a Small Wireless Facility is concealed completely inside a
white enclosure or encasement.



   132.11(W)(7)(b)   New Utility Pole that Replaces an Existing
Facility.  Any new Utility Pole associated with a Small Wireless Facility
that replaces an Existing Structure shall be of substantially similar design,
material, and color as the Existing Structure it replaces, provided that the
new Utility Pole is round and tapered and painted white consistent with the
existing City Utility Poles located within the Public Rights-of-Way.



   132.11(W)(7)(c)   Distance separation between ground-mounted
equipment associated with a Small Wireless Facility.  Ground-mounted
equipment associated with a Small Wireless Facility in the Public
Rights-of-Way must be spaced a minimum of five hundred (500) linear feet
apart from ground-mounted equipment associated with another Small Wireless
Facility.



   132.11(W)(7)(d)   Waiver.  The City’s design standards set forth
in this City Code Section 132.11(W) may be waived by the City Manager upon a
showing by the Applicant that the design standards are not reasonably
compatible for the particular location of a Small Wireless Facility or that
the design standards impose an excessive expense. The waiver shall be granted
or denied within 45 days after the date of the written request to the City.



   132.11(W)(8)   Basis for denial.  The City may deny a proposed
Collocation of a Small Wireless Facility in the Public Rights-Of-Way if the
proposed Collocation:



   132.11(W)(8)(a)   Materially interferes with the safe operation of
traffic control equipment;



   132.11(W)(8)(b)   Materially interferes with sight lines or clear
zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes;



   132.11(W)(8)(c)   Materially interferes with compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards
regarding pedestrian access or movement;



   132.11(W)(8)(d)   Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition
of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual; or



   132.11(W)(8)(e)   Fails to comply with Applicable Codes.



   132.11(W)(9)   Collocation on City Utility Poles.



   132.11(W)(9)(a)   The rate to Collocate a Small Wireless Facility on
a City Utility Pole shall be $150 per pole annually, or the maximum amount
permitted under applicable law, whichever is greater.



   132.11(W)(9)(b)   The City may reserve space on City Utility Pole s
for future public safety uses.  If replacement of the City Utility Pole is
necessary to accommodate the Collocation of the Small Wireless Facility and
the future public safety use, the pole replacement is subject to make-ready
provisions and the replaced pole shall accommodate the future public safety
use.



   132.11(W)(9)(c)   For a City Utility Pole that supports an aerial
facility used to provide Communication Services or electrical service, the
applicant shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C.
s. 224 and implementing regulations. The good faith estimate of the City for
any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested
Collocation will include pole replacement, if necessary.



   132.11(W)(9)(d)   For a City Utility Pole that does not support an
aerial facility used to provide Communication Services or electric service,
the City will provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary
to enable the pole to support the requested Collocation, including necessary
pole replacement, within 60 days after receipt of a complete application.
Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60
days after written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the applicant. 
Alternatively, the City may require the applicant seeking to collocate a
Small Wireless Facility to provide a make-ready estimate at the applicant’s
expense for the work necessary to support the Small Wireless Facility,
including pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. If pole
replacement is required, the scope of the make-ready estimate is limited to
the design, fabrication, and installation of a Utility Pole that is
substantially similar in color and composition.



   132.11(W)(9)(e)   The make-ready work specified in paragraphs (9)(c)
and (9)(d) above shall be subject to the City’s usual construction
restoration standards for work in the right-of-way. The replaced or altered
City Utility Pole shall remain the property of the City.



   132.11(W)(10)   Micro Wireless Facilities.  City approval shall not
be required for the installation, placement, maintenance or replacement of
Micro Wireless Facilities that are suspended on cables strung between
existing Utility Poles in compliance with Applicable Codes by or for a
Communications Services Provider authorized to occupy the Public
Rights-Of-Way and who is remitting taxes under F.S. Chapter 202. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may require a right-of-way permit for
work that involves excavation, closure of a sidewalk or closure of a
vehicular lane.



   132.11(W)(11)   Permitting.  An applicant for installation of a
Small Wireless Facility shall obtain a right-of-way permit from the City,
except to the extent applicable law prohibits the City from requiring a
permit.



   132.11(W)(12)   Airport airspace.  A Structure granted a permit and
installed pursuant to this subsection 132.11(W) shall comply with F.S.
Chapter 333, and federal regulations pertaining to airport airspace
protections.



   132.11(W)(13)   No authorization to Collocate on City Utility Poles;
no application to HOA restricted pole.  This subsection 132.11(W) does not
authorize a Person to collocate Small Wireless Facilities or Micro Wireless
Facilities on a City Utility Pole or erect an Antenna Support Structure in a
location subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions, articles of
incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners’ association.



   132.11(W)(14)   Prohibition against placement in location where
facilities are placed underground.  A Communications Services Provider
shall, in relation to a Small Wireless Facility, Utility Pole or Antenna
Support Structure in the Public Rights-Of-Way, comply with any
nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements of the City that prohibit
above-ground Structures in the Public Rights-Of-Way.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010; Am. Ord. 2017-17, passed 11-20-2017; Am.
Ord. 2018-08, passed 6-4-2018)



§ 132.12  COMPENSATION FOR USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   132.12(A)   Compensation required.  A Registrant that places or
maintains Communications FacilitiesIn The Public Rights-Of-Way shall be
required to pay compensation to the City as required by applicable Law and
ordinances of the City.



   132.12(B)   Registrants not providing local services.  A Registrant
that places or maintains Communications FacilitiesIn The Public
Rights-Of-Way, other than a Registrant that provides local services, as
defined in F.S. § 202.11(2), within the City, shall pay to the City the fees
required to be paid by providers of toll service within the City.



   132.12(C)   Fees.  A Registrant, that makes physical Use of the
Public Rights-Of-Way and who is not providing Communications Services as
defined in F.S. § 202.11(2), or a Registrant that makes physical Use of the
Public Rights-Of-Way and who is not serving a Communications Services
customer at retail within the jurisdictional limits of the City at the time
the Registrant begins to make physical Use of the Public Right-Of-Way, shall
pay to the City annually in an amount set forth by City resolution. The fee
or other consideration imposed pursuant to this subsection shall not apply in
any manner to any communications company which provides Communications
Services as defined in F.S. § 202.11(2), for any services provided by such
communications company. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the
City shall at all times hereby require the maximum compensation allowed under
applicable Law.



   132.12(D)   Except to the extent prohibited by applicable Law:



   132.12(D)(1)   The fee payments to be made pursuant to this Section
shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a tax;



   132.12(D)(2)   Such fee payments shall be in addition to any and all
taxes of a general applicability;



   132.12(D)(3)   A Registrant shall not have or make any claim for any
deduction or other credit of all or any part of the amount of said fee
payments from or against any of said City taxes or other fees or charges of
general applicability which Registrant is required to pay to the City, except
as required by Law; and



   132.12(E)   The fee specified herein is the minimum consideration
for use of the Public Rights-Of-Way , including all public easements, for the
purpose of installing and maintaining a Communications Facility .



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.13  SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.



   132.13(A)   Suspension.  Subject to § 132.14 below and providing
reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure, the City Manager may suspend a
permit issued or deny an application for a subsequent permit to a Registrant
for work In The Public Rights-Of-Way for one or more of the following:



   132.13(A)(1)   Failure to satisfy permit conditions, or conditions
set forth in this Chapter or other applicable City ordinances, codes or
regulations governing placement or maintenance of Communications FacilitiesIn
Public Rights-Of-Way , including without limitation, failure to take
reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work site,
or to restore any Public Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.13(A)(2)   Misrepresentation or fraud by Registrant in a
registration or permit application to the City;



   132.13(A)(3)   Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of
registration;



   132.13(A)(4)   Failure to relocate or to remove facilities as may be
lawfully required by the City; or



   132.13(A)(5)   Failure to maintain pedestrian or vehicular Traffic.



   132.13(B)   Written notification.  After the suspension or denial
of a permit pursuant to this Section, the City shall provide written notice
of the reason to the Registrant.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.14  APPEALS.



   132.14(A)   Final, written decisions of the City Manager suspending
or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an
application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal
must be filed with the City within 30 calendar days of the date of the final,
written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth
above shall be waived. The City Commission shall act as the “hearing
officer” and consider an appeal pursuant to this Section. The hearing shall
occur within 45 calendar days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived by
the Registrant , and a written decision shall be rendered within 20 calendar
days of the hearing. Upon correction of any grounds that gave rise to a
suspension or denial, the suspension or denial shall be lifted.



   132.14(B)   Nothing in this Chapter shall affect or limit the
remedies the City has available under applicable Law.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.15  CONDITIONAL USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   132.15(A)   In the event Registrant desires to use its existing
facilities or to construct new facilities for the purpose of providing other
Utility or non- Utility services to existing or potential consumers or
resellers, by providing any other services other than the provision of
Communications Services , or for providing any other Use to existing or
potential consumers, a Registrant shall seek such additional and separate
authorization from City for such activities as may be required by applicable
Law.



   132.15(B)   To the extent that any Person or Registrant leases or
otherwise uses the facilities of a Person that is duly registered or
otherwise authorized to place or maintain facilities In The Public
Rights-Of-Way of the City, such Person or registrant shall make no claim, nor
assert any right, which will impede the lawful exercise of the City’s
rights, including requiring the removal of such facilities from the Public
Rights-Of-Way of the City, regardless of the effect on Registrant ’s
ability to place or maintain its own Communications FacilitiesIn Public
Rights-Of-Way of the City.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.16  TERMINATION OF REGISTRATION.



   132.16(A)   The involuntary termination of a previously effective
registration may only be accomplished by an action of the City Commission.
The City may declare the registration terminated and revoke and cancel all
privileges granted under that registration if:



   132.16(A)(1)   A federal or Florida authority suspends, denies, or
revokes a Registrant ’s certification or license to provide communications
service;



   132.16(A)(2)   The Registrant ’s placement and maintenance In The
Public Rights-Of-Way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public
or other users of the Public Rights-Of-Way ; or



   132.16(A)(3)   The Registrant Abandons all of its communications
facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way .



   132.16(B)   Prior to such termination for any of the reasons set
forth in this Section, the City Manager shall notify the Registrant in
writing setting forth the matters pertinent to such reasons and describing
the proposed action of the City with respect thereto. The Registrant shall
have 60 calendar days after receipt of such notice within which to cure the
violation, or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the City
Commission, to accomplish the same.



   132.16(C)(1)   In the event the City Commission terminates the
registration, the Registrant shall, within a reasonable time following such
termination, provide an acceptable plan for transferring ownership of the
communications facilities to another Person in accordance with this Chapter
or shall remove or Abandon the facilities and take such steps as are
necessary to render every portion of the facilities remaining In The Public
Rights-Of-Way of the City safe. If the Registrant has either Abandoned its
facilities or chooses to Abandon its facilities, the City may either:



   132.16(C)(1)(a)   Require the registrant or the registrant’s
bonding company to remove some or all of the facilities from the Public
Rights-Of-Way and restore the Public Rights-Of-Way to its condition
immediately prior to the removal;



   132.16(C)(1)(b)   The City may require that some or all of the
facilities be removed and the Public Rights-Of-Way restored to its such
condition at the Registrant ’s expense, using City employees, agents or
contractors, and charge any and all costs to the registrant and require
reimbursement, or



   132.16(C)(1)(c)   Utilize or allow other Persons to utilize the
registrant’s Abandoned facilities.



   132.16(C)(2)   The obligations of the Registrant hereunder shall
survive the termination of a registration. In the event of a declaration of
termination of registration, this provision does not permit the City to cause
the removal of any facilities that are used to provide another service for
which the Registrant holds a valid certification or license with the
governing federal or State agency, where required, and is properly registered
with the City, for such certificated service, where required.



   132.16(D)   A final order of the City imposed pursuant to Florida
Statutes, and applicable provisions of this Chapter and the City Code , if
any, shall constitute a lien on any property of the Owner and may be enforced
as provided therein.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.17  TRANSFER OF CONTROL, SALE OR ASSIGNMENT OF ASSETS.



   132.17(A)   Notification.  If a Registrant transfers, sells or
assigns its registration or its facilities In The Public Rights-Of-Way,
incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the Registrant’s assets, the
transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of
this Chapter. To the extent allowed by applicable Law, written notice of any
such transfer, sale or assignment or transfer of ownership or control of a
Registrant’s business shall be provided to the City within 14 business days
of the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee,
buyer or assignee is a current Registrant, then the transferee, buyer or
assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee
is not a current Registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall
register as provided in § 132.10 within 60 calendar days of the transfer,
sale or assignment. if permit applications are pending in the Registrant’s
name, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall notify the appropriate City
officials that the transferee, buyer or assignee is the new Applicant.



   132.17(B)   Subordination.  Any mortgage, pledge, lease or other
encumbrance on the Communications Facilities shall be subject and subordinate
to the rights of the City under this Chapter and applicable Law.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.18  INDEMNIFICATION.



   A Registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold
harmless and defend the City, its officials, boards, members, agents and
employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings,
judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by
the City arising out of the placement or maintenance of its communications
system or facilities In Public Rights-Of-Way , regardless of whether the act
or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
Chapter; provided, however, that a Registrant ’s obligation hereunder shall
not extend to any damages caused by the negligence, gross negligence or
wanton or willful acts of the City. This provision includes, but is not
limited to, the City’s reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in defending
against any such claim, suit or proceedings. City agrees to notify the
Registrant , in writing, within a reasonable time of City receiving notice,
of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this
Section shall prohibit the City from participating in the defense of any
litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the City’s
reasonable belief there exists, or may exist, a conflict in representation,
potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this
Section shall be construed or interpreted:



   132.18(A)   As denying to either party any remedy or defense
available to such party under the Laws of the State of Florida;



   132.18(B)   As consent by the City to be sued; or



   132.18(C)   As a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver
provided in F.S. § 768.28.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.19  INSURANCE.



   The City shall not approve a registration until and unless the City
obtains assurance that such Registrant (and those acting on its behalf) have
adequate insurance. At a minimum, the following requirements must be
satisfied:



   132.19(A)   The policies of insurance shall be primary and written
on forms acceptable to the City and placed with insurance carriers approved
and licensed by the Insurance Department in the State of Florida and meet a
minimum financial AM Best Company rating of no less than “A- Excellent: FSC
VII.” In the event that the insurance carrier’s rating shall drop, the
insurance carrier shall immediately notify the City. No changes shall be made
to these specifications without prior written specific approval by the City.



   132.19(B)   The City of Weston, Calvin Giordano & Associates, Inc.,
Weiss Serota Helfman Pastoriza Cole & Boniske, P.L., and Municipal
Technologies, LLC, shall be named as additional insured, as their interests
may appear on all policies except workers’ compensation. As respects
general liability coverage, the completed operations coverage and the
additional insured status of the City must be maintained for this project for
not less than five years following completion and acceptance by the City or
no more restrictive than ISO form CG 20 37 (07 04). Waiver of subrogation in
favor of the City of Weston is required on all policies except workers’
compensation.



   132.19(C)   Registrant shall provide statutory workers’
compensation, and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less
than $1,000,000.00 per employee per accident, $1,000,000.00 disease aggregate
and $1,000,000.00 per employee per disease for all personnel on the worksite.
If applicable, coverage for the Jones Act and U.S. Longshoremen and
Harborworkers Exposures must also be included. (Elective exemptions will NOT
satisfy this requirement. Certificates evidencing an employee leasing company
as employer will not be accepted).



   132.19(D)   In the event the Registrant has “leased” employees,
the Registrant or the employee leasing company must provide evidence of a
workers’ compensation policy for all personnel on the worksite. All
documentation must be provided for review and approval by the City. The
Registrant is responsible for the workers’ compensation of any and all
subcontractors used by the Registrant . Evidence of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage for all subcontractors must be submitted prior to any work
being performed.



   132.19(E)   Commercial general liability: Including but not limited
to bodily injury, property damage, contractual liability, products and
completed operations (without limitation), watercraft or aircraft liability
if those vehicles will be utilized, and personal injury liability with limits
of not less than $2,000,000.00 each occurrence, covering all work performed
under this contract.



   132.19(F)   Business automobile liability: Registrant agrees to
maintain business automobile liability at a limit of liability not less than
$1,000,000.00 each occurrence covering all work performed under this Chapter.



   132.19(G)   Registrant further agrees coverage shall include
liability for owned, non-owned and hired automobiles. In the event Registrant
does not own automobiles, Registrant agrees to maintain coverage for hired
and non-owned auto liability, which may be satisfied by way of endorsement to
the commercial general liability policy or separate business auto liability
policy. If private passenger automobiles are used in the business, they must
be commercially insured.



   132.19(H)   Umbrella liability: Umbrella polices are acceptable to
provide the total required liability limits.



   132.19(I)   Self-insurance:  Registrant may satisfy the insurance
requirements and conditions of this Section under a self-insurance plan
and/or retention. Registrant agrees to notify the City, and/or indicate on
the certificate(s) of insurance, when self-insurance is relied upon or when a
self-insured retention exceeds $100,000.00. The City reserves the right, but
not the obligation, to request and review a copy of the Registrant ’s most
recent annual report or audited financial statement, which the Registrant
agrees to furnish for the purpose of determining the Registrant ’s
financial capacity to self-insure.



   132.19(J)   The rights reserved by the City with respect to any
security fund or bond established pursuant to this Section are in addition to
all other rights and remedies the City may have under this Chapter, a lease,
or at Law or equity.



   132.19(K)   Any Person, firm or corporation who knowingly breaches
any provision of this Chapter shall upon receipt of written notice from the
City be given a time schedule to cure the violation. Failure to commence to
cure the violation within 30 calendar days and to complete cure, to the
City’s satisfaction, within 60 calendar days, or such longer time as the
City may specify, shall result in revocation of any permit or license and the
City shall seek any remedy or damages to the full extent of the Law. This
shall not preclude other penalties allowed by Law.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.20  CONSTRUCTION BOND.



   132.20(A)   Prior to performing any major Construction work In The
Public Rights-Of-Way , the City may require the Registrant to establish in
the City’s favor a construction bond to secure the Restoration of the
Public Rights-Of-Way and to ensure the Registrant ’s faithful performance
of the Construction or other work In The Public Rights-Of-Way , in accordance
with applicable sections of the City Code . Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
construction bond hereunder shalt only be required to the extent that the
cost of the Restoration exceeds the amount recoverable against the security
fund as provided in § 132.21.



   132.20(B)   In the event a Registrant subject to such a Construction
bond fails to complete the work in accordance with the provisions of the
permit and this Chapter, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally
from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by
the City as a result, including the full amount of any compensation,
indemnification or cost of removal or Abandonment of any property of the
Registrant , or the cost of completing the work, plus a reasonable allowance
for attorneys’ fees, up to the full amount of the bond.



   132.20(C)   No less than 12 months after completion of the
Construction and satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bond,
the Registrant may request the City Manager to remove the requirement to
continue the construction bond and the City shall release the bond within ten
calendar days. Notwithstanding, the City may require a new bond for any
subsequent work performed In The Public Rights-Of-Way .



   132.20(D)   The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having
a minimum rating of A-1 in Best’s Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty
Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney; and shall
provide that:



   “Unless released by the City, this bond may not be canceled, or
allowed to lapse, until 60 calendar days after receipt by the City, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer
of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew.”



   132.20(E)   The rights reserved by the City with respect to any
Construction bond established pursuant to this Section are in addition to all
other rights and remedies the City may have under this Section, or at Law or
equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the
construction bond will affect any other right the City may have.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.21  SECURITY FUND.



   At the time of registration and as a condition of receiving its first
permit to place or maintain a Communications FacilityIn Public Rights-Of-Way
, the Registrant shall be required to file with the City, for City approval,
an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in the sum of
$50,000.00 having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State
of Florida, and acceptable to the City Manager, which shall be referred to as
the “security fund.” The security fund shall be conditioned on the full
and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and
obligations imposed upon Registrant by the provisions of this Chapter. The
bond or guarantee shall be furnished annually or as frequently as necessary
to provide a continuing guarantee of the Registrant ’s full and faithful
performance at all times. In the event a Registrant fails to perform its
duties and obligations imposed upon the Registrant by the provisions of this
Chapter, subject to § 132.25, there shall be recoverable, jointly and
severally from the security fund and/or from the principal and surety of the
bond, any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result, including the
full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or
Abandonment of any property of the Registrant , plus a reasonable allowance
for attorneys’ fees, up to the full amount of the security fund, the City
may in its reasonable discretion accept a corporate guarantee of the
Registrant or its parent company.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.22  REPORTS AND RECORDS; INSPECTIONS.



   132.22(A)   Registrant records.  A Registrant shall provide the
following documents to the City as received or filed:



   132.22(A)(1)   Upon reasonable request, any pleadings, petitions,
notices, and documents, which may directly impact the obligations under this
Chapter and which are reasonably necessary for the City to protect its
interests under this Chapter.



   132.22(A)(2)   Any request for protection under bankruptcy Laws, or
any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy.



   132.22(B)   No effect on remedies.  Nothing in this subsection
shall affect the remedies Registrant has available under applicable Law.



   132.22(C)   Inspections.  In addition, the City may, at its option,
and upon reasonable notice to the Registrant, inspect the facilities In The
Public Rights-Of-Way and schematics indicating the location of its facilities
for a specific site to ensure the safety of its residents.



   132.22(D)   Confidentiality of records.  The City shall keep any
documentation, books and records of the Registrant confidential to the extent
required under Florida Statutes.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.23  ABANDONMENT OF A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.



   132.23(A)   Duty to notify City.  Upon Abandonment of a
Communications Facility owned by a RegistrantIn The Public Rights-Of-Way, the
Registrant shall notify the City of such Abandonment within 90 calendar days.



   132.23(B)   Notice to remove Abandoned facilities.  The City may
direct the Registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such
Abandoned facility at the Registrant’s sole expense if the City determines
that the Abandoned facility’s presence interferes with the public health,
safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a
determination that such facility:



   132.23(B)(1)   Compromises safety at any time for any Public
Rights-Of-Way user or during Construction or maintenance In Public
Rights-Of-Way ;



   132.23(B)(2)   Prevents another Person from locating facilities in
the area of Public Rights-Of-Way where the Abandoned facility is located when
other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or



   132.23(B)(3)   Creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to
the Public Rights-Of-Way ’s use.



   132.23(B)(4)   In the event of subsection 132.23(B)(2) above, the
City may require the third Person to coordinate with the Registrant that owns
the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the
registrant.



   132.23(C)   Consent to remove Abandoned facilities.  In the event
that the City does not direct the removal of the Abandoned facility, the
Registrant, by its notice of Abandonment to the City shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
the City or another Person at such third party’s cost.



   132.23(D)   Failure to remove facilities.  If the Registrant fails
to remove all or any portion of an Abandoned facility as directed by the City
within a reasonable time period as may be required by the City under the
circumstances, the City may perform such removal and charge the cost of the
removal against the Registrant.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.24  ADMINISTRATION.



   132.24(A)   The City Manager shall have the responsibility for
overseeing the day-to-day administration of this Chapter. The City Manager
shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the City,
except for those actions specified in this Chapter that are reserved to the
City Commission.



   132.24(B)   The City Manager shall provide the Commission with
assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate and may recommend that
the Commission take certain actions with respect to the Registrant .



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.25  ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   132.25(A)   Violations.  In addition to any other remedies
available at Law, including but not limited to F.S. § 166.0415 and Ch. 162,
or equity or provided in this Chapter, the City may apply any one or
combination of the following remedies in the event a Registrant violates this
Chapter, or applicable local Law or order related to the Public Rights-Of-Way:



   132.25(A)(1)   Failure to comply with the provisions of the Chapter
or other Law applicable to occupants of the Public Rights-Of-Way may result
in imposition of penalties to be paid by the Registrant to the City as
provided in F.S. Chapter 162 and Chapter 31 of the City Code .



   132.25(A)(2)   In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the
City may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent
jurisdiction.



   132.25(B)   No waiver.  Failure of the City to enforce any
requirements of this Chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the City’s
right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or
to seek appropriate enforcement remedies.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.26  FORCE MAJEURE.



   In the event a Registrant ’s performance of or compliance with any of
the provisions of this Chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within
the Registrant ’s control, such inability to perform or comply shall be
deemed excused and no, penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result,
provided, however, that such Registrant uses all practicable means to
expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For
purposes of this Chapter, causes or events not within a registrant’s
control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes,
landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public
enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints
imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within
registrant’s control, and thus not falling within this Section, shall
include, without limitation, Registrant ’s financial inability to perform
or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by
any of Registrant ’s directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 132.27  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.



   132.27(A)   The City reserves the right to amend this Chapter as it
shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers.



   132.27(B)   This Chapter shall apply to all existing Communications
Facilities placed In The Public Rights-Of-Way prior to February 17, 2009, to
the full extent permitted by State and federal Law.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 133: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



Section



   133.01   Intent



   133.02   Applicability



   133.03   Application requirements for wireless communications
facilities



   133.04   Application requirements for collocations



   133.05   Installations on municipal property



   133.06   Application fees and process



   133.07   Collocation



   133.08   Interference with public safety communications



   133.09   Development, zoning, building and inspection requirements
for wireless communication facilities



   133.10   Standards for telecommunication towers



   133.11   Standards for antennas



   133.12   Use of public Rights-Of-Way



   133.13   Replacement or modification of a wireless communications
facility



   133.14   Indemnification, insurance and security funds



§ 133.01  INTENT.



   The regulations and requirements establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas and are intended to
accomplish the following purposes:



   133.01(A)   Protect and promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the City;



   133.01(B)   Minimize residential areas and land uses from potential
adverse impacts of Towers and Antennas ;



   133.01(C)   Encourage the location of Towers in nonresidential areas
and to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact
on the community is minimal;



   133.01(D)   Minimize the total number of Towers throughout the
community by strongly encouraging the Collocation of Antennas on new and
Pre-Existing Tower sites as a primary option rather than Construction of
additional single use Telecommunications Towers ;



   133.01(E)   Encourage users of Telecommunications Towers and
Antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact
of the Telecommunications Towers and Antennas through careful design, siting,
Landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;



   133.01(F)   Minimize potential damage to property from
Telecommunications Towers and Wireless Communications Facilities by requiring
such Structures be soundly designed, constructed, modified and maintained; and



   133.01(G)   Enhance the ability of the providers of Wireless
Communications Services to provide such services to the community through an
efficient and timely application process. In furtherance of these goals, the
City shall at all times give due consideration to the City’s Comprehensive
Plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas, in
approving sites for the location of Telecommunications Towers and Antennas .



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.02  APPLICABILITY.



   133.02(A)   New Communications Facilities and modifications to
existing facilities.  All new Wireless Communications Facilities and
reconstruction or modifications to existing Wireless Communications
Facilities in the City shall be subject to the regulations in this Chapter to
the full extent permitted under applicable State and federal Law.



   133.02(B)   Pre-Existing Telecommunications Towers or Antennas.
Pre-Existing Telecommunications Towers or Antennas shall not be required to
meet the requirements of this Chapter, other than the specific requirements
set forth herein.



   133.02(C)   Broadcasting facilities/amateur radio station
operators/receive only Antennas.  This Chapter shall not govern any
Broadcasting Facility or a Wireless Communications Facility owned and
operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive only Antennas.



   133.02(D)   Pending applications.  This Chapter shall apply to
applications for Wireless Communications Facilities, Telecommunications
Towers, and Antennas as defined herein unless prohibited by applicable Law.



   133.02(E)   Not essential services.  The providing of Personal
Wireless Services and the siting and construction of Wireless Communications
Facilities shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this Chapter and
shall not be regulated or permitted as Essential Services or Public Safety
Communications.



   133.02(F)   Administration.  Except for matters herein specifically
reserved to the City Commission, the City Manager shall be the principal City
official responsible for the administration of this Chapter.



   133.02(G)   AM Array.  For purposes of implementing this Chapter,
an AM Array, consisting of one or more Tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting Antenna, shall be considered
one Tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be
measured from the outer perimeter of the Towers included in the AM Array.
Additional Tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM Array by
right.



   133.02(H)   Application required.  An Applicant must submit an
application form for a Person to apply for the Construction, installation, or
placement of a Wireless Communications Facility, Telecommunications Tower, or
Antenna within the City consistent with the terms of this Chapter. The City
may create a different application form for Collocation applications.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.03  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   133.03(A)   Permit required.  Unless exempted from these
requirements as set forth below, or as otherwise required by State or federal
law, permits shall be required for the installation of Wireless
Communications Facilities, including Telecommunications Towers and Antennas,
by application submitted to the City.



   133.03(B)   Application requirements.  In addition to the
submission requirements for an application for site plan approval provided by
§ 125.41of the City Code, the following information must be included in all
applications, including applications for installations of Telecommunications
Towers and Antennas but excluding Collocation applications.



   133.03(B)(1)   Current survey of the property.



   133.03(B)(2)   Description of the wireless Communications Services
currently provided and/or to be provided in the future by the Applicant over
its Wireless Communications Facilities .



   133.03(B)(3)   Location of the proposed facilities.



   133.03(B)(4)   Identify the location of all overhead and underground
public utilities; Telecommunication, irrigation, cable, water, sewer,
drainage, municipal fiber optic equipment and other facilities.



   133.03(B)(5)   Identify the Trees , Structures, improvements,
facilities and obstructions, if any, that Applicant proposes to temporarily
or permanently remove or relocate.



   133.03(B)(6)   Identify all applicable FCC licenses and approvals.



   133.03(B)(7)   Statement that Applicant shall notify all other
Telecommunication providers of the permit application at time application is
accepted by the City.



   133.03(B)(8)   Any application submitted to the City for
construction or installation of a Telecommunication Tower or Wireless
Communications Facility shall demonstrate that the proposed Structure
conforms with the State Of The Art or, alternatively, that State Of The Art
technology is unsuitable for the site involved. Costs of State Of The Art
technology that exceed new Tower Development shall not be presumed to render
the technology unsuitable.



   133.03(B)(9)   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the
installation of a Telecommunications Tower or Antenna complies with the
zoning provisions, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, Lot
coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire Lot shall control, even though the Antenna or Telecommunications Tower
may be located on leased parcels within such Lot.



   133.03(B)(10)   An inventory of existing sites. Each Applicant shall
provide the City with an inventory of its Pre-Existing Telecommunications
Towers and Antennas , and the pre-existing sites of any other
Telecommunications Towers , Antennas and Wireless Communications Facilities
within a three-mile radius of the City.



   133.03(B)(11)   For applications for new Telecommunications Towers ,
the Applicant must provide information to demonstrate, pursuant to the
procedures listed within this subsection, that no Pre-Existing Tower,
existing Structure , or State Of The Art technology that does not require the
Use of new Telecommunications Towers or new Structures, can accommodate or be
modified to accommodate the Applicant ’s proposed Telecommunications Tower
. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no Pre-Existing Tower, Existing
Structure or State Of The Art technology is suitable may consist of an
affidavit from an Engineer licensed to practice in the State of Florida or by
an Engineer exempt from such requirement under Florida Law, and with
experience with radio frequency and Wireless Communications Facilities ,
determining or demonstrating the following:



   133.03(B)(11)(a)   That Pre-Existing Towers or existing Structures
located within the Geographic Search Area do not have the capacity to provide
reasonable technical service consistent with the applicant’s technical
system, including but not limited to, applicable FCC requirements.



   133.03(B)(11)(b)   That Pre-Existing Towers or Existing Structures
are not of sufficient height to meet applicable FCC requirements, or
engineering requirements of the Applicant .



   133.03(B)(11)(c)   That Pre-Existing Towers or Existing Structures
do not have sufficient structural strength or capacity to support
applicant’s proposed Antenna and related equipment, or a replacement Tower
is not economically feasible.



   133.03(B)(11)(d)   That the Applicant ’s proposed Antenna would
cause electromagnetic/radio frequency interference with Antennas on
Pre-Existing Towers, Antennas or Existing Structures , or the Antenna on the
pre-existing Towers or Structures would cause interference with the
applicant’s proposed Antenna .



   133.03(B)(11)(e)   That the Applicant ’s proposed Antenna on a
Pre-Existing Tower or Existing Structure would cause interference with Public
Safety Communications .



   133.03(B)(11)(f)   That the Applicant made diligent efforts but was
unable to obtain permission to install or collocate the Applicant ’s
Wireless Communications Facilities on pre-existing Towers or usable Antenna
support located within a one mile radius from the proposed site.



   133.03(B)(11)(g)   That there are other limiting factors that render
Pre-Existing Towers and Existing Structures unsuitable.



   133.03(B)(12)   The engineering report.



   133.03(B)(13)   If applicable, a copy of the executed lease
agreement of the property where the Wireless Communications Facility and/or
Tower will be located.



   133.03(B)(14)   Additional information that the City may request
consistent with this Chapter and applicable Law to process the application.
In the event the City requests any additional information, the time in which
an application is processed shall be tolled pending receipt and further
evaluation.



   133.03(B)(15)   Consultant fee.  The City shall have the right to
retain independent technical consultants and experts that it deems necessary
to properly evaluate applications for individual Towers . The consultant fee
shall be based upon the hourly rate of the independent technical consultant
or expert the City deems necessary to properly evaluate applications for
Tower . The consultant fee shall be applied to those applications requiring
special review or evaluation. The consultant fee shall be reimbursed by
Applicant to the City prior to issuance of any permits.



   133.03(B)(16)   To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, any
application for a Wireless Communications Facility shall also include:



   133.03(B)(16)(a)   A certification from an Engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Florida or by an Engineer exempt from such
requirement under Florida law, and with experience with radio frequency and
Wireless Communications Facilities that the proposed facility including
reception and transmission functions, is not expected to interfere with or
obstruct transmission to and from existing Public Safety Communications
facilities;



   133.03(B)(16)(b)   A remedial action plan, subject to the City’s
approval, that includes, but is not limited to, procedures to rectify any
interference or obstruction with Public Safety Communications , its plans to
make all necessary repairs and/or accommodations to alleviate the
interference or obstruction, and a period of compliance.



   133.03(B)(17)   If the Applicant seeks relief from any regulation
contained herein, the Applicant shall provide the nature of the specific
relief sought and the engineering justification to demonstrate that without
such relief, applicability of the regulation would have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of Personal Wireless Services .



   133.03(C)   Engineering report.  The engineering report shall be
from an Engineer licensed to practice in the State of Florida or by an
Engineer exempt from such requirement under Florida law, and with experience
with radio frequency and Wireless Communications Facilities, and shall
include:



   133.03(C)(1)   A site Development Plan of the entire subject
property drawn to scale, including, without limitation:



   133.03(C)(1)(a)   A tax parcel number, legal description of the
parent tract and leased parcel, total acres, and section/township/range of
the subject property;



   133.03(C)(1)(b)   The lease parcel fully dimensioned, including
property lines, setbacks, roads on or adjacent to the subject property,
easements;



   133.03(C)(1)(c)   Outline of all existing Buildings , including
purpose (i.e. residential Buildings , garages, Accessory Structures, etc.) on
subject property;



   133.03(C)(1)(d)   All existing vegetation, by mass or individually
by diameter, measured for feet from the ground of each stand-alone Tree on
the subject property;



   133.03(C)(1)(e)   Proposed/existing security barrier, indicating
type and extent as well as point of controlled entry;



   133.03(C)(1)(f)   Proposed/existing access easements, Utility
easements, and parking for the Telecommunications Tower ;



   133.03(C)(1)(g)   All proposed changes to the subject property,
including grading, vegetation removal, temporary or permanent roads and
driveways, Stormwater management facilities and any other construction or
Development attendant to the Telecommunications Tower ;



   133.03(C)(1)(h)   Scaled elevation drawing of proposed
Telecommunications Tower , including location of all mounts, Antennas ,
Equipment Facilities , fencing and Landscaping ;



   133.03(C)(1)(i)   If applicable, On-Site and adjacent land uses.



   133.03(C)(2)   If applicable, a narrative of why the proposed
Telecommunications Tower cannot comply with the requirements of the
engineering report.



   133.03(C)(3)   The type of Telecommunications Tower and specifics of
design including, if appropriate, the following:



   133.03(C)(3)(a)   Equipment brochures for the proposed Tower such as
manufacturer’s specifications or trade journal reprints. These shall be
provided for the Antennas , mounts, Equipment Facilities , cables as well as
cable runs, and security barrier, if any;



   133.03(C)(3)(b)   Materials of the proposed Tower specified by
generic type and specific treatment (i.e., anodized aluminum, stained wood,
painted fiberglass, etc.). These shall be provided for the Antennas , mounts,
Equipment Facilities , cables as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if
any;



   133.03(C)(3)(c)   Colors of the proposed Tower represented by a
color board showing actual colors proposed. Colors shall be provided for the
Antennas , mounts, Equipment Facilities , cables as well as cable runs, and
security barrier, if any;



   133.03(C)(3)(d)   Dimensions of the Tower specified for all three
directions: height, width and breadth. These shall be provided for the
Antennas , mounts, Equipment Facilities and security barrier, if any; and



   133.03(C)(3)(e)   A visual impact analysis, with a minimum of two
photo digitalization or photographic superimpositions of the Tower within the
subject property. The photo digitalization or photographic superimpositions
shall be provided for all attachments, including: the Antennas , mounts,
Equipment Facilities , cables as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if
any for the total height, width and breadth, as well as at a distance of 250
feet and 500 feet from all properties within that range, or at other points
agreed upon in a pre-application conference.



   133.03(C)(4)   Current wind-loading capacity and a projection of
wind-loading capacity using different types of Antennas as contemplated by
the Applicant . No Telecommunications Tower shall be permitted to have its
wind loading capacity lower than as provided for by the Florida Building Code.



   133.03(C)(5)   An affidavit from Florida registered professional
Engineer or by an Engineer exempt from such requirement under Florida Law,
and with experience with radio frequency and Wireless Communications
Facilities stating that the proposed Telecommunications Tower , including
reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the visual and
customary transmission or reception of radio, television or similar services
as well as other wireless services enjoyed by adjacent residential and
nonresidential properties.



   133.03(C)(6)   An affidavit from an Engineer licensed to practice in
the State of Florida or by an Engineer exempt from such requirement under
Florida Law, and with experience with radio frequency and Wireless
Communications Facilities stating confirming compliance with all applicable
Building codes, associated regulations and safety standards. For all Towers
attached to Existing Structures , the statement shall include certification
that the Structure can support the load superimposed from the
Telecommunications Tower .



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.04  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR COLLOCATIONS.



   The following information must be included in all Collocation
applications.



   133.04(A)   An engineering report, from an Engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Florida or by an Engineer exempt from such
requirement under Florida Law, and with experience with radio frequency and
Wireless Communications Facilities , that shall include:



   133.04(A)(1)   A statement of compliance with this Chapter and all
applicable Building codes, associated regulations and safety standards as
provided herein. The statement shall include certification that the Existing
Structure can support the load superimposed from the Antenna (s).



   133.04(A)(2)   The type of Antenna and specifics of design
including, if appropriate, the following:



   133.04(A)(2)(a)   Equipment brochures for the proposed Antenna such
as manufacturer’s specifications or trade journal reprints. These shall be
provided for the Antennas , mounts, Equipment Facilities , cables as well as
cable runs, and security barrier, if any;



   133.04(A)(2)(b)   Materials of the proposed Antenna specified by
generic type and specific treatment (i.e., anodized aluminum, stained wood,
painted fiberglass, etc.). These shall be provided for the Antennas , mounts,
Equipment Facilities , cables as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if
any;



   133.04(A)(2)(c)   Colors of the proposed Antenna represented by a
color board showing actual colors proposed. Colors shall be provided for the
Antennas , mounts, Equipment Facilities , cables as well as cable runs, and
security barrier, if any;



   133.04(A)(2)(d)   Dimensions of the proposed Antenna specified for
all three directions: height, width and breadth. These shall be provided for
the Antennas , mounts, Equipment Facilities and security barrier, if any; and



   133.04(A)(2)(e)   A visual impact analysis, with a minimum of two
photo digitalization or photographic superimpositions of the Pre-Existing
Tower and proposed Antenna within the subject property. The photo
digitalization or photographic superimpositions shall be provided for all
attachments, including: the Antennas , mounts, Equipment Facilities , cables
as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any for the total height,
width and breadth, as well as at a distance of 250 feet and 500 feet from all
properties within that range, or at other points agreed upon in a
pre-application conference.



   133.04(A)(3)   Current wind-loading capacity and a projection of
wind-loading capacity using different types of Antennas as contemplated by
the Applicant . No Telecommunications Tower shall be permitted to have its
wind loading capacity lower than as provided for by the Florida Building Code.



   133.04(A)(4)   A certification that the proposed Antenna , including
reception and transmission functions, is not expected to interfere with or
obstruct transmission to and from existing Public Safety Communications
facilities or any other Wireless Communications services;



   133.04(A)(5)   A description of the geographical service area
requirements; and



   133.04(A)(6)   If necessary, a remedial action plan, subject to the
City’s approval, that includes, but is not limited to, procedures to
rectify any interference or obstruction with Public Safety Communications ,
its plans to make all necessary repairs and/or accommodations to alleviate
the Interference or obstruction, and a period of compliance.



   133.04(B)   An inventory of existing sites. Each Applicant shall
provide the City with an inventory of its Pre-Existing Telecommunications
Towers and Antennas , and the pre-existing sites of any other
Telecommunications Towers , Antennas and Wireless Communications Facilities
within a three-mile radius of the City.



   133.04(C)   A copy of the executed lease agreement of the Tower
where the Wireless Communications Facility and/or Antenna will be collocated;
and



   133.04(D)   Additional information that the City may request
consistent with this Chapter and applicable Law to process the application.
In the event the City requests any additional information, the time in which
an application is processed shall be tolled pending receipt and further
evaluation.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.05  INSTALLATIONS ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   133.05(A)   Applications for a Wireless Communications Facility on
property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City, except for Public
Rights-Of-Way , shall require a lease agreement approved by the City
Commission and executed by the City and the Owner of the proposed Wireless
Communications Facility . The City may require, as a condition of entering
into a lease agreement, the dedication of space on the facility for Public
Safety Communications purposes, as well as property improvement on the leased
space. Any dedications and improvements shall be negotiated prior to
execution of the lease.



   133.05(B)   No lease granted pursuant to this Chapter shall convey
the exclusive right, privilege, permit or Franchise to occupy or to use the
public lands of the City for delivery of Personal Wireless Services or any
other purpose.



   133.05(C)   No lease granted pursuant to this Chapter shall convey
any right, title or interest in the public lands other than a leasehold
interest, and shall be deemed only to allow the use of the public lands for
the limited purposes and term stated in the lease. No lease shall be
construed as a conveyance of a title interest in the property.



   133.05(D)   Any and all Collocations or placements of Antennas on a
Wireless Communications Facility that is located on property owned, leased or
otherwise controlled by the City, except for Public Rights-Of-Way , shall
require a separate lease agreement with the City as well as full compliance
with the requirements of this Chapter for such Collocations and placements of
Antennas .



   133.05(E)   Pursuant to applicable Law, the City may contract with a
third party to administer City-owned property for purposes of developing
City-owned sites, consistent with the terms of this Chapter. Except as
specifically provided herein, the terms of this Chapter, and the requirements
established thereby, shall be applicable to all Telecommunication Towers or
Personal Wireless Service facilities to be developed or collocated on
City-owned sites.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.06  APPLICATION FEES AND PROCESS.



   133.06(A)   Filing fee.  All applications shall be accompanied by
the applicable non-refundable filing fee, which shall be adopted by
resolution of the City Commission.



   133.06(B)   Applicants regulated by this Chapter may request a
pre-application conference with the City. Such request shall be submitted
with a non-refundable fee in an amount set by City resolution to reimburse
the City for the cost and fees incurred by the conference.



   133.06(C)   Unless otherwise authorized by State or federal Law, no
Person shall construct, install or maintain a Wireless Communications
Facility within the City without the City’s approval pursuant to this
Chapter.



   133.06(D)   The City Manager shall review the application for
consistency with the City’s Comprehensive Master Development Plan , land
development regulations including this Chapter, and compatibility of the
proposed Wireless Communications Facility with the surrounding neighborhood.
For applications that are not subject to the City Commission’s approval
pursuant to this Chapter, the City Manager shall issue a written decision
either granting or denying an application. The City Manager shall not grant
an application for a proposed Wireless Communications Facility that will
interfere with any Public Safety Communications , or is otherwise not in
compliance with this Chapter. In the event the City Manager denies an
application, the City Manager shall set forth the reasons for denial in
writing.



   133.06(E)   Notification of completeness.  The City Manager shall
notify the Applicant within 20 days after the date the application is
submitted as to whether the application is, for administrative purposes only,
properly completed and has been properly submitted in accordance with the
requirements set forth above. However, such determination shall not be deemed
as an approval of the application. Such notification shall indicate with
specificity any deficiencies which, if cured, could make the application
properly completed.



   133.06(F)   In the event that the City Manager determines that a
proposed Wireless Communications Facility subject to the City Commission’s
approval is not in compliance with this Chapter, the City Manager shall
recommend that the City Commission deny the application and shall set forth
the reasons for denial in writing.



   133.06(G)   The City Commission shall consider the application, the
City Manager’s recommendation, and any additional evidence presented by the
Applicant , City staff and the public.



   133.06(H)   Any decision of the City Commission to deny an
application shall authorize the City Manager to set forth in writing the City
Commission’s reasons for the denial. It is the intent of this Section to
establish a procedure for compliance with the “written decision” and
“substantial evidence” requirements of the Telecommunications Act, 47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(iii).



   133.06(I)   The City shall grant or deny each properly completed
application for a Collocation based on the application’s compliance with
this Chapter, City Code and any other applicable regulations, and within the
normal time frame for a similar Building Permit review but in no case later
than 45 business days after the date the application is determined to be
properly completed. This time frame shall not apply to an application for
Collocation on City-owned property.



   133.06(J)   The City shall grant or deny each properly completed
application for any other Wireless Communications Facility based on the
application’s compliance with this Chapter and any other applicable law,
including but not limited to the City Code and within the normal time frame
for a similar type of review, but in no case later than 90 business days
after the date the application is determined to be properly completed. This
time frame shall not apply to an application for Wireless Communications
Facilities on City-owned property.



   133.06(K)   An application is deemed submitted or resubmitted on the
date the application is received by the City. If the City does not notify the
Applicant in writing that the application is not completed in compliance with
the City’s regulations within 20 business days after the date the
application is initially submitted or additional information resubmitted, the
application is deemed, for administrative purposes only, to be properly
completed and properly submitted. However, the determination shall not be
deemed as an approval of the application. If the application is not completed
in compliance with the City’s regulations, the City shall so notify the
Applicant in writing indicating with specificity any deficiencies in the
required documents or deficiencies in the content of the required documents
which, if cured, make the application properly completed. Upon resubmission
of information to cure the stated deficiencies, the City shall notify the
applicant, in writing, within the normal time frames of review, but in no
case longer than 20 business days after the additional information is
submitted, of any remaining deficiencies that must be cured. However, if
Applicant does not cure the application deficiencies within 20 business days
after receiving the notice of deficiencies, the application shall be
considered withdrawn or closed.



   133.06(L)   The time frames specified in this Section may be
extended because the City’s procedures generally applicable to all other
similar types of applications require action by the City Commission and/or
development review staff and such action has not taken place within the
specified time frames. Under such circumstances, the City Commission shall
either grant or deny the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting.



   133.06(M)   The City may request, but not require, a waiver of the
time frames by the Applicant , except that, with respect to a specific
application the City may require a one-time waiver in the case of a declared
local, state, or federal Emergency that directly affects the administration
of all permitting activities of the City.



   133.06(N)   The City may enter into an entry and testing agreement
with the Wireless Communications Facility owner, Applicant and/or operator,
in a form approved by the City Attorney, without approval of the City
Commission.



   133.06(O)   Extension and waiver.  Where action by the City
Commission or any other City agency is required on an application for a
permit taken pursuant to this Section, the City Manager may by letter to the
Applicant extend the time frame for a decision until the next available
scheduled date of the Commission or agency as to whether to grant or deny an
application for a permit taken pursuant to this Chapter. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Applicant may voluntarily agree to waive the time frames set
forth above.



   133.06(P)   Emergency extension.  The City may request a waiver of
the time frames by the Applicant, except that, with respect to a specific
application, a one-time waiver may be required in the case of a declared
local, State, or federal Emergency that directly affects the administration
of all permitting activities in the City.



   133.06(Q)   Appeal.  If an application is denied by the City
Manager for noncompliance with the requirements of this Chapter then the
Applicant may appeal this decision to the City Commission in accordance with
the City Code. Any decision appealed from the City Commission may be appealed
in accordance with applicable Law.



   133.06(R)   Nonconforming Towers.  Any Telecommunication Towers in
existence in the City on February 17, 2009 that are nonconforming with the
terms and provisions of this Section shall have until February 17, 2014 to
bring said Tower into compliance, or upon the change of ownership of the
leasehold interest upon which the Tower is located, whichever shall occur
first.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.07  COLLOCATION.



   133.07(A)   Intent.  It is the intent of the City to encourage
Collocation of Antennas on Existing Structures and Pre-Existing Towers.
Except as provided herein, all Towers shall have the capacity to permit
multiple users.



   133.07(B)   Collocation incentive.  To encourage such collocation,
the City Manager may approve an application submitted to collocate Antennas
on an Existing Structure, Pre-Existing Tower, or a Stealth facility,
consistent with this Chapter. The specific Collocation applications indicated
in the subsections below shall be subject to administrative approval.



   133.07(C)   Exemptions for collocation.



   133.07(C)(1)   Any Antenna and related equipment to service the
Antenna that is being collocated on an above ground Existing Structure is not
subject to land development regulations of the City Code if the following
criteria are met:



   133.07(C)(1)(a)   The Existing Structure already contains an
established Antenna and related equipment;



   133.07(C)(1)(b)   The Existing Structure is not non-conforming and
may pursuant to Florida Law be expanded; and



   133.07(C)(1)(c)   The height of the Structure containing the Antenna
and related equipment would not be increased by the addition of Antenna and
related equipment.



   133.07(C)(2)   Notwithstanding the exemption provided for in this
Section, Construction of the Antenna and related equipment is subject to
review by the City Manager and any other City department or agency for
compliance with the City’s design standards; and life safety codes,
including but not limited to Building codes; conditions or requirements in
any existing permits, agreements, or approvals. Moreover, this Section shall
not relieve the permit holder for or Owner of the Existing Structure or
property of compliance with any applicable condition or requirement of a
permit, agreement, or land development regulation, including but not limited
to any aesthetic requirements, or Law.



   133.07(D)   Collocation applications requiring only City Manager
approval.



   133.07(D)(1)   Collocations on Towers , including nonconforming
Towers , are subject to only Building Permit review, which may include a
review for compliance with this Section, if they meet the following
requirements:



   133.07(D)(1)(a)   The Collocation does not increase the height;



   133.07(D)(1)(b)   The Collocation does not increase the ground space
area, commonly known as the compound, approved in the site plan for Equipment
Facilities and ancillary facilities, except as allowed under this Chapter; and



   133.07(D)(1)(c)   The Collocation consists of Antennas , Equipment
Facilities , and ancillary facilities that are of a design and configuration
consistent with all applicable regulations, restrictions, or conditions, if
any, applied to the initial Antennas placed on the Tower and to its
accompanying Equipment Facilities and ancillary facilities and, if
applicable, applied to the Tower supporting the Antennas . Such regulations
may include the design and aesthetic requirements, but not procedural
requirements, other than those authorized by this Section, of the applicable
land development regulations in effect at the time the initial Antennas
placement was approved.



   133.07(D)(1)(d)   Such Collocations are not subject to any design or
placement requirements of land development regulations in effect at the time
of the Collocation that are more restrictive than those in effect at the time
of the initial Antennas placement approval, to any other portion of the land
development regulations, or to public hearing review. Such Collocation
applications are not subject to the City Commission’s approval and shall be
decided by the City Manager.



   133.07(E)   Other Collocation applications requiring only City
Manager approval.



   133.07(E)(1)   Except for a historic Building , Structure , site,
object, or district, the following Collocation applications on all other
Existing Structures shall also be subject to no more than a City Manager
review if they meet the following requirements:



   133.07(E)(1)(a)   The Collocation does not increase the height;



   133.07(E)(1)(b)   The Collocation does not increase the ground space
area, otherwise known as the compound, if any, approved in the site plan for
equipment enclosures and ancillary facilities;



   133.07(E)(1)(c)   The Collocation consists of Antennas , equipment
enclosures, and ancillary facilities that are of a design and configuration
consistent with any applicable structural or aesthetic design requirements
and any requirements for location on the Structure , but not prohibitions or
restrictions on the placement of additional Collocations on the Existing
Structure or procedural requirements, other than those authorized by this
Section of the Chapter at the time of the Collocation application; and



   133.07(E)(1)(d)   The Collocation consists of Antennas , equipment
enclosures, and ancillary facilities that are of a design and configuration
consistent with all applicable restrictions or conditions, if any, that do
not conflict with subsection 133.07(E)(1)(c) and were applied to the initial
Antennas placed on the Structure and to its accompanying equipment enclosures
and ancillary facilities and, if applicable, applied to the Structure
supporting the Antennas .



   133.07(F)   If only a portion of the Collocation does not meet the
requirements of any of the above subsections, such as an increase in the
height or a proposal to expand the ground space approved in the site plan for
the equipment enclosure, where all other portions of the Collocation meet the
requirements of this Subsection, that portion of the Collocation only may be
reviewed by the City Commission. A Collocation proposal under this Subsection
that increases the ground space area, otherwise known as the compound,
approved in the original site plan for equipment facilities and ancillary
facilities by the lesser of 400 or more square feet or 50% of the original
compound size, shall, however, be reviewed as if it were a new Wireless
Communications Facility .



   133.07(G)   The replacement of or modification to a Wireless
Communications Facility , except a Tower , that results in a Wireless
Communications Facility not readily discernibly different in size, type, and
appearance when viewed from ground level from surrounding properties, and the
replacement or modification of equipment that is not visible from surrounding
properties, all as reasonably determined by the City, shall be deemed an
application for Collocation.



   133.07(H)   The Owner of the Pre-Existing Tower on which the
proposed Antennas are to be collocated shall remain responsible for
compliance with any applicable condition or requirement of a permit or
agreement, or any applicable condition or requirement of the land development
regulations to which the Pre-Existing Tower must comply, including any
aesthetic requirements, provided the condition or requirement is not
inconsistent with this Section.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.08  INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS.



   To the extent not inconsistent with applicable federal Law, all
providers of Personal Wireless Services and all Owners and/or operators of
Wireless Communications Facilities , Towers , and Antennas shall comply with
the following:



   133.08(A)   Any Wireless Communications Facility , Tower , or
Antenna that causes interference with the operations of Public Safety
Communications services, shall, after receiving notice, rectify the
interference immediately or, to the extent not inconsistent with applicable
Law, cease transmitting signals (go off the air) at once.



   133.08(B)   In the event that the Wireless Communications Facility ,
Tower , or Antenna interferes with Public Safety Communications , it shall be
the responsibility of the Owner and/or operator that creates the interference
to make all necessary repairs and/or accommodations to alleviate the problem
at its expense. The City shall be held harmless in this occurrence.



   133.08(C)   In the event that a provider of Personal Wireless
Services and/or an Owner and/or operator of Wireless Communications Facility
, Tower , and/or Antenna interferes with Public Safety Communications , once
it ceases transmission of signals (goes off the air) and rectifies the
interference, it may not continue to resume providing Personal Wireless
Services until it receives approval from the City.



   133.08(D)   To the extent not inconsistent with applicable Law, if a
provider of Personal Wireless Services or the Owner or operator of a Wireless
Communications Facility , Tower or Antenna refuses to stop the interference
or to cease transmitting signals as required herein, the City may file a
complaint with the FCC for resolution and/or seek an injunction against it
pursuant to F.S. § 843.025 that makes it unlawful for any Person to deprive
a LawEnforcement Officer of his or her radio or to otherwise deprive the
Officer of the means to summon assistance, or pursue any other remedy
authorized by applicable Law. Any Person who is found to have violated this
Section shall be punished as provided by applicable Law.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.09  DEVELOPMENT, ZONING, BUILDING AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   133.09(A)   General regulations.  The standards listed in this
Section apply specifically to all Antennas, Towers and Wireless
Communications Facilities, except those owned by the City, located on
property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled and approved by the City or
as otherwise specified herein. The City reserves the right to modify or waive
the requirements for use on public property. The City shall not be required
to provide access to City property.



   133.09(B)   The construction, maintenance, operation and repair of
Wireless Communications Facilities are subject to the regulatory supervision
of the City to the full extent permitted by applicable Law, and shall be
performed in compliance with all Laws, ordinances and practices affecting
such facility including, but not limited to, zoning codes, Building codes,
and safety codes, and as provided in this Chapter. The construction,
maintenance, operation and repair shall be performed in a manner consistent
with applicable industry standards, including the Electronic Industries
Association .



   133.09(C)   All Telecommunication Towers and Antennas must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, including
emissions standards, and any other agency of the local, State or federal
government with the authority to regulate Towers and Antennas prior to
issuance of a Building Permit by the City. If such applicable standards and
regulations are revised and require that existing facilities adhere to such
revised standards, then the Owners of Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
governed by this Chapter shall bring such Towers and Antennas into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations within 90 calendar days of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling State or federal agency.
Failure to bring Towers and Antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the
Telecommunications Tower , Antenna or wireless Communications Facility at the
owner’s expense.



   133.09(D)   To ensure the structural integrity of Telecommunications
Towers installed, the Owner shall construct and maintain the
Telecommunications Tower in compliance with the Florida Building Code, and
all other applicable codes and standards. A statement shall be submitted to
the City by a Florida Registered Professional Engineer certifying compliance
with this Section upon completion of construction and/or subsequent
modification. Where an Existing Structure , including Poles , is requested as
a Stealth facility, the facility, and all modifications thereof, shall comply
with all requirements as provided in this Chapter and all other applicable
standards. Following the issuance of a Building permit, the City shall
require an analysis of a soil sample from the base of the Telecommunications
Tower site.



   133.09(E)   Telecommunications Towers , Wireless Communications
Facilities and AntennaOwners shall submit an annual report to the City in
September of each Year, including, but not limited to:



   133.09(E)(1)   A summary of any and all complaints of interference
with Public Safety Communications within the City that includes remedial
measures that were taken to rectify or eliminate interference, and any other
information which may be reasonably required to monitor the Telecommunication
Towers and AntennaOwner ’s compliance with this Chapter; and



   133.09(E)(2)   A certification of the Wireless Communications
Facilities , Towers or Antenna ’s structural and electrical integrity.



   133.09(F)   Inspections.



   133.09(F)(1)   The City reserves the right to conduct periodic
inspection of Wireless Communications Facility , Towers , and Antennas at the
Owner ’s expense, to ensure structural and electrical integrity and
compliance with this Chapter, the Florida Building Code, and other applicable
codes and regulations.



   133.09(F)(2)   The City may conduct more frequent inspections of
Wireless Communications Facility , Towers , or Antennas should there be an
Emergency, Extraordinary Conditions or other reason to believe that the
structural and electrical integrity of the Wireless Communications Facility,
Tower , or Antenna is jeopardized.



   133.09(F)(3)   If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a
Wireless Communications Facility, Tower , or Antenna fails to comply with
such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided to the Owner , the Owner shall commence work
within 30 calendar days to bring such Wireless Communications Facility ,
Tower , or Antenna into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such
Wireless Communications Facility into compliance within 60 calendar days of
notice shall constitute grounds for requiring the removal of the facility at
the Owner ’s expense.



   133.09(F)(4)   The City reserves the right to require additional
inspections if there is evidence that a Tower or a Wireless Communications
Facility has a safety problem or is exposed to Extraordinary Conditions.



   133.09(F)(5)   TowerOwners shall also submit a report to the City
certifying structural and electrical integrity of Towers every two Years.
Towers shall also be inspected once every five Years by a Florida Registered
Professional Engineer , at the TowerOwner ’s expense, and the results
submitted to the City.



   133.09(F)(6)   The report above shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable fee to be established by City resolution to reimburse the City
for the cost of review. Based upon the results of the inspection, the City
may require repair or removal of a Wireless Communications Facility or Tower .



   133.09(G)   Wireless Communications Facilities in Residential
Areas.  The City prohibits the placement of a Telecommunications Tower and
Antennas in a Residential Area or residential zoning district unless the
Applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City that it cannot
reasonably provide its Personal Wireless Service to the Residential Area or
zone from outside the Residential Area or zone. In such a case, the City and
the Applicant shall cooperate to determine an appropriate location for an
Antenna of an appropriate design within the Residential Area or zone. The
Applicant shall reimburse any and all reasonable costs and expenses incurred
by the City for this cooperative determination, including attorneys’ fees.
Such application for cooperation shall be accompanied by an application fee
in the same amount as for a new Tower. The cooperation application shall not
be subject to the time frames contained in this Chapter for granting and
denying applications.



   133.09(H)   Hierarchy of zoning districts and siting alternatives. 
Development of a Wireless Communications Facility shall be permitted in the
following Preferred Zoning Districts and in accordance with the following
siting alternatives hierarchies.



   133.09(H)(1)   The Preferred Zoning Districts order of ranking is
from highest (a) to lowest (g). Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed,
the Applicant must demonstrate in its application that higher ranked options
are not available. The availability of a less expensive lease on a lower
ranked site is not sufficient in and of itself to justify using the lower
ranked alternative where a higher ranked alterative is otherwise available.



   133.09(H)(1)(a)   MU;



   133.09(H)(1)(b)   CF;



   133.09(H)(1)(c)   I-1, C-1, and O-1;



   133.09(H)(1)(d)   PECD;



   133.09(H)(1)(e)   AE and CV;



   133.09(H)(1)(f)   GC;



   133.09(H)(1)(g)   Any other zoning district in accordance with §
133.09(G) above.



   133.09(H)(2)   The order of ranking is from highest (a) to lowest
(g). Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed, the Applicant must
demonstrate in its application that higher ranked options are not available.
The availability of a less expensive lease on a lower ranked site is not
sufficient in and of itself to justify using the lower ranked alternative
where a higher ranked alterative is otherwise available.



   133.09(H)(2)(a)   Collocation on existing Stealth Tower on
City-owned property in a Preferred Zoning District .



   133.09(H)(2)(b)   Collocation on existing Telecommunications Tower
on City-owned property in a Preferred Zoning District .



   133.09(H)(2)(c)   Collocation on Existing Structures on City-owned
property in a Preferred Zoning District .



   133.09(H)(2)(d)   Collocation on existing Telecommunications Tower
in a Preferred Zoning District .



   133.09(H)(2)(e)   Attachment of Antenna on a current Wireless
Communications Facility in a Preferred Zoning District .



   133.09(H)(2)(f)   New Stealth Tower in a Preferred Zoning District .



   133.09(H)(2)(g)   New Telecommunications Tower in a Preferred Zoning
District .



   133.09(H)(3)   On property owned by the City, the City shall
authorize the application and use of City property after the Applicant
executes a lease agreement acceptable to the City. The City shall have no
obligation whatsoever to execute such lease even if the Applicant can meet
the criteria set forth herein.



   133.09(I)   Unstaffed communication Buildings.



   133.09(I)(1)   Minimum setbacks.  Unmanned communication Buildings
shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district where such
Buildings are situated.



   133.09(I)(2)   Size limitations.  An unstaffed communication
Building shall be a permanent Structure not to exceed 250 square feet in
floor area. More than one unstaffed communication Building may be permitted
on a site; provided, however, that the total square footage of such
Buildings, added together, does not exceed 1,000 square feet. If the site
contains more than one Building, the required distance separation between the
Buildings may be excused.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.10  STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS.



   133.10(A)   Minimum standards.  Except where a variance is granted,
every Telecommunications Tower must meet the following minimum standards:



   133.10(A)(1)   The Height of a Telecommunications Tower shall not
exceed 100 feet.



   136.10(A)(2)   All Telecommunication Towers shall be designed and
constructed with the capability of accommodating three users.



   133.10(A)(3)   Telecommunication Towers or Antennas shall be
approved by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other appropriate
agency prior to issuance of a Building Permit by the City and comply with §
133.06 of this Chapter. Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit (s) by the
City, the Applicant shall provide evidence that the Telecommunication Towers
or Antennas are in compliance with FAA regulations. Where an Antenna will not
exceed the highest point of the Existing Structure upon which it is to be
mounted, such evidence shall not be required.



   133.10(A)(4)   All proposed Telecommunication Towers shall comply
with current radio frequency emissions standards of the FCC.



   133.10(A)(5)   All Telecommunication Tower sites must comply with
the Landscaping requirements of the City in force at the time the application
for a Telecommunication Tower site plan approval is submitted to the City. An
eight-foot wall constructed in accordance with the City Code , as measured
from the finished grade of the site, shall be required around the base of any
Tower and may be required around any accessory Building or Structures.



   133.10(A)(6)   The minimum required Landscape buffering widths shall
be consistent with the requirements of the City Code , shall be installed
around the entire outside perimeter of the concrete wall and/or buildings,
encircling the leased Premises on which said Telecommunication Tower shall be
placed. Additional Landscape buffer widths may be required by staff around
the outside perimeter of the wall and around any or all anchors or supports
if deemed necessary to buffer adjacent properties. The City Commission, upon
site plan review, may require additional Landscape buffer widths in excess of
the above requirements as is deemed reasonably necessary in order to enhance
compatibility with adjacent residential and nonresidential land uses.
Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of the perimeter wall.



   133.10(A)(7)   Landscaping , consistent with the minimum
requirements of the City Code shall be installed on the leased area, around
the wall, any Accessory Buildings or Structures. In addition to the City’s
Landscaping requirements, the following Landscaping shall be provided:



   133.10(A)(7)(a)   A minimum row of large Trees or large palms at
least 16 feet in height, or half the height taller than the wall, which ever
is larger, at a maximum distance of 12 to 15 feet apart, with ten- to 12-feet
tall smaller Trees in-between them shall be planted around the perimeter of
the wall;



   133.10(A)(7)(b)   A continuous branch touching branch Hedge (full to
the ground) shall fully screen all non-accessible portions of the wall to the
Height of the wall or tallest element (not Tower ) at installation. All gates
must be opaque, color and type to be approved by the City;



   133.10(A)(7)(c)   All Landscaping shall be properly installed and
maintained in accordance to the approved site plan and City Code requirements
to insure good health and viability. All missing, dead, damaged or diseased
Landscaping shall be replaced with like kind per approved plans or at the
established grown heights of the existing Landscaping (which ever is larger)
within 30 calendar days of notice; and



   133.10(A)(7)(d)   In locations where the impact of the Wireless
Communications Facility abuts residential properties staff can require such
additional Landscaping as necessary to protect the aesthetics and minimize
the impact of the surrounding area;



   133.10(A)(7)(e)   The City Commission, upon site plan review, may
require additional Landscaping in excess of the above requirements as deemed
reasonably necessary in order to enhance compatibly with the adjacent
residential and nonresidential land uses.



   133.10(A)(8)   Telecommunication Towers shall only be located on
parcels larger than 2,500 square feet.



   133.10(A)(9)   Warning Signs for high voltage and trespassing.



   133.10(A)(9)(a)   No Signs , including commercial advertising, Logo
, political Signs , flyers, flags, or banners, but excluding warning Signs ,
shall be allowed on any part of an Antenna or Tower . Any Signs placed in
violation of this Section shall be removed immediately at the facility Owner
’s expense.



   133.10(A)(9)(b)   If high voltage is necessary for the operation of
the Telecommunication Tower , associated equipment, or Backhaul Network or
any Accessory Structures, “HIGH VOLTAGE—DANGER” warning Signs shall be
permanently attached to the fence or wall and spaced no more than 40 feet
apart.



   133.10(A)(9)(c)   “NO TRESPASSING” warning Signs shall be
permanently attached to the fence or wall and spaced no more than 40 feet
apart.



   133.10(A)(9)(d)   The height of the lettering of the warning Signs
shall be at least 12 inches in height. The warning Signs shall be installed
at least five feet above the finished grade.



   133.10(A)(9)(e)   The warning Signs may be attached to freestanding
Poles if the content of the Sign may be obstructed by Landscaping .



   133.10(A)(10)   Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct
support of a Tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the
Telecommunication Tower, unless repairs to the Tower are being made.



   133.10(A)(11)   The minimum setbacks shall conform to the zoning
districts where the Towers are situated. Notwithstanding the above, the City
may require minimum setback requirements for properties zoned industrial, up
to 25 feet from the rear yard and front yard, and 15 feet from the side
yards, as measured from the base of the Tower or from the guy wire anchor,
whichever is closest to the property line or Right-Of-Way when, in the City
Manager’s discretion, the City Manager believes said setbacks to be
necessary in the interest of protection and safety of the public.



   133.10(A)(12)   All Telecommunication Towers shall be located no
closer than 100% of the height of the Tower from Residential Areas or
districts, as measured on a straight line from the two closest points between
the nearest residential zoning district line and the nearest point of the
proposed TowerStructure .



   133.10(A)(13)   The minimum distance separation between an existing
Tower and a proposed Tower shall be no less than one mile. When a
Stealth/Camouflaged Facility or Tower is proposed to be used by the Applicant
, or an existing Tower or Structure that serves another purpose, i.e., Poles
, then, in that event, the City Manager, after administrative review, may
reduce the minimum separation as set forth above up to 25% of said minimum
separation, providing that the proper Landscaping and/or buffering is put in
place at the direction of the City Manager.



   136.10(A)(14)   All Buildings and other Structures to be located on
the same property as a Telecommunications Tower shall conform with the
setbacks established for the underlying zoning district.



   133.10(A)(15)   Each application for a Wireless Communications
Facility may be required to include written approval or a statement of no
objection from other State agencies that may regulate Wireless Communications
Facility siting, design, and construction.



   133.10(A)(16)   Removal of abandoned or unused facilities. A
provider who has determined to discontinue its operations or part of its
operations in the City must either:



   133.10(A)(16)(a)   Remove its own facilities;



   133.10(A)(16)(b)   Provide information satisfactory to the City
Manager that the provider’s obligations for its equipment in the Public
Right-Of-Way or public easement or Private Property under this Section have
been lawfully assumed by another provider; or



   133.10(A)(16)(c)   Submit to the City Manager a proposal and
instruments for transferring ownership of its equipment to the City. If a
provider proceeds under this clause, the City may, at its option:



   133.10(A)(16)(c)1.   Assume ownership of the equipment with a $10.00
nominal consideration, or



   133.10(A)(16)(c)2.   Require the provider, at its own expense, to
remove it, or



   133.10(A)(16)(c)3.   Require the provider to post a bond in an
amount sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated costs to
be incurred in removing the equipment. Equipment of a provider who fails to
comply with the preceding paragraph and which, for 12 months, remains unused
shall be deemed to be Abandoned . Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a
nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at Law or in
equity, including, but not limited to:



   133.10(A)(16)(c)3.a.   Abating the nuisance;



   133.10(A)(16)(c)3.b.   Taking possession of the equipment and
restoring it to a useable condition; or



   133.10(A)(16)(c)3.c.   Requiring removal of the equipment by the
provider or by the provider’s surety under the bond required by § 133.14
herein. Telecommunication Towers being utilized for other purposes, including
but not limited to light standards and power poles, may be exempt from this
provision.



   133.10(A)(17)   Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a
Tower for signs or advertising purposes including company name, banners,
flags, streamers, etc., shall be strictly prohibited.



   133.10(A)(18)   Accessory Buildings or Structures. All accessory
Buildings or Structures shall meet all Building design standards as listed in
this Code, and in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building
Code. All Accessory Buildings or Structures shall require a Building Permit
issued by the City.



   133.10(A)(19)   Colors. Except where superseded by the requirements
of other county, State, or federal regulatory agencies possessing
jurisdiction over Telecommunications Towers , Telecommunications Towers shall
be painted or constructed in neutral colors, designed to blend into the
surrounding environment such as non-contrasting gray, earth tones of
appropriate shades of green, or such other colors as determined by the City
Manager. All Towers must be repainted every three Years and areas where paint
has chipped off the Tower must be repainted, at a minimum, once a Year.



   133.10(A)(20)   In the event a hurricane or any other weather
warning is issued by the appropriate governmental entity that may impact
Wireless Communications Facilities in the City, the City Manager may order a
service provider to temporarily lower and Secure such facilities until such
time as the warning is canceled.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.11  STANDARDS FOR ANTENNAS.



   133.11(A)   Minimum standards.



   133.11(A)(1)   Antennas on rooftops or Building mounted shall be
permitted as an Accessory Use in all Preferred Zoning Districts except in the
residential zoning districts, subject to the procedure and requirements
provided elsewhere in this Chapter, as follows:



   133.11(A)(1)(a)   No commercial advertising shall be allowed on an
Antenna ;



   133.11(A)(1)(b)   No signals, lights, or illumination shall be
permitted on an Antenna , unless required by the Federal Communications
Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration;



   133.11(A)(1)(c)   Any related unstaffed equipment Building shall not
contain more than 250 square feet of Gross Floor Area or be more than ten
feet in height;



   133.11(A)(1)(d)   If the equipment Building is located on the Roof
of the Building , the area of the equipment Building shall not occupy more
than 25% of the Roof area;



   133.11(A)(1)(e)   Antennas , and related equipment Buildings , shall
be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the edge of the Building or rooftop,
located or screened to minimize the visual impact of the Antenna upon
adjacent properties and shall be of a material or color which matches the
exterior of the Building or Structure upon which it is situated; and



   133.11(A)(1)(f)   Antennas shall only be permitted on Buildings that
are at least 50 feet tall. Antennas may be placed on Buildings less than 50
feet tall if the City Manager determines that public safety needs warrant the
Antenna .



   133.11(A)(2)   Building rooftop StealthAntennas may not extend more
than 20 feet above highest point of a Roof . StealthAntennas attached to but
not above rooftop Structures shall be exempt from this provision. Antennas
may exceed 20 feet above the Roof if the City Manager determines that public
safety needs warrant additional height.



   133.11(A)(3)   Building rooftop non-StealthAntennas may not extend
more than ten feet above highest point of a Roof . StealthAntennas attached
to but not above rooftop Structures shall be exempt from this provision.
Antennas may exceed 20 feet above the Roof if the City Manager determines
that public safety needs warrant additional height.



   133.11(B)   Antenna types. To minimize adverse visual impacts,
StealthAntenna types shall be preferred. If a non-StealthAntenna is proposed,
the application shall be required to demonstrate, in a technical manner
acceptable to the City, why the StealthAntenna (i.e. an Antenna incorporated
into the architecture of the Building or fully screened from view from sight
proximate to the Antenna) cannot be used for the particular application. This
does not preclude a combination of the various types of Antenna.



   133.11(C)   Antenna dimensions.  Antenna dimensions shall be
reviewed by the City Manager as required by existing technology. A statement
shall be submitted, prepared by a professional registered Engineer licensed
to practice in the state, and competent to evaluate Antenna choices, to
certify the need for the required dimensions.



   133.11(C)(1)   Whip (omni-directional) Antennas and their supports
must not exceed 15 feet in height and three inches in diameter and must be
constructed of a material or color that matches the exterior of the Building .



   133.11(C)(2)   Microwave dish Antennas located below 65 feet above
the ground may not exceed six feet in diameter. Microwave dish Antennas
located 65 feet and higher above the ground may not exceed eight feet in
diameter. Ground-mounted dish Antennas must be located or screened so as not
to be visible from abutting public Streets or adjacent properties.



   133.11(C)(3)   No more than five dish Antennas shall be installed on
a Monopole Tower.



   133.11(D)   Aircraft hazard.  Prior to the issuance of a permit by
the City, the application shall provide evidence that the Telecommunications
Tower or Antenna is in compliance with FAA regulations. Where an Antenna will
not exceed the highest point of the Existing Structure upon which it is to be
mounted, such evidence shall not be required.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.12  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   133.12(A)   No Telecommunications Towers or Equipment Facilities may
be installed or placed in Public Right-Of-Way, with the exception that an
Antenna may be placed on any Pole that has been already installed or placed
in the Right-Of-Way , with the consent of the Pole owner, subject to the
standards in this Section.



   133.12(B)   Development standards.



   133.12(B)(1)   Any Antenna to be installed in the Right-Of-Way , and
its accompanying Equipment Facilities , shall be subject to all site plan
review and permitting requirements of the City.



   133.12(B)(2)   When installing an Antenna on a Pole , any and all
associated Equipment Facilities shall be placed in any of the following areas:



   133.12(B)(2)(a)   Underground in the Right-Of-Way ; or



   133.12(B)(2)(b)   On an adjacent property, with the consent of the
property Owner provided that all the wiring is underground.



   133.12(B)(3)   Before installing any Antenna on any Pole already
installed in the Right-Of-Way , an Applicant must complete the Antenna
application pursuant to this Chapter and must also comply with the other
applicable sections of this Chapter. An application pursuant to this Section
shall not be deemed a Collocation application.



   133.12(B)(4)   No Antenna may be installed under this Section until
the Applicant fully complies with all the indemnification and insurance
requirements of this Chapter.



   133.12(B)(5)   An Antenna may be mounted on an existing Pole , with
the consent of the PoleOwner , provided the Height of the Antenna does not
extend more than ten feet above the top of such Pole . An existing Pole may
be modified, replaced or rebuilt to accommodate an Antenna so long as the
height of such Pole is not increased by more than ten feet from its existing
height.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.13  REPLACEMENT OR MODIFICATION OF A WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.



   133.13(A)   A Telecommunications Tower that is modified or
reconstructed to accommodate the Collocation of an additional Antenna shall
be of the same Telecommunications Tower type as the existing
Telecommunications Tower , unless the City allows reconstruction as a
monopole pursuant to this Section.



   133.13(B)   An existing Telecommunications Tower may be modified or
rebuilt to a taller height to accommodate an additional Antenna . Such
modification or rebuild of the Telecommunications Tower shall require the
approval of the City Commission. The new height shall comply with the
requirements of this Chapter.



   133.13(C)   A Telecommunications Tower that is being rebuilt to
accommodate an additional Antenna and that requires movement on-site from its
existing location shall require an application for a new Tower . After the
Telecommunications Tower is rebuilt to accommodate Collocation, only one
Telecommunications Tower may remain on the site. A relocated on-site
Telecommunications Tower shall continue to be measured from the original
Telecommunications Tower location for purposes of calculating separation
distances between Towers pursuant to this Section. The relocation of a
Telecommunications Tower pursuant to this Section shall not be deemed to
cause a violation of the separation requirements contained herein.



   133.13(D)   Modification of existing Wireless Communications
Facility . Minor modification of a Wireless Communications Facility shall not
require an additional approval so long as the modification does not change
the height of the Telecommunications Tower , enlarge the AntennaArray ,
enlarge the Equipment Facility and does not involve any Collocation. All
other modifications shall require approval.



   133.13(E)   A Pre-Existing Tower, including a nonconforming Tower ,
may be structurally modified to permit Collocation or may be replaced through
no more than administrative review and Building Permit review, and is not
subject to public hearing review, if the overall height of the Tower is not
increased and, if a replacement, the replacement Tower is a Monopole Tower
or, if the Pre-Existing Tower is a Stealth Tower, the replacement Tower is a
like-Stealth Tower.



   133.13(F)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming Towers or
Antennas . Legal nonconforming Telecommunications Towers or Antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt subject to City Code . Building permits
to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable Building codes
and shall be obtained within 180 calendar days from the date the facility is
damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if the permit expires, the
Telecommunications Tower or Antenna shall be deemed Abandoned as specified in
§ 133.10 herein.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



§ 133.14  INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE AND SECURITY FUNDS.



   133.14(A)   General indemnification.



   133.14(A)(1)   The City shall not enter into a lease agreement with
a Wireless Communications provider unless the Applicant agrees to indemnify,
defend and hold harmless and at City’s option, pay for an attorney selected
by City, to defend the City and the City’s consultants, engineers,
attorneys and assigns and their officials, employees and agents (collectively
referred to as “indemnities”) and each of them from and against all loss,
costs, penalties, fines, damages, claims, expenses (including attorneys’
fees) or liabilities (collectively referred to as “liabilities”) by
reason of any injury to or death of any Person or damage to or destruction or
loss of any property arising out of, resulting from, or in connection with:



   133.14(A)(1)(a)   The performance or non-performance of the actions
contemplated by this Chapter which is or is alleged to be directly or
indirectly caused, in whole or in part, by any act, omission, default or
negligence (whether active or passive) of the Applicant or its employees,
agents or subcontractors (collectively referred to as “applicants”),
regardless of whether it is, or is alleged to be, caused in whole or in part
(whether joint, concurrent or contributing) by any act, omission, default or
negligence (whether active or passive) of the indemnities, or any of them; or



   133.14(A)(1)(b)   The failure of the Applicant to comply with any of
the paragraphs herein or the failure of the provider to conform to statutes,
ordinances, or other regulations or requirements of any governmental
authority, federal or State, in connection with the actions taken under this
Chapter.



   133.14(A)(2)   Indemnification for construction contracts. In the
event that a lease agreement entered into between the City and an Applicant
is deemed to be a “construction contract” pursuant to F.S. § 725.06, the
following indemnification shall apply in lieu of subsection 133.14(A)(1)
above.



   133.14(A)(2)(a)   To the fullest extent permitted by F.S. Chapter
725, the Applicant hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its
officers and employees from liabilities, damages, losses, and costs
including, but not limited to reasonable attorneys’ fees, to the extent
caused by the negligence, recklessness, or intentionally wrongful misconduct
of the provider and persons employed or utilized by the provider in
connection with the actions taken under this Chapter.



   133.14(A)(3)   The indemnification obligations under this Chapter
shall not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of
damages, compensation, or benefits payable by or for the Applicant and/or
Persons employed or utilized by the provider, in the performance of the
actions taken under this Chapter, under any insurance required by this
Chapter including, but not limited to, workers’ compensation acts,
disability benefit acts, or other employee benefit acts.



   133.14(A)(4)   The obligations of the provider under this Chapter
shall not extend to the liability of the consultant, the consultant’s
consultants, and agents and employees or any of them arising out of:



   133.14(A)(4)(a)   The preparation or approval of maps, drawings,
opinions, reports, surveys, change orders, designs or specifications, or



   133.14(A)(4)(b)   The giving of or the failure to give directions or
instructions by the consultant, the consultant’s consultants, and agents
and employees of any of them provided such giving or failure to give is the
primary cause of the injury or damage.



   133.14(B)   Insurance.  The City shall not grant or approve an
application for the installation of a Tower, Antenna and/or Wireless
Communications Facility and shall not enter into any lease agreement for
placement of facilities on City-owned property until and unless the City
obtains assurance that such Applicant or lessee (and those acting on its
behalf) have adequate insurance. At a minimum, the following requirements
must be satisfied:



   133.14(B)(1)   The policies of insurance shall be primary and
written on forms acceptable to the City and placed with insurance carriers
approved and licensed by the Insurance Department in the State of Florida and
meet a minimum financial AM Best Company rating of no less than
“A-Excellent: FSC VII.” In the event that the insurance carrier’s
rating shall drop, the insurance carrier shall immediately notify the City.
No changes shall be made to these specifications without prior written
specific approval by the City.



   133.14(B)(2)   The City of Weston, Calvin Giordano & Associates,
Inc., Weiss Serota Helfman Pastoriza Cole & Boniske, P.L., and Municipal
Technologies, LLC, shall be named as additional insured, as their interests
may appear on all policies except workers’ compensation. As respects
general liability coverage, the completed operations coverage and the
additional insured status of the City must be maintained for this project for
not less than five years following completion and acceptance by the City or
no more restrictive than ISO form CG 20 37 (07 04). Waiver of subrogation in
favor of the City of Weston is required on all policies except workers’
compensation.



   133.14(B)(3)   Applicant shall provide statutory workers’
compensation, and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less
than $1,000,000.00 per employee per accident, $1,000,000.00 disease aggregate
and $1,000,000.00 per employee per disease for all personnel on the worksite.
If applicable, coverage for the Jones Act and US Longshoremen and
Harborworkers Exposures must also be included. (Elective exemptions will not
satisfy this requirement. Certificates evidencing an employee leasing company
as employer will not be accepted).



   133.14(B)(4)   In the event the Applicant has “leased”
employees, the Applicant or the Employee leasing company must provide
evidence of a workers’ compensation policy for all personnel on the
worksite. All documentation must be provided for review and approval by the
City. The Applicant is responsible for the workers’ compensation of any and
all subcontractors used by the contractor. Evidence of workers’
compensation insurance coverage for all subcontractors must be submitted
prior to any work being performed.



   133.14(B)(5)   Commercial general liability: Including but not
limited to bodily injury, property damage, contractual liability, products
and completed operations (without limitation), watercraft or aircraft
liability if those vehicles will be utilized, and personal injury liability
with limits of not less than $2,000,000.00 each occurrence, covering all work
performed under this contract.



   133.14(B)(6)   Business automobile liability: Applicant agrees to
maintain business automobile liability at a limit of liability not less than
$1,000,000.00 each occurrence covering all work performed under this contract.



   133.14(B)(7)   Applicant further agrees coverage shall include
liability for owned, non-owned and hired automobiles. In the event Applicant
does not own automobiles, Applicant agrees to maintain coverage for hired and
non-owned auto liability, which may be satisfied by way of endorsement to the
commercial general liability policy or separate business auto liability
policy. If private passenger automobiles are used in the business, they must
be commercially insured.



   133.14(B)(8)   Umbrella liability: Umbrella polices are acceptable
to provide the total required liability limits.



   133.14(C)   The rights reserved by the City with respect to any
security fund or bond established pursuant to this Chapter are in addition to
all other rights and remedies the City may have under applicable Law.



   133.14(D)   Any Person who knowingly breaches any provision of this
Chapter shall upon receipt of written notice from the City be given a time
schedule to cure the violation. Failure to commence to cure the violation
within 30 calendar days and to complete cure, to the City’s satisfaction,
within 60 calendar days, or such longer time as the City may specify, shall
result in revocation of any permit or license and the City shall seek any
remedy or damages as provided below.



   133.14(E)   Violations.



   133.14(E)(1)   In addition to revoking any permit or license for
violation of this Chapter and any other remedies available at law, including
but not limited to F.S. § 166.0415 and Chapter 162, or equity or provided in
this Chapter, the City may apply any one or combination of the following
remedies in the event an Applicant violates this Chapter, or applicable local
Law or order related to the Public Rights-Of-Way :



   133.14(E)(1)(a)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter or other applicable Law may result in imposition of penalties to be
paid by the Registrant to the City as provided in F.S. Chapter 162 and
Chapter 31 of the City Code .



   133.14(E)(1)(b)   In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the
City may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent
jurisdiction.



   133.14(E)(2)   No waiver. Failure of the City to enforce any
requirements of this Chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the City’s
right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or
to seek appropriate enforcement remedies.



(Ord. 2010-23, passed 10-4-2010)



CHAPTER 134: HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



   134.01   Intent



   134.02   Scope and exemptions



   134.03   Criteria and procedures for designation of a historic
resource



   134.04   Historic resource designation



   134.05   Certificate of appropriateness (COA)



   134.06   Certificate to dig (CTD), protection, preservation, and
procedures



   134.07   Reserved



   134.08   Public hearing and notice



   134.09   Maintenance of historic resource



   134.10   Public nuisance



§ 134.01  INTENT.



   134.01(A)   It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that
the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of properties of historical,
cultural, archaeological, paleontological, aesthetic, and architectural merit
are in the interests of the health, prosperity, and welfare of the people of
the City. Therefore, this Chapter is intended to:



   134.01(B)   Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of Buildings, Structures, portions of Structures, groups of
Structures, manmade or natural landscape features, works of art,
paleontological, and Archeological Resources of sites, and districts which
serve as visible reminders of the City's cultural, social, economic,
political, scientific, religious, prehistoric, and architectural heritage;



   134.01(C)   Safeguard the City's historical, cultural,
archaeological, paleontological, and architectural heritage, as embodied and
reflected in such individual sites, districts, and archeological or
Paleontological Zones;



   134.01(D)   Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;



   134.01(E)   Protect and enhance the City's attraction to visitors
and the support and stimulus to the economy by stabilizing and improving
property values;



   134.01(F)   Encourage new Buildings and developments that will be
harmonious with the existing historic attributes of the City; and



   134.01(G)   Promote the use of individual sites and districts for
the education, pleasure, and welfare of the residents of the City.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.02  SCOPE AND EXEMPTIONS.



   134.02(A)   Unless expressly exempted below, no Building permits
shall be issued for New Construction, Demolition, Alteration, rehabilitation,
signage, or any other physical modification of a Historic Resource without
the prior issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) by the City
Commission.



   134.02(B)   The following permits are exempt from the regulations of
this Chapter.



   134.02(B)(1)   All permits for plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
elevators, fire alarms, and fire extinguishing equipment, and all mechanical
and electrical equipment that do not involve Exterior changes or Construction
visible from the public right-of-way or navigable waterway, or changes to an
interior not previously designated as a Historic Resource and not visible
from the public right-of-way or navigable water.



   134.02(B)(2)   Any permit necessary for compliance with a lawful
order issued by the City, including, without limitation, any permit necessary
for the immediate preservation of public health or safety.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.03  CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES FOR DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC RESOURCE.



   134.03(A)   Designation Criteria. The following criteria shall be
used to determine eligibility for designation of an individual Historic
Resource or a Historic District:



   134.03(A)(1)   Any site, Building, Structure, object, or district
that is listed in the National Register of Historic Places may be designated.



   134.03(A)(2)   A site, Building, Structure, object, or district that
is not listed in the National Register of Historic Places may be designated
only if it conveys an overall sense of past time and place by possessing at
least three of the following attributes of Integrity: location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, and association, and is characterized by one
or more of the following:



   134.03(A)(2)(a)   Events associated with the site, Building,
Structure, object, or district have made a significant contribution to the
cultural, social, political, economic, scientific, religious, prehistoric,
paleontological, or architectural history and have contributed to the pattern
of history in the City, the State of Florida, or the nation;



   134.03(A)(2)(b)   The site, Building, Structure, object, or district
is associated with the lives of persons significant in local, state, or
national history; or



   134.03(A)(2)(c)   The site, Building, Structure, object, or district
embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
Construction; represents the work of a master builder, architect, or
designer; possesses high artistic values; or represents a significant and
distinguishable entity, the components of which may lack individual
distinction;



   134.03(A)(2)(d)   The site, Building, Structure, object, or district
has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory
or history;



   134.03(A)(2)(e)   The site, Building, Structure, object, or district
has achieved significance within the last  50 years as a result of the
extraordinary importance of an event that occurred at the site on a local,
state, or national level; the fragility of the resource; the community's
strong associative attachment to the resource; or the significance of a
Building's architecture or architect; or



   134.03(A)(2)(f)   The Archaeological Site is located within an
Archaeological Zone, the site has been previously recorded with the Florida
Master Site File, and the City has made a good-faith effort to obtain access
to the property to conduct a reconnaissance level archaeological survey, but
access to the property has been denied.



   134.03(A)(3)   Interior spaces shall not be designated unless the
interiors have exceptional architectural, artistic, or historic importance,
and are customarily open to the public.



   134.03(A)(4)   A resource must be at least 50 years of age or, if
less than 50 years old, must possess exceptional importance.



   134.03(B)   Designation Procedures. The following procedures shall
be used in determining eligibility of an individual Historic Resource or a
Historic District:



   134.03(B)(1)   Designation Initiation. An owner of a property, site,
Building, Structure , object, or district, or the City Commission, upon its
own motion, may seek the designation of a property, site, Building,
Structure, object, or district as a Historic Resource .



   134.03(B)(2)   Application. An owner of a property, site, Building,
Structure , object, or district requesting designation shall submit an
application on a form provided by the City.



   134.03(B)(3)   Boundaries. The boundaries of a Historic Resource or
Historic District shall be described in a legal description. The boundaries
of the historic designation site shall be established as follows:



   134.03(B)(3)(a)   For designation of an individual Historic
Resource, the boundary shall be the original site as it was associated with
the Historic Resource during its Period of Significance. If a portion of the
original site containing the Historic Resource has been sold or developed,
that portion of the site that is currently associated with the Historic
Resource shall constitute the boundary.



   134.03(B)(3)(b)   For a Historic District , the boundary shall be
the geographic perimeter of the grouping of sites and properties included in
the district.



   134.03(B)(4)   Review. Upon receipt of a completed application form,
including necessary documentation, the City Manager shall review the
application for completeness and accuracy. Once determined complete and
accurate, the application shall be placed on a City Commission agenda for
consideration. At that meeting, the City Commission will conduct a public
hearing and make a determination regarding designation or, if necessary, make
the determination whether to designate at a subsequent date.



   134.03(B)(5)   Notice. The designation of the site, Building,
Structure , object, or district as a Historic Resource shall not exceed the
scope of the actual application for, or the extent of notice of public
hearing on, the site, Building, Structure, object, or district proposed for
designation.



   134.03(B)(6)   Voting Requirements. If the property owner of an
individual Historic Resource consents to designation, a simple majority vote
of the City Commission shall be required to designate a Historic Resource .
If an individual Historic Resource designation lacks owner consent, then a
majority vote plus one of the City Commission shall be required.



   134.03(B)(7)   Permit Issuance. No permits for any Demolition ,
Alteration , Construction, Relocation, land disturbance, or development
activities shall be issued once a nomination form is filed until the City
Commission acts to approve or deny the nomination, or for six months after
the nomination is filed, whichever shall first occur.



   134.03(B)(8)   Appeal. An appeal of a decision of the City
Commission regarding the designation or failure to designate a property as a
Historic Resource shall be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.04  HISTORIC RESOURCE DESIGNATION.



   A Historic Resource shall be designated by resolution of the City
Commission and upon adoption shall be recorded in the public records of the
County.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.05  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA).



   134.05(A)(1)   COA Required. No person shall undertake any of the
following actions affecting a Historic Resource without first obtaining a COA
from the City Commission:



   134.05(A)(1)(a)   Alteration of the Exterior architectural
appearance or features of a Building or a Structure or designated interior
portion of a Building, Structure, object, or site;



   134.05(A)(1)(b)   New Construction;



   134.05(A)(1)(c)   Relocation;



   134.05(A)(1)(d)   Demolition;



   134.05(A)(1)(e)   Land disturbance; or



   134.05(A)(1)(f)   Development activities.



   134.05(A)(2)   Review of New Construction and Alterations to
designated Buildings and Structures shall be limited to the Exterior
architectural features visible to the public, except for interior portions
designated a Historic Resource.



   134.05(A)(3)   A COA shall be a prerequisite and in addition to any
other permits required by law. The issuance of a COA by the City Commission
shall not relieve the property owner of the duty to comply with other state
and local laws and regulations.



   134.05(A)(4)   Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance to a Building or
Structure that are otherwise permitted by law may be undertaken without a COA
, provided the work on a Historic Resource does not alter the Exterior
architectural appearance or features of the Exterior or designated interior,
or alter elements significant to its architectural, archaeological, or
historic Integrity.



   134.05(A)(5)   If a COA for Relocation is approved, the Historic
Resource shall remain designated during and after its Relocation.



   134.05(A)(6)   Except as set forth in this Chapter, no Building
permit shall be issued by the City that affects any Historic Resource without
a COA .



   134.05(B)(1)   COA Application. The property owner or agent shall
complete and file an application with the City Manager on a form provided by
the City .



   134.05(B)(1)(a)   Applications shall be accompanied by drawings,
plans, or specifications of sufficient detail to show the proposed Exterior
or designated interior Alterations, Additions, changes, or New Construction.



   134.05(B)(1)(b)   Such drawings, plans, or specifications shall
include designated interior and Exterior elevations, floor plans,
architectural design of Buildings and Structures, including proposed
materials, textures, and colors, and all improvements such as walls, walks,
terraces, plantings, accessory Buildings, signs, lights, and other
appurtenant elements.



   134.05(C)   COA Criteria. In approving or denying applications for a
COA, the City Commission shall consider the following general criteria:



   134.05(C)(1)   Whether the proposed modification has a material
effect on the Historic Resource;



   134.05(C)(2)   Whether the proposed modification will affect the
historic and architectural significance, architectural style, design,
arrangements, texture, materials, and color of the Historic Resource;



   134.05(C)(3)   Whether denial of a COA would deprive the property
owner of all reasonable economically beneficial use of such property;



   134.05(C)(4)   Whether the plans may be reasonably carried out by
the applicant;



   134.05(C)(5)   Whether the plans comply with the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards;



   134.05(C)(6)   Whether the proposed work will have a negative impact
on the Historic Resource upon which such activity is to be done; and



   134.05(C)(7)   Whether the proposed work will have a negative impact
on other Historic Resources on the site or on other Historic Resources within
its views.



   134.05(D)   Additional criteria relating to Alterations.  In
approving or denying applications for a COA for Alterations , in addition to
the general criteria listed above, the City Commission shall determine:



   134.05(D)(1)   Whether the distinguishing original qualities or
character of a Building, Structure, or site and its surrounding environment
will be retained. Whenever reasonably possible, historic material or
distinctive Exterior architectural features will not be removed or altered;



   134.05(D)(2)   Whether the proposed Alterations change, destroy, or
adversely affect any Exterior architectural feature upon which the
Alterations are to be performed;



   134.05(D)(3)   Whether the Alterations will protect, enhance, or
perpetuate the Structure, Building, or site;



   134.05(D)(4)   If replacement of an architectural feature is
necessary, whether the new material is compatible with the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, and texture;



   134.05(D)(5)   Whether distinctive stylistic features or examples of
craftsmanship which characterize a Building, Structure, or site will be
preserved; and



   134.05(D)(6)   Whether every reasonable effort is being made to
protect and preserve Archaeological Resources on or adjacent to the site, or
that may be affected by, any Alterations, rehabilitation, restoration, or
reconstruction project.



   134.05(E)   Additional criteria relating to New Construction. In
approving or denying applications for a COA for New Construction , the City
Commission shall consider the following criteria, in addition to other
general criteria listed above, in order to determine whether:



   134.05(E)(1)   The height of the proposed Building is visually
compatible with adjacent or surrounding Buildings or Structures;



   134.05(E)(2)   The width of the proposed Building is visually
compatible with the height of the Building, as well as with adjoining or
surrounding Buildings or Structures;



   134.05(E)(3)   The open space area between the proposed Building,
and adjoining or surrounding Buildings or Structures, is visually compatible;



   134.05(E)(4)   The materials, textures, and colors of the facade of
the proposed Building or Structure are compatible with the predominant
materials used in adjacent or surrounding Buildings or Structures to which
they are visually related;



   134.05(E)(5)   Appurtenances of a Building or Structure, such as
walls, wrought iron fences, landscaping, or Building facades are visually
compatible with the Building or Structure to which they are visually related;
and



   134.05(E)(6)   Whether Additions to Historic Resources are sited as
inconspicuously as reasonably possible and, with the exception of waterfront
properties, towards the rear. All Additions shall be designed to complement
the Historic Resource in terms of scale, shape, and materials, while at the
same time being readable as differentiated from and compatible with the old
work.



   134.05(F)   Additional criteria relating to request to relocate a
Historic Resource.  In approving or denying applications for a COA for
Relocation of a Historic Resource , the City Commission, in addition to the
general criteria listed above, shall consider the following:



   134.05(F)(1)   Whether the Relocation will affect the contribution
the Building or Structure makes to its present setting;



   134.05(F)(2)   Whether there are definite plans for the site to be
vacated;



   134.05(F)(3)   Whether the Building or Structure can be moved
without significant damage to its physical Integrity;



   134.05(F)(4)   Whether the Building or Structure is compatible with
the Building or Structure on its proposed site or adjacent properties;



   134.05(F)(5)   Whether it has been demonstrated that no viable
preservation alternatives exist at its present location; and



   134.05(F)(6)   Whether all necessary measures will be taken to
protect and preserve archaeological and Paleontological Resources affected
by, or adjacent to, a Historic Resource.



A CTD shall also be required for Relocation of a Historic Resource if the
resource is 100 years old or older.



   134.05(G)   Additional requirements relating to requests for
Demolition.  Demolition of a Historic Resource may occur pursuant to an
order of a government agency, a court of competent jurisdiction, or, if
granted, pursuant to an application by the owner or owner’s agent for a COA
for Demolition from the City Commission.



   134.05(G)(1)   In approving or denying applications for a COA for
Demolition of a Historic Resource, in addition to the general criteria listed
above, the following criteria shall be considered:



   134.05(G)(1)(a)   Whether the application concerns a Noncontributing
Resource;



   134.05(G)(1)(b)   Whether the Historic Resource no longer retains
its significance due to permitted Alterations or extensive damage caused by
fire, flood, or storm;



   134.05(G)(1)(c)   Whether the Demolition is of major benefit to a
Historic District ;



   134.05(G)(1)(d)   Whether the historic or architectural importance
of the Historic Resource is significant;



   134.05(G)(1)(e)   Whether the Historic Resource is one of the last
remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood, City, or the region;



   134.05(G)(1)(f)   Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the
property if the proposed Demolition is carried out, and the effect of those
plans on the character of the surrounding properties;



   134.05(G)(1)(g)   Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save
the Historic Resource; and



   134.05(G)(1)(h)   Whether failure to issue the COA for Demolition
will deprive the owner of all reasonably economically beneficial use of the
owner’s property.



   134.05(G)(2)   In addition to the items listed in Subsection
134.05(B)(1) above, the applicant shall provide the following information to
the City Commission :



     134.05(G)(2)(a)   Name of owner of record.



   134.05(G)(2)(b)   Site plan showing all Buildings and Structures
located on the property.



   134.05(G)(2)(c)   Recent photographs of the Building or Structure
proposed for Demolition.



   134.05(G)(2)(d)   Reasons for requesting Demolition and method of
Demolition to be used.



   134.05(G)(2)(e)   Proposed future use of the site and of the
materials from the demolished Building or Structure.



   134.05(G)(3)   If an application for Demolition of a COA for a
Historic Resource is filed, the approval of the COA for Demolition shall be a
prerequisite to the issuance of any other City permits for a Historic
Resource. However, the issuance of a COA for a Demolition shall not occur
until all other approvals required for the redevelopment of the subject site
by the City, and any other jurisdiction, are issued. If no approvals are
required for the redevelopment, the issuance of a COA for a Demolition shall
not occur until the preliminary permit is issued by the City, and any other
jurisdiction, for any ground disturbance for the redevelopment of the subject
site.



   134.05(H)   Application for economic hardship exception. Where, by
reason of particular site conditions and restraints, or because of unusual
circumstances applicable solely to a particular Historic Resource or site
upon which a resource is located, strict enforcement of the provisions of
this Chapter would result in the deprivation of all reasonable economically
beneficial use of the Historic Resource or site upon which the resource is
located, the City Commission shall vary or modify adherence to this Chapter;
provided always that its decision shall ensure harmony with the general
purposes of this Chapter and will not adversely affect the City . In any
instance where there is a claim of undue economic hardship, the applicant
shall submit, by affidavit, the following information:



   134.05(H)(1)   Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, the
description of the entire property purchased, and party from whom the
property was purchased, including a description of the relationship, whether
business or familial, if any, between the owner and the person from whom the
property was purchased.



   134.05(H)(2)   Assessed value of the land and improvements thereon
according to the most recent assessment of the Broward County Property
Appraiser.



   134.05(H)(3)   For depreciable properties, a pro forma financial
statement, indicating the profits and losses of the property for the current
and preceding two years, prepared by an accountant or broker of record.



   134.05(H)(4)   All appraisals obtained by the applicant in
connection with the purchase or financing of the property, or obtained during
the applicant’s ownership of the property.



   134.05(H)(5)   Bona fide offers of the property for sale or rent,
price asked, and offers received, if any.



   134.05(H)(6)   Any consideration by the applicant as to profitable,
adaptive reuses for the property.



   134.05(H)(7)   The City Manager may require that an applicant
furnish such additional information necessary for a determination to be made
of undue economic hardship. The owner shall permit access to the subject
property for the purpose of inspections and appraisals. In the event an
applicant has alleged that strict enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter would result in the deprivation of all reasonable economically
beneficial use to the applicant, evidence pertaining to this allegation shall
be provided before or at the quasi-judicial hearing for the issuance of the
COA as set forth in this Chapter. All interested persons shall be allowed to
participate in the hearing.



   134.05(I)   All Alterations or repairs shall be performed pursuant
to the terms and conditions of the COA .



   134.05(J)   In the event work is not being performed in accordance
with the COA , the Building official shall issue a stop work order until it
is demonstrated that work will commence consistent with the COA or, if
necessary, that an amended COA has been obtained. No additional work shall be
undertaken as long as the stop work order remains in effect.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.06  CERTIFICATE TO DIG (CTD), PROTECTION, PRESERVATION, AND
PROCEDURES.



   134.06(A)(1)   CTD Required. Within a designated Archaeological or
Paleontological Site or Zone, or Historic Resource site or property
containing archaeological or Paleontological Resources or artifacts, no
person shall undertake any of the following actions affecting the site or
property, without first obtaining a CTD from the City Commission for:



   134.06(A)(1)(a)   Any New Construction, filling, digging, removal of
trees, or other activity that may alter or reveal Archaeological Material or
paleontological material; or



   134.06(A)(1)(b)   Any Alterations, Relocations, New Construction, or
Demolitions when ground disturbance is likely to occur within an
Archaeological or Paleontological Site or Zone.



   134.06(A)(2)   A CTD shall be a prerequisite and in addition to any
other permits required by law. The issuance of a CTD by the City Commission
shall not relieve the property owner of the duty to comply with other state
and local laws and regulations.



   134.06(B)   CTD Criteria.  In approving or denying applications for
a CTD , the City Commission shall consider the following:



   134.06(B)(1)   Whether the proposed work will have an effect on a
known or anticipated Historic Resource;



   134.06(B)(2)   Whether the extent to which the historic,
archaeological, paleontological significance of the Historic Resource will be
affected by the proposed work is within the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards;



   134.06(B)(3)   Whether denial of a CTD would deprive the property
owner of all reasonable economically beneficial use of such property;



   134.06(B)(4)   Whether the plans may be reasonably carried out by
the applicant;



   134.06(B)(5)   Whether the plans comply with the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards;



   134.06(B)(6)   Whether the proposed work will have a negative impact
on the Historic Resource upon which such activity is to be done; and



   134.06(B)(7)   Whether the proposed work will have a negative impact
on other Historic Resources on the site or on other Historic Resources within
its view.



   134.06(C)   Application procedures for a CTD.



   134.06(C)(1)   The owner or authorized agent shall complete and file
an application on a form provided by the City.



   134.06(C)(1)(a)   Applications shall be accompanied by drawings,
plans, or specifications of sufficient detail to show the proposed
Alterations, Additions, changes, or New Construction and locations of ground
disturbance activities as are reasonably required for decisions to be made by
the City Commission .



   134.06(C)(1)(b)   After the City Manager determines the application
complete, the application shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the
City Commission . The City Commission shall approve the application for a
CTD, approve the application with conditions, or deny the application. 



   134.06(C)(1)(c)   The CTD may be made subject to specified
conditions, including, but not limited to, those regarding site excavation.



   134.06(C)(1)(d)   An approved CTD shall contain an effective date,
not to exceed 60 days after the decision, at which time the proposed activity
may begin, unless the City Commission initiates the designation process for
the site in question as a Historic Resource or Historic District . In such a
case, all the rules and regulations pertaining to the designation process for
a Historic Resource shall apply.



   134.06(D)   All work performed pursuant to the issuance of a CTD
shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is
not being performed in accordance with the CTD, the Building official shall
issue a stop work order until it is demonstrated that work will commence
consistent with the CTD or, if necessary, that an amended CTD has been
obtained. No additional work shall be undertaken as long as the stop work
order remains in effect.



   134.06(E)   In the event that any Archaeological Materials are
uncovered during development activities, such development activities in the
immediate vicinity of the discovery site shall be discontinued, and certain
actions shall be taken by the property owner.



   134.06(F)(1)   The property owner shall:



   134.06(F)(1)(a)   Notify the City of the discovery.



   134.06(F)(1)(b)   Complete a Phase 1 level survey of the property
completed by a professional archaeologist meeting the qualifications and
standards established by 36 C.F.R. Part 61.



   134.06(F)(1)(c)   Submit the survey to the City, and to the Florida
Master Site File section of the Florida Division of Historical Resources.



   134.06(F)(2)   If the professional archaeologist determines that the
site is not significant, and said determination is verified by the City or
the Florida Master Site File section of the Florida Division of Historical
Resources, then development activities may resume immediately. If the HPO
fails to respond within 14 calendar days after receipt of said survey, the
determination of the professional archaeologist that the site is not
significant shall be presumed to be valid.



   134.06(F)(3)   If the site is determined to be significant, the City
shall initiate preservation of the site by any of the following:



   134.06(F)(3)(a)   Designate the site as a Historic Resource;



   134.06(F)(3)(b)   Recommend approval of incorporation of the site
into a site development plan;



   134.06(F)(3)(c)   Initiate public acquisition of the site;



   134.06(F)(3)(d)   Offer transfer of development rights to the owner
or developer, if available;



   134.06(F)(3)(e)   Recommend offering tax incentives to the owner or
developer pursuant to F.S. § 193.505; or



   134.06(F)(3)(f)   Allow development activities to proceed under the
supervision of a professional archaeologist, at a level of supervision to be
determined by the archaeologist, to ensure protection of the site.



   134.06(F)(4)   If preservation of the site is not feasible,
development activities in the immediate area of the discovery shall be
delayed for a period of time not to exceed three months after the date of
receipt of the Phase 1 level survey. During this three-month period,
representatives of the State Division of Historical Resources or the City
shall seek the right of access to the immediate area to survey. A
professional archaeologist retained by the owner or developer shall conduct
an Archaeological Salvage Excavation of the area within which the discovery
was made; provided, however, that development shall resume upon either the
completion of such Archaeological Salvage Excavation or the expiration of the
three-month period, whichever first occurs. If necessary, the three-month
time period may be extended for an additional three-month time period to
allow for completion of the survey and Archaeological Salvage Excavation. If
access to the site is denied, the CTD shall be denied.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.07  RESERVED.



§ 134.08  PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE.



   The City Commission shall review all applications submitted pursuant to
this Chapter for conformity to the applicable requirements and shall act upon
such applications after a duly noticed public hearing. Notice and
advertisement of any applications shall be provided in accordance with §
125.06 of the City Code.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.09  MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC RESOURCE.



   134.09(A)   Every owner of a Historic Resource shall properly
maintain and keep in good repair and shall not permit Demolition by Neglect
to occur:



   134.09(A)(1)   All of the Exterior portions of such Buildings or
Structures;



   134.09(A)(2)   All interior portions which, if not maintained, may
cause the Building or Structure to deteriorate or to become damaged or
otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair; and



   134.09(A)(3)   If the site contains Archaeological Materials, the
owner shall be required to maintain the property in such a manner so as not
to adversely affect the Integrity of the Archaeological Zone or Historic
Resource; or



   134.09(A)(4)   In the alternative to 134.09(A)(1)—134.09(A)(3)
above, seek a COA based upon a deprivation of reasonable economically
beneficial use of such property.



   134.09(B)   The requirements of this section shall be in addition to
any and all requirements of the Florida Building Code that require Buildings
or Structures to be maintained in good repair. It is the intent of this
section to preserve, from either deliberate or inadvertent neglect, the
Exterior features of Historic Resources and the interior portions thereof
when maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the
Historic Resource. All such Historic Resources shall be preserved against
such decay and deterioration and be maintained free from structural defects
through correction of any of the following deficiencies:



   134.09(B)(1)   Facades which may fall and injure the subject or
adjoining Structure or Building, or members of the public.



   134.09(B)(2)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or
deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical
structural supports.



   134.09(B)(3)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof
supports, or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to
defective material or deterioration.



   134.09(B)(4)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of Exterior
walls, roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors.



   134.09(B)(5)    Any fault or defect in the Structure or Building
which renders it structurally unsafe, insufficiently protected from
weathering, or not properly watertight.



   134.09(C)   A property owner who believes that the application of
this section creates an undue economic hardship may seek a COA .



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)



§ 134.10  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The City Commission hereby finds that the unauthorized Alteration,
Demolition, or Demolition by Neglect, of Structures or sites designated as a
Historic Resource is a violation of this Chapter, constituting a public
nuisance; and, as such, the City Attorney, upon approval of the City
Commission, may seek an injunction, in addition to any other legal remedies
available.



(Ord. 2015-18, passed 9-11-2015)


