
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF
AUSTELL, GEORGIA
_____________________________
Published in 2021 by Order of the City Council 
_____________________________
 
 
CITY OFFICIALS
_____________________________
Ollie Clemons, Jr. 
Mayor
_____________________________
Marlin Lamar, Ward 1 
Devon D. Myrick, Ward 2 
Randy P. Green, Ward 3 
Sandra Leverette, Ward 4 
Melanie Maria Elder, At Large, Post 1 
Valerie Anderson, At Large, Post 2, Mayor Pro Tem 
City Council
_____________________________
Scott Kimbrough 
City Attorney
_____________________________
Elizabeth Young 
City Clerk
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Austell, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1985 Code, as supplemented through November 5, 2001, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
RELATED LAWS INDEX 	RLi:1 
SPECIAL ACTS INDEX 	SAi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 

Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Jean Lindsay, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Elizabeth Young, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Austell, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Austell, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Austell, Georgia. 2021. 
 
PART I 
CHARTER 
 
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION, NAME, BOUNDARIES, POWERS
 
Section 1.10. Incorporation, name.
The City of Austell in Cobb and Douglas counties as the city boundaries are presently described in several Acts of the General Assembly of Georgia and as shown on the city map hereinafter referred to, are hereby reincorporated and the city is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of Austell, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual existence. References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Austell. 
 
Section 1.11. Corporate boundaries.
(a)	[ Boundaries.] The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or description, or supplemental description) of the corporate limits of the City of Austell, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or descriptions certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)	[ Redrawing of map.] The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)	Annexation of August 26, 1996. On and after the date of this ordinance, the corporate limits of the City of Austell shall include and embrace those additional tracts of land described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 1135 and 1136 19th District, 2nd Section, Cobb County, Georgia, containing 12.218 acres as shown on survey prepared by West Georgia Surveyors, Inc., dated August 26, 1996 and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin located on the south right-of-way of Clay Road 225.29 ft.; northwest of the intersection of the south right-of-way of Clay Road with the east line of Land Lot 1135; thence south 00 degrees 59 minutes 57 seconds east for a distance of 205.76 ft.; to an iron pin; thence south 74 degrees 11 minutes 32 seconds east for a distance of 227.00 ft.; to an iron pin located on the east line of Land Lot 1135; thence south 01 degrees 38 minutes 27 seconds east for a distance of 676.70 ft.; to an iron pin; thence south 52 degrees 02 minutes 00 seconds east for a distance of 454.17 ft.; to an iron pin located on the south line of Land Lot 1136; thence south 88 degrees 25 minutes 46 seconds west along the south line of Land Lot 1136 for a distance of 349.42 ft.; to an iron pin located at the common corner to Land Lots 1135, 1136, 1159 and 1160; thence south 88 degrees 25 minutes 46 seconds west along the south line of Land Lot 1135 for a distance of 430.35 ft.; to a point located on the east boundary of the existing limits of the City of Austell; thence north 01 degrees 02 minutes 37 second west along the east boundary of the city limits for a distance of 1207.49 ft.; to an iron pin; thence north 22 degrees 10 minutes 00 seconds west for a distance of 62.61;ft; to a point located on the east right-of-way of Sweetwater Valley Road; thence north 08 degrees 29 minutes 53 seconds west along the east right-of-way of Sweetwater Valley Road for a distance of 49.74 ft.; to a point located on the south right-of-way of Clay Road; thence south 73 degrees 20 minutes 49 seconds east along the south right-of-way of Clay Road for a distance of 243.21 ft.; to an iron pin and point of beginning. 
(Ord. of 8-26-1996)
Editor's note(s)—The metes and bound description included in this section may not be currently accurate. The corporate boundaries may change from time to time due to annexation and de-annexation. 
 
Section 1.12. Powers and construction.
(a)	This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or any future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(b)	The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
(c)	The corporate powers of this city may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Ad valorem taxation. To levy, assess, and collect ad valorem taxes on all taxable property in the city; 
(2)	Other taxes. To levy, assess, and collect other taxes allowed by general law; 
(3)	Business regulation and taxation. To levy, assess, and collect occupational and business taxes and to license and regulate occupations and businesses; 
(4)	Appropriations. To make appropriations and expend funds for support of the city and any other lawful purpose; 
(5)	Municipal debts. To borrow money and issue bonds, notes, and other obligations as authorized by general law; 
(6)	Property. To own property and interests in property; 
(7)	Gifts. To accept gifts and grants for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city on such terms as the donor may impose; 
(8)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under any applicable public acts as are or may be enacted; 
(9)	Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility, and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties, and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(10)	Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public service, and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations by the public service commission; 
(11)	Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; 
(12)	Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under any applicable public acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(13)	Sidewalk maintenance. To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be affected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)	Building regulation. To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, swimming pool, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(15)	Planning and zoning. To provide such comprehensive city planning for development by zoning, subdivision regulation, and the likes as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(16)	Police power. To exercise the police power for the public safety and well-being of the city; 
(17)	Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawn shops; the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant trades; theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, game rooms, game machines, teen clubs, dance halls, and massage parlors; 
(18)	Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(19)	Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(20)	Noise, air and water pollution. To regulate the decibel level of noise (including music) and the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(21)	Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(22)	Public hazards, removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(23)	Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other materials for recycling and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(24)	Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service or availability charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(25)	Sewer fees. To levy an availability or a use fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(26)	Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(27)	Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, whether inside or outside the city limits, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(28)	Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court shall work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreements with the appropriate county officials; or to provide for community service work; and to house prisoners for other governmental agencies; 
(29)	Animal regulations. To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same; if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition of such animals and fowl by sale, gift, or humane destruction when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of an ordinance enacted hereunder; and to provide for contracting with other governmental agencies therefor; 
(30)	Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(31)	Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces on public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(32)	Bonding companies. To regulate and license bonding companies in the city or doing business in the city; 
(33)	Pensions. To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(34)	Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(35)	Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations providing for services to be made therefor; 
(36)	City agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(37)	Penalties. To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(38)	Public safety, police and fire protection. To organize and operate a police department, to exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen, to organize and operate a firefighting agency, and to organize and operate an emergency rescue and emergency medical technicians agency; 
(39)	Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(40)	Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(41)	Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(42)	General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; and 
(43)	Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
 
Section 1.13. Exercise of powers.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by the constitution of Georgia, by general law, or by this charter. If general law and this charter make no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE II. GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE
 
City Council
 
Section 2.10. City council.
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 1; 1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 1)
 
Section 2.11. City council terms and qualification for office.
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of two years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless he is a qualified municipal voter and has been a bona fide resident of the city for one year immediately prior to his official qualification as a candidate for such office; each person elected to such office shall continue to reside within the city during his period of service and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city. Each council member elected by ward shall be a bona fide resident of such ward for one year prior to his official qualification as a candidate for such office and shall continue to reside in such ward during his period of service. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 338), § 1)
Editor's note(s)—The city, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.2, has opted for four-year terms for municipal officers. 
 
Section 2.12. Mayor and city council vacancy; filling of vacancies.
(a)	The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the declaration of such vacancy by the city council or upon the occurrence of the next regular or special city council meeting, whether or not such declaration is made following the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled as provided for in Article V of this charter. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 2)
 
Section 2.13. Mayor and city council compensation and expenses.
(a)	The position of mayor shall receive additional compensation over and above the regular salary for automobile expenses in the amount of $1,000.00 per month beginning with the first mayoral term subsequent to the 2007 general election and for each succeeding term unless modified by the city council for the City of Austell. 
(b)	The compensation of the mayor and council members may be changed by ordinance, but any increase shall be subject to O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4 or any similar law hereafter enacted. 
(c)	The mayor and council members shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 3; Char. Ord. of 5-7-2007)
Editor's note(s)—The compensation and expense reimbursement amounts in this section are no longer accurate as such amounts have been amended since the Charter was enacted and may be further amended from time to time based on the authority contained in this section and under state law. 
 
Section 2.14. Holding other office.
Except as authorized by general state law, the mayor or any council member shall not hold any other city office or be eligible to qualify for other elective office, other than the one presently held by such person, unless such person first resigns that present office, except as hereinafter provided in Article V for the mayor pro tempore serving as acting mayor, provided that if a council member's term be due to expire immediately following the next city election, it shall not be necessary for such council member to resign to seek a different position and except as provided hereinafter in section 2.15(e). 
(Ord. of 3-5-1990; Ord. of 8-2-1999, § 1)
 
Section 2.15. Prohibitions.
(a)	Conflicts of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this chapter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)	Directly engage in any business or transaction or have a direct financial or personal interest of a value in excess of $500.00 in any calendar quarter in any manner which amounts to a conflict of interest with the city, provided this shall not apply to and thereby shall not prevent such person from submitting sealed bids for contacts with the city; 
(2)	Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests of a value in excess of $500.00 in any calendar quarter when such employment or service amounts to a conflict of interest with the city, provided this shall not apply to and thereby shall not prevent such person from submitting sealed bids for contracts with the city; 
(3)	Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself, herself, or others; 
(4)	Discriminate unfairly by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether for remuneration or not, or accept, for himself or his family, favors or benefits under circumstances which might be construed by reasonable persons as influencing the performance of his governmental duties; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; and, provided further, if state law specifically authorizes such transactions, this charter shall not prohibit same, and such will be an exception hereto; 
(5)	Ask for or receive anything of value to which he is not entitled for the purpose of influencing him in the performance of any act related to the functions of his office or employment, or in return for an agreement to influence or attempt to influence official action by any other officer or employee of the city, as now or hereafter provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-10-2 or 16-10-5; 
(6)	For himself or in behalf of any business entity sell any real or personal property to the city, or any agency thereof, other than as allowed by O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6, as now or hereafter provided; 
(7)	Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(8)	Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest; provided, however, the participation in discussion at a public meeting or the presentation of a proposal at a public meeting shall be allowed. 
(b)	Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any council member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)	Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)	Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render the contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city council. 
(e)	Ineligibility of elected officials. Except as permitted by law, neither the mayor nor any council member shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by the government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. This provision shall not prohibit the mayor or council member from assuming the duties and authority of a nonelective position on an interim basis while the position is vacant due to resignation, death, dismissal, or similar circumstances. In such cases, at the request and approval of the council, the mayor or a council member may perform services associated with the vacant position on an interim basis, not to exceed 90 days, at a rate of compensation approved by the mayor and council. 
(f)	Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall actively participate in political campaigns for public office in the city or continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office of the city. 
(g)	Penalties for violation.
(1)	Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
(2)	Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his office or position as described in [(g)](1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Ord. of 3-5-1990; 1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 4; Ord. of 8-2-1999, § 2)
 
Section 2.16. Inquiries and investigations.
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
 
Section 2.17. General power and authority of the city council.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I. 
(b)	The city council shall, through its respective committees, supervise and assist the department directors in the administration of their respective departments. In supervising the department directors and administering its other duties, the city council shall follow the administrative procedures set forth in this charter, city ordinance, or general state law. 
(1993 Ga. Laws, SB 284, § 2)
 
Section 2.18. Organizational meeting.
The city council shall hold its organizational meeting at the first regular meeting of the city council on the first Monday in January each year, unless it is a legal holiday, then on the second Monday or as soon thereafter as is practicable. The oath of office shall be administered to the incoming mayor and council members prior to or on the date of such meeting and the incoming mayor shall call the meeting to order. The oath of office administered to newly elected members shall be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of mayor (or council member, as the case may be) of the City of Austell, to the best of my skill and ability, and as seems to me, for the best interest and welfare of the city, without fear, favor, or affection, and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America, so help me God. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 3)
 
Section 2.19. Regular and special meetings.
(a)	The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on the call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Except where waiver by all members is effected by their presence or in writing, only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of all meetings shall be made as required by general state law. 
 
Section 2.20. Rules of procedure and committee appointment.
(a)	The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)	The mayor shall appoint, at the first regular council meeting of each year, a council committee to supervise and assist each of the department directors in the management of the respective administrative departments established in section 3.10 of this charter. Each council committee shall consist of at least two council members other than the mayor. The mayor shall be an ex officio member of each committee. 
(c)	The mayor shall appoint a chairperson and vice chairperson of each council committee. The chairperson shall preside at council committee meetings. The chairperson shall be the liaison between the department director and the council committee and shall be primarily responsible for assisting the department director in the administration of the department. The committee shall be responsible for the personnel evaluation of the department director in the administration of the department. 
(d)	The council committee shall review administrative items presented by the department director and shall either disapprove the item without submission to the city council or recommend to the city council that such item be approved or disapproved. Any item disapproved by the council committee may nonetheless be presented to the city council by the department director as an agenda item for approval or disapproval by the full city council. 
(e)	Each committee chairperson shall have the right to call meetings of the committee and shall have the power from time to time to authorize budgeted purchases up to a dollar amount set by the council without first obtaining specific committee or council approval of the item, provided that all other provisions of the charter and the ordinances of the city are complied with, including bid requirements, if applicable. Approval for such expenditures shall be documented with a copy provided to the director of finance as soon as possible after the purchase. 
(f)	Each committee shall have the power from time to time to authorize budgeted purchases up to a dollar amount set by the council without first obtaining specific city council approval for the item, provided that all other provisions of the charter and the ordinances of the city are complied with, including bid requirements, if applicable. Approval for such expenditures shall be documented with a copy provided to the director of finance as soon as possible after the purchase. 
(g)	The vice chairperson shall be authorized to act as the chairperson of the committee upon the absence, disability, or death of the chairperson until such absence or disability ceases or until a new chairperson is appointed by the mayor at a regular city council meeting. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 4)
 
Section 2.21. Quorum; voting.
Four council members in addition to the mayor or the presiding officer at the meeting shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city council shall have the right to require a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of three council members or two council members plus the mayor or presiding officer voting to break a tie shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The mayor, or mayor pro tempore if presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. 
 
Section 2.22. Ordinance form; procedure.
(a)	Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption, subject to such changes as may be made and voted on by the city council. The enacting clause shall be: "The council of the City of Austell hereby ordains …", and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and read and voted on at a regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(c)	Failure to comply with the technical requirements of this section shall not invalidate an ordinance if the intention of the city council that the ordinance be effective is evident. 
 
Section 2.23. Action requiring an ordinance.
In addition to other acts required by general state law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance; all other acts may be done by resolution or motion. 
 
Section 2.24. Emergencies.
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. Any emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
 
Section 2.25. Codes of technical regulations.
The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance; the reference shall set forth the name of such code, its date, any amendments thereto, and the fact that a copy is on file with the city clerk and kept with the minutes of the city council. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, provided the city clerk shall be given a copy of such code along with the adopting ordinance and shall keep the same with the minutes although not necessarily in the minute book. Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
 
Section 2.26. Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing.
(a)	The city clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose [of] all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)	The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council and shall be published as soon as is practicable, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations, which may be separate standard code books, and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Austell, Georgia." The Code shall be supplemented and updated regularly. Copies of the Code shall be furnished to the mayor, council members, city clerk, city attorney, municipal court judge, police chief, and such other officers, departments, and agencies of the city as the city council may direct. Copies shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be published as soon as is practicable following its adoption, and the published ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in codified form suitable for incorporation therein or in a wholly new code form. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other, rules and regulations included in the code. 
(1993 Ga. Laws, SB 284, § 5)
 
Sections 2.27—2.31. Reserved.
 
Mayor
 
Section 2.32. Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation.
The mayor shall be elected as provided in Article V of this charter and serve for a term of two years and until his successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of this city immediately prior to his official qualification as a candidate for such office; and the mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of his service as mayor. The mayor shall forfeit office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for council members. The compensation of the mayor shall be as provided in section 2.13 hereof. 
(1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 6)
Editor's note(s)—The city, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.2, has opted for four-year terms for municipal officers, including the mayor. 
 
Section 2.33. Mayor pro tempore.
The mayor shall appoint from among the council members a mayor pro tempore who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the absence, disability, or death of the mayor and until such absence or disability ceases or until a new mayor is elected. The disability of the mayor shall be determined by the mayor or the council. The mayor may appoint an alternate mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore while acting as mayor may appoint a successor mayor pro tempore and an alternate mayor pro tempore. 
 
Section 2.34. Powers and duties of the mayor.
The mayor shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To preside at all meetings of the city council and to have the right to take part in the deliberations of the council, but shall not have the right to vote on any question except in the case of a tie; 
(2)	To be the official head and spokesperson for the city for service of process and ceremonial purposes; 
(3)	To sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, deeds, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(4)	To cosign, along with the director of finance, all checks for the payment of money; alternate signatories may be designated by city ordinance; 
(5)	To have the veto power as hereinafter set out in section 2.35; 
(6)	To keep the council advised from time to time of the general condition of the city and to recommend such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city; 
(7)	To call special meetings of the city council as provided herein; 
(8)	To appoint at the first meeting each year (or as soon thereafter as expedient), for a term of that year, a gas system liaison and members of the following standing committees: police committee, fire committee, water, sewer and mechanic committee, street and sanitation committee, general administration committee, finance committee, community affairs committee, parks committee, and such other committees as the mayor and council may deem necessary; 
(9)	To appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, all department directors and in such manner to fill any vacancy in any such office; 
(10)	To pardon or parole any offender against the ordinances of the city; 
(11)	To see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the governing body are faithfully executed; 
(12)	To submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances of the city as of the end of each fiscal year and a complete report on administrative activities for the city as of the end of each calendar year; and 
(13)	To perform such other duties as may be required by general state law, this charter, or city ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989; Ord. of 1-8-1990; 1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 7; 1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 7; Amend. of 6-3-1996, § 1; Amend. of 7-1-1996, § 1; Amend. of 2-3-1997, § 1; Amend. of 6-2-1997, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-2000, § 1)
 
Section 2.35. Veto power.
Every ordinance, resolution, and motion passed and every election or appointment of a city administrative officer or a department head by the city council shall be subject to the veto of the mayor in the following manner: 
(1)	If such matter is vetoed by the mayor, such veto must be submitted in writing to the city clerk within four days of passage. The mayor may sign an approval of any council action at the time of passage. Such approved actions may not thereafter be subject to veto by the mayor and shall be effective upon approval. If an item is neither approved nor vetoed, it shall become effective at 12:00 noon on the fourth calendar day after its adoption. If the mayor vetoes an item, the mayor shall submit to the city council, through the clerk, a written statement of the reason for the veto. If the item is vetoed, the clerk shall record upon the item the date of its veto by the mayor; 
(2)	Any item vetoed by the mayor may be brought before the next regular council meeting, and no other, by any council member, whether or not on the agenda, for a motion to override the mayor's veto. If the vote to override the veto passes by an affirmative vote of at least four council members, the item shall be adopted and not subject to veto; and 
(3)	The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the city council over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall become law unless overridden by the council as in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Res. of 5-5-1986; 1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 8; 1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 8)
 
Gas System
 
Section 2.36. City authority to operate.
The city shall continue to have the right, power, and authority to operate a gas distribution system, both inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, to distribute, transport, sell, and furnish gas to customers located both inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, such customers to include persons, firms, corporations, or other municipal corporations and counties of this state, and to accept franchises for that purpose granted by other municipalities and by counties of this state to the city, and any franchises, heretofore granted the city are ratified and affirmed. 
 
Section 2.37. Gas mains and distribution systems.
The city shall continue to be authorized to lay, construct, and operate gas mains, gas lines, and gas distribution systems both inside and outside the corporate limits of the city. The city shall have the right, power, and authority to exercise police powers over the entire gas system and shall have the right and authority to make rules and regulations governing the operation, maintenance, extensions, and connections with any gas main inside or outside the corporate limits of the city and shall have the right and authority to require all users of gas who connect with its gas mains or lines inside or outside the city limits to install proper meters and make connections in accordance with the rules and regulations provided therefor and shall further have the right and authority to refuse to sell or furnish to any person, firm, corporation, or municipal corporation who fails or refuses to comply with such rules and regulations. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as granting to any person, firm, or private or municipal corporation the right to require the city to furnish gas and the city shall not be required to do so if in its discretion same is not deemed desirable or feasible. 
 
Section 2.38. Gas board.
(a)	There shall be a gas board for the city, to be known as the Austell Gas Board, which shall exercise such of the powers granted unto the city for the gas system to the extent that such board is hereinafter authorized and empowered to exercise same. 
(b)	The gas board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed for two-year terms by the mayor and city council, and such members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed. Their terms of office shall be staggered so that three members are appointed in odd numbered years and two members shall be appointed in even numbered years. 
(c)	The members of the gas board shall annually select one of their number as chairman and another of their number as vice-chairman for terms of one year each, or until their successors are duly selected and qualified. 
(d)	Meetings shall be held on call of the chairman and in his absence or disability on the call of the vice-chairman. 
(e)	Members shall be entitled to at least three days' written notice of the time and place of the meetings of the board called by the chairman or vice-chairman, provided that the members may waive in writing such notice, and provided, further, than the attendance of a member of the board at a meeting of the board shall be an automatic waiver of such written notice of such meeting. 
(f)	The board may by resolution adopt bylaws governing its procedure and may by same fix regular meeting dates in which event written notice of such regular meetings shall not be required. 
(g)	Three board members, including the chairman or the presiding officer at the board meeting, shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to conduct the affairs of the gas system as authorized. The majority vote of those board members present shall be required to take official action by the gas board, but no action shall be authorized without at least two affirmative votes. The chairman or presiding officer shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1992; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-2000, § 1)
 
Section 2.39. Compensation and expenses.
(a)	Until changed as provided in subsection (b) the members of the gas board shall continue to receive the same compensation to which they were entitled immediately prior to the effective date of this charter. 
(b)	The compensation of the members of the gas board may be changed by ordinance; but any increase shall be subject to O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4 or any similar law hereafter enacted. 
(c)	The members of the gas board shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
 
Section 2.40. Powers and duties.
(a)	The gas board shall have general supervision and control over the gas system or systems including plants of the city and shall make such rules and regulations regarding the operation and maintenance of such system or systems as it may deem best and proper, and such board may make such contracts and employ or discharge such persons in the operation and maintenance of the system or systems as it may deem best. 
(b)	The board shall have the plenary power and authority to erect, or to contract for the erection of, enlargements, improvements, and extensions of the gas system for the city, with the amount of funds made available to them by the mayor and city council of the city, or from funds arising from the operation of the gas system, or out of funds arising from the sale of revenue-producing certificates or bonds issued by the city. 
(c)	The board shall also have the management in like manner as well as the control of the operation of the gas plant or system that may be owned, or hereafter owned, by the city. It is empowered to enter into contracts necessary for the establishment, maintenance, and operation of the system. 
(d)	The board shall have the power and authority to maintain, repair, and extend the gas distribution system and gas plants, if any, from time to time as funds become available for such improvements. It shall have the power to erect and maintain gas mains and gas plants, within the city limits and elsewhere, for the purpose of supplying the city and its environs with gas service as may be necessary or desirable, and for other purposes which it deems proper. 
(e)	The board shall regulate and provide for the private use of gas, fix the time, price, and place of payment for such services, and, in default of payment for such services, it may shut them off and keep the same shut off until all arrears are fully paid. Should it become necessary to enforce payment for services already rendered, it may recommend to the clerk of the board the issuance of execution for the amount due for any service furnished, and the clerk of the board is authorized and empowered to issue execution therefor, which may be levied and collected as other executions. 
(f)	The board shall make such rules and regulations for the government of its servants and employees and for the distribution and use of the products of its gas systems or plants as it may deem proper. 
(g)	The board shall make semi-annual reports to the city council showing all receipts and disbursements by it and showing such other matters as the city council may require. 
(h)	The board shall be amenable to the city council and subject to removal from office by it for cause as set forth in sections 5.18 and 5.19 hereof. 
 
Section 2.41. Revenues; payments to the city.
(a)	The board is charged with the duty of collecting for all services rendered by the gas system of the city and is required to keep the money so collected in a bank or banks as it deems appropriate as a depository for such funds. 
(b)	The board shall at all times maintain a schedule of fees, rates, and tolls for the services and products of the city's gas system as shall be sufficient to retire any revenue certificates, bonds, or other indebtedness incurred by the city or the board for the erection, construction, extension, or improvement of such gas system, and to provide for any reserves and funds required to be maintained by the city or the board in connection with the issuance of any such bonds or revenue certificate or the incurrence of any other such indebtedness. Such obligations of the city and the board shall be discharged according to their tenor by the board and required payments shall be made promptly when due either directly to the obligee, his agents or assigns, or by the payment of such sums to the city for the account of such obligee. 
(c)	In addition to the above, such fees, tolls and rates shall be maintained at a level sufficient to pay the current operation and maintenance expenses of such system, provided the board shall pay to the city an amount equal to 11 percent of the gross revenues of the system. Upon (1) the approval of at least 55 percent of the aggregate principal amount of the prior bonds then outstanding and (2) the request of the city, the percentage of gross revenue of the system to be paid to the city may be increased. Any request by the city for such an increase must be made no later than 120 days before the first day of the gas board's next succeeding fiscal year and will be effective on the first day of such next succeeding fiscal year. 
(d)	"Gross revenues," as used in this part, shall mean the system's operating revenues received for providing gas service to customers less uncollectible revenues. Subject to the above, the board shall have full control and authority over the expenditure of such funds with the provision that same can only be expended to pay the expenses of operating and maintaining such gas system, to retire indebtedness incurred in connection with the construction, extension, or improvement of such system as aforesaid, and to establish required or reasonable reserves and funds including depreciation reserves, maintenance and repair funds, sinking funds for retirement or revenue certificates, bonds, or other indebtedness. 
(Ord. of 7-6-1992)
Editor's note(s)—Subsection (c) of this section has been revised here to reflect currently applied amounts but has not been formally amended. The subsection previously read: "In addition to the above, such fees, tolls and rates shall be maintained at a level sufficient to pay the current operation and maintenance expenses of such system, provided the board shall pay to the city an amount equal to three percent of the gross revenues of the system for the fiscal year ending July 31, 1990; four percent of the gross revenues of the system for the fiscal year ending July 31, 1991; four and one-half (4½) percent of the gross revenues of the system for the fiscal year ending July 31, 1992; and five percent of the gross revenues of the system for all succeeding fiscal years. On or after August 1, 1997, the percentage of gross revenues of the system to be paid by the gas board to the city as described above may, upon (1) the approval of at least 55 percent of the aggregate principal amount of the prior bonds then outstanding and (2) the request of the city be increased by up to one percent to a maximum of six percent for the next succeeding 12 months and be increased by up to one-half (0.5) percent yearly thereafter to a maximum of seven percent. Any request by the city as described in the preceding sentence must be made no later than 120 days before the first day of the gas board's next succeeding fiscal year and will be effective on the first day of such next succeeding fiscal year." 
 
Section 2.42. Indebtedness.
(a)	The board shall be authorized to lay or construct gas mains, lines, and gas distribution systems and plants both inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, and to issue gas revenue anticipation certificates for such purposes in accordance with the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as now exist or hereafter are adopted, and any certificates heretofore issued or authorized by the city for such purpose are ratified and affirmed. 
(b)	Should the board deem it advisable to create additional debts for the erection, enlargement, or improvement of any of the systems under its control, the board is directed and authorized to determine the amount of needed funds and the anticipated revenue from the operation of the facilities, and to recommend to the city council the creation of a debt to be evidenced by revenue certificates to be retired from revenues produced, or to recommend the creation of a bonded indebtedness for such purposes or as may be raised by other methods. Should the amount of money needed be such that the revenues produced by the facilities would retire same as anticipated by the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as now exist or hereafter are adopted, the city council shall proceed to issue revenue producing certificates as provided for by such laws. 
(c)	Should the city council deem it advisable to secure the money on a bond issue, the city is authorized, empowered, and granted the right to issue revenue anticipation obligations for the purpose of constructing, extending, operating, and maintaining gas generating and distribution systems, as authorized by the constitution of the State of Georgia, by adoption of a resolution by the governing body of the city and without an election, pursuant to the amendment to the constitution set forth in 1964 Ga. Laws, p[age] 1061, which is continued in full force and effect. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 1061, § 1)
State law reference(s)—Local amendment to the Georgia Constitution: "Notwithstanding any provisions of this constitution to the contrary, the city is authorized and hereby empowered and granted the right, power and authority to issue revenue anticipation obligations for the purpose of construction, extending, operating and maintaining gas generating and distribution systems, as authorized in paragraph V of article VII, section VII, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, by adoption of a resolution by the governing body of the City of Austell and without an election." 
 
Section 2.43. Board clerk.
The board shall elect a clerk for its body, who may but need not be from the board or a citizen of the city, and the clerk shall maintain and keep open an office for receiving payments for services rendered by any of such facilities. The clerk shall give bond, in such sum as the board may prescribe, for the faithful discharge of his duties, for the prompt payment of all moneys collected into the depository, and for a true accounting of the expenditures of any of such funds. The bond shall be made payable to the board. The clerk so elected may also be city clerk. 
 
Section 2.44. Ordinances.
The board may pass such ordinances and bylaws as may be required for the protection of the gas system or systems and such ordinances as may be required for the sale of bonds or revenue certificates. When such ordinances and bylaws are approved by the city council, it shall have the force and effect of ordinances of the city and any person violating any one of the ordinances shall be tried as provided for in the city charter. The present ordinances of the board as previously approved by the city are retained and in force until changed by the bodies. 
 
Sections 2.45—2.49. Reserved.
 
Community Improvement
 
Section 2.50. Community improvement commission.
The city council shall have the right, power and authority to form and operate a community improvement commission to benefit citizens and businesses, both inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Austell area by promoting the beautification of designated areas both within and outside the corporate city limits, to provide grants and funding for community improvement projects, to benefit the health, safety and welfare of citizens of Austell and surrounding areas and to provide financial support for community improvement projects, facilities and services for the benefit of the citizens of the Austell area. The city council shall be empowered to create and operate the Austell Area Community Improvement commission as an agency of the city pursuant to Section 1.12. 
(Ord. of 8-2-1999)
 
Section 2.51. Definitions.
(a)	Advisory board. A five-member board which shall, by majority vote, make recommendations to the mayor and council with regard to applications for grants. Two members of the advisory board shall each either be a resident of the city or a representative of a business operating within the city. Each of the three remaining members of the advisory board shall either be a resident of, or a representative of a business located within one of the three wards outside the city limits, but within the community improvement district. The advisory board shall therefore have two representatives from the city and one member from each of the three wards within the community improvement district. 
(b)	Commission. The Austell Area Improvement commission. 
(c)	Community Improvement District (CID). The geographical district for which grants may be sought for the benefit of projects and the purposes set forth in Section 2.53. The district shall consist of the city and three wards, the boundaries of which shall be established by the mayor and council. 
(d)	Community Improvement District Fund (CID Fund). A segregated account of the city, invested as approved by the mayor and council, into which deposits shall be made and funds withdrawn in keeping with the purposes of the CID. Expenditures from the fund shall be to meet the expenses of the commission or to fund grants but shall not be expended otherwise without five votes in favor of such expenditure following a public hearing of the mayor and council. 
(e)	Grant. A grant of money from the CID Fund, in an amount to be determined by the mayor and council after consideration of the advisory board's recommendation, for the benefit of a project located in part or in whole within the CID. 
(f)	Project. Any activity including, but not limited to, construction, demolition, renovation, remodeling, or modernization of any building, roadway, utility, or other structure, or beautification of any property or structure or any activity associated with, and in furtherance of, the purposes of the commission, provided that the project shall be geographically located, in part or in whole, within the CID. 
(Ord. of 8-2-1999)
 
Section 2.52. Application and grant process.
(a)	Application for grant. An applicant may request a grant from the commission for the benefit of a specified project. The form of the application shall be as approved by the mayor and council and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	A complete description of the project, including the projected expenses and revenues and a description of how the project shall meet the criteria and purposes for the issuance of grants as established by the mayor and council and as set forth in Section 2.53; 
(2)	Whether the applicant evidences a significant need for assistance from the commission, taking into account the other sources of funding and revenue available to the applicant; 
(3)	A full disclosure of the identity of the applicant and all persons by whom, or for whose benefit, the application is being made. (If the applicant is a privately held corporation, the application shall set forth all majority shareholders, directors and officers of the applicant.) 
The applicant shall provide to the commission any further information requested by the commission in order to determine the scope of the project, the financial resources and management of the applicant and any further information in order to determine whether the purposes of the commission will be furthered by the grant to the applicant. 
(b)	Nonliability of commission. The applicant shall not have an entitlement to a grant or to a grant in any amount. The mayor and council shall be empowered to deny any application for a grant and shall not be obligated to follow the recommendation of the advisory board. By making a grant application, an applicant expressly agrees that neither the commission, nor members of the advisory board, nor mayor and council, nor their respective agents or employees, shall have any liability for the actions taken in consideration of any application or the approval or denial of any grant application. 
(c)	Consideration of grant application. In order to serve the health, public safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Austell and the community improvement district, the mayor and council may approve or deny the application for a grant, approve a grant in an amount other than as applied for, add or delete conditions to the grant or allow a grant application to be withdrawn. An action by the mayor and council to defer, hold or continue consideration of the grant for later consideration shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the mayor and council's consideration of the application and no further public notice of such meeting shall be required. The applicant or applicant's representative shall appear before the mayor and council at the meeting at which the grant application shall be considered in order to present the application and any additional matters in support of the application and shall be available to answer any questions or provide further information requested by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 8-2-1999)
 
Section 2.53. Criteria for grant distribution.
The decision by the mayor and council to approve in whole or part, to reject, to place conditions upon, or to delete a application for a grant shall be based on, but not limited to, a consideration of the following criteria: 
(a)	Whether the project shall benefit and enhance the health, public safety, and general welfare of the residents and businesses of the city and the community improvement district; 
(b)	Whether the project shall be consistent with, and beneficial to, the land uses in the vicinity of the proposed project, as the property is currently being used or as may be anticipated under the official land use plan of the city; 
(c)	Whether the project presents a prudent and rational use of the resources of the commission in light of the available amount of commission revenues, the degree of benefit to the citizens of the community improvement district and nature and necessity of other grant requests; 
(d)	Whether the project shall contribute to the reduction of traffic, noise, water pollution, air pollution, noise pollution, or other effects of increased development within the community improvement district; 
(e)	Whether the project shall enhance the aesthetic appearance of properties, land, buildings, or other structures within the community improvement district; 
(f)	Whether the project shall benefit and enhance the quality of life within the community improvement district through the promotion and support of the arts, recreation, or leisure activities of the citizens within the community improvement district. 
(Ord. of 8-2-1999)
 
Section 2.54. Grant limitations.
The commission shall not be authorized to make any grant or contribute to any project which shall result in the expenditures from the CID Fund in any calendar year in excess of 90 percent of the net income of the commission in the preceding 12-month calendar year. 
(Ord. of 8-2-1999)
 
Section 2.55. Commission procedures.
The duly elected city council shall govern the affairs of the commission. In such role, the city council may conduct its commission meetings in conjunction with the regular public meetings of the city council or at public meetings specially called by the mayor or as provided in the city Charter, and shall provide for the keeping of minutes of its proceedings, which minutes shall be a public record. 
(Ord. of 8-2-1999)
 
Section 2.56. Advisory board.
(a)	There shall be an advisory board for the commission, to be known as the Austell Area Community Improvement Commission Advisory Board, which shall exercise such of the powers granted unto it by the mayor and council. 
(b)	The advisory board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed for two-year terms by the mayor and council, and such member shall serve until their successors are duly appointed. The members shall be nominated by the mayor and elected upon a majority vote by members of the council. Their terms of office shall be staggered so that three members are appointed in odd numbered years and two members shall be appointed in even numbered years. 
(c)	The members of the advisory board shall annually select one of their number as chairman and another of their number as vice-chairman for terms of one year each or until their successors are duly selected and qualified. 
(d)	The advisory board may by resolution adopt by-laws governing its procedure and may by same fix regular meeting dates in which event written notice of such regular meeting shall not be required. Any such resolutions must be approved by a majority vote of the city council. 
(e)	Three board members, including the chairman or presiding officer at the advisory board meeting, shall constitute a quorum and be authorized to conduct the affairs of the commission as authorized. The majority vote of those board members present shall be required to take official action by the advisory board but no action shall be authorized without at least two affirmative votes. The chairman or presiding officer shall be entitled to vote only in case of a tie. 
(f)	The compensation of the members of the advisory board shall be established by the mayor and council and the members of the advisory board shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses, as approved by the mayor and council, incurred in the performance of the duties of their office. 
(g)	The mayor and council shall appoint a clerk for the advisory board who may be, but need not be, a member of the board. The clerk shall maintain and keep a record of all funds received and expended by the commission. The clerk shall give bond, and such sum as the board may prescribe, for the faithful discharge of his duties, for the prompt payment of all monies collected into the commission accounts and for a true accounting of all expenditures of any such funds. The bond shall be made payable jointly to the commission and the city. The clerk so appointed by the mayor and council may also be a city employee. 
(h)	The advisory board shall receive and consider applications for grants for community improvement projects within the community improvement district. The advisory board shall consider and investigate such applications at its regular or specially called meetings. As a part of considering each request, the advisory board may seek and consider recommendations from the staff of the various administrative departments of the city. The applicant or applicant's representative shall appear before the advisory board to present the application and answer any questions or inquiry presented by the advisory board. 
(i)	As to each application, the advisory board shall make a recommendation to the mayor and council for approval, denial, deferral, continuance, hold, withdrawal without prejudice, or other action with regard to a grant application. Written minutes of the advisory board recommendation to the mayor and council shall be prepared and maintained. Additionally, the grant application shall be submitted to the mayor and council together with any supplemental information submitted by the applicant or considered by the advisory board. 
(j)	Within 90 days of the close of its fiscal year an annual report shall be prepared showing a summary of the grant applications and grants provided by the commission. In addition, the report shall include an audited annual financial report by the commission. Additional reports shall be submitted at the request of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 8-2-1999)
 
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS
 
Section 3.10. Administrative departments.
(a)	Except as may otherwise be provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties of and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as is necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. Subject to the foregoing, the following city departments are established: police, streets and sanitation, water and sewage/mechanic, parks and recreation, general administration, finance, community affairs, and fire. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general state law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)	All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance or pay scale as adopted from time to time by the city council. 
(d)	There shall be a director of each operating department as determined by the mayor and council. A department director may only be removed by the mayor for cause pursuant to the personnel policies as determined by the city council. Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in a department director's position, a new department director shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent, by majority vote, of the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989; Ord. of 1-8-1990; 1991 Ga. Laws, p. 4498, § 9; 1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 9; Ord. of 2-3-1997, § 2; Ord. of 6-5-2000, § 1; Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 1)
Editor's note(s)—Currently the streets, sanitation, water, sewer and mechanical functions of the city are managed by the city's public works department. 
 
Section 3.11. Powers and duties of the department directors.
The department director shall be the administrative official of the department and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of his department. The department directors shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To hire, appoint, evaluate, reprimand, and subject to adverse disciplinary action all city employees supervised by the department directors within their departments, except as otherwise provided by general state law, this charter, city ordinance, or personnel policies adopted pursuant to this charter. The procedure to be followed by the department directors in fulfilling such duties shall be governed by the personnel policies as adopted by the city council; 
(2)	To attend all city council meetings and their respective committee meetings; 
(3)	To submit to the finance director an annual budget for their respective departments. The department budgets will be compiled into a proposed balanced budget by the finance director and submitted to the finance committee for review and recommendation to the city council for approval; 
(4)	To advise their respective committees as to the future needs of their departments; 
(5)	To make any report as the council committee or city council may require concerning the operation of their departments and of any employees subject to their direction and supervision; 
(6)	To prepare an inventory showing all real and personal property utilized by their departments and to submit such inventory to the finance director for compilation; 
(7)	To make budgeted purchases from time to time of supplies, materials and equipment for their departments up to a dollar amount set by the council without first obtaining specific approval of the committee chairperson, the council committee, or the city council, provided that all other provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city are complied with, including bid requirements, if applicable. All purchases in excess of such amount must be approved by the committee chairperson, the council committee, or the city council, depending on the amount of the expenditure; 
(8)	To recommend to the council committee items of city personal property which the department director deems to be unnecessary or unfit for the use of the city. Upon approval by the council committee, the department director shall conduct all sales of such property declared to be surplus. The department director shall make all necessary publications and notices, procure bids, and, with the assistance of the finance director, conduct the bid openings and the sales; 
(9)	To be responsible for the preparation and publication of all notices and announcements required by law with respect to the operation of their departments. Such notices shall be given to the general administration department for review and submittal for publishing; 
(10)	To supervise and report to the proper council committee regarding the performance of all contacts made for services or materials related to their departments; and 
(11)	To perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city council, the city charter, city ordinance, or general state law. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 10; Ord. of 2-3-1997, §§ 3, 4)
 
Section 3.12. Boards, commissions, and authorities.
(a)	The city council may create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any functions as the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance established the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)	All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or general state law. 
(c)	The city council may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of the board, commission, or authority, and may pay them a fee for attending meetings. 
(d)	Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter, by general law, or by ordinance. 
(e)	No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself to honestly, faithfully, and impartially perform the duties of his office to the best of his ability. 
(f)	Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause in accordance with and as provided in sections 5.18 and 5.19 hereof. 
(g)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman, one member as vice-chairman, one member as secretary, and one member as assistant secretary. Each board, commission, or authority of the city may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 10)
 
Section 3.13. City attorney.
The mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 10; Ord. of 2-3-1997, § 5; Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 2)
 
Section 3.14. City clerk.
The mayor shall appoint a city clerk with the advice and consent by the city council. Such appointment and council vote shall occur upon a vacancy in such position. The duties of the city clerk shall be: 
(1)	To keep an accurate record and minutes of all meetings of the city council, to keep and affix the city seal as required to all official documents of the city, to attest the mayor's execution of official documents, and to certify under the city's seal such documents as may require certification; 
(2)	To perform such other duties as the city council may establish and as required by the city charter, city ordinance, or general state law. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 10; Ord. of 2-3-1997, § 6; Ord. of 4-5-1999; Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 3)
 
Section 3.15. Personnel policies.
This city council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(a)	The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(b)	The administration of a position classification, a pay plan, and a grid scale pay range and may delegate to the directors of departments and council committees the duty to set pay within such ranges; the methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto; and the transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(c)	Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be affected; 
(d)	Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(e)	Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 10)
 
ARTICLE IV. JUDICIAL BRANCH
 
Section 4.10. Creation; name.
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Austell. 
 
Section 4.11. Judge.
No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and is a resident of Cobb County or Douglas County, Georgia. Members of the State Bar of Georgia shall be given preference in selection, but it is not required that the judge be a member of the state bar. The judge shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The judge may be removed from office by the city council in accordance with and as provided in Sections 5.18 and 5.19 of this charter. The compensation of the judge shall be set by the city council. Before entering on the duties of his office, the judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 11; Ord. of 2-3-1997, § 7; Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 3)
 
Section 4.12. Convening.
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as designated by the judge or as provided by ordinance. 
 
Section 4.13. Jurisdiction; powers.
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt. 
(c)	The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction including fines of an amount up to the maximum of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for up to a maximum of six months, or both, or may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, parks, or other public places or to do community service work for up to 30 days per offense, or any combination of the foregoing. 
(d)	The municipal court may use the bail bond and fine schedule adopted by the city council from time to time for those offenses specified therein as minimum punishment for the offenses specified. For any offense, whether or not appearing on the schedule, the municipal court may impose, upon conviction, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six months and work and labor on the city public works or community service not to exceed 30 days, either or all or any part of either or all. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(f)	The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party to enforce compliance with its orders, judgments, and sentences and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)	The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by general state law. The judge of the municipal court and the mayor are authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city. 
(h)	The judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state court of Cobb County to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)	The municipal court is specifically vested with the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to mayor's, recorder's, and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Ord. of 4-6-1992; Ord. of 8-3-1992; Ord. of 10-5-1992)
Editor's note(s)—Subsection (d) of this section refers to the "city jail." The city has no jail. Jail confinement for violation of city ordinances is in the county jail. 
 
Section 4.14. Certiorari.
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the superior court of Cobb County or Douglas County, depending upon the situs of the offense, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
 
Section 4.15. Rules for court.
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations for procedure in the superior court or any lower court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings. 
 
Section 4.16. Clerk of court.
Upon a vacancy, the clerk of court shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent, by majority vote, of the city council. The clerk of court shall personally, or in the person of an appropriate designee, attend each session of the municipal court, and perform such duties as the city council may by ordinance direct. 
(Ord. of 2-3-1997, § 8; Ord. of 9-11-2000, § 4)
 
ARTICLE V. ELECTIONS
 
Section 5.10. Applicability of general law.
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, as now or hereafter amended. 
Editor's note(s)—The Georgia Municipal Elections Code, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-1 to 21-3-480, was repealed effective January 1, 1999. Municipal elections are now controlled by the general election law set forth in O.C.G.A. ch. 21-2. 
 
Section 5.11. Regular elections; time for holding.
(a)	The mayor and council members from Wards 2 and 4 and At-Large Post 2 elected in December 1989 whose terms normally expire in January shall remain in office until December 31, 1991, and until their successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 1991 and biennially thereafter, the successors to such mayor and three council members shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following their election. 
(b)	The council members from Wards 1 and 3 and At-Large Post 1 who are to be elected in November 1990 and whose terms normally expire in January shall remain in office until December 31, 1992, and until their successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November 1992 and biennially thereafter, the successors to such three council members shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January following their election. 
(c)	This section is enacted pursuant to the authority provided for in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-64(c). 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 813), § 1)
Editor's note(s)—O.C.G.A. § 21-3-64 was repealed effective January 1, 1999. 
 
Section 5.12. Special elections; vacancies.
(a)	In the event that the office of a council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the remaining council members shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office, except as hereinafter provided. The call for the special election shall be no later than 45 days from the occurrence of the vacancy. However, if the call for such an election would fall within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining members shall by majority vote appoint a successor for the remainder of the term of that office who shall serve until his successor is duly elected and qualified, and consequently, there shall be no special election called. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 21-3. 
(b)	In the event that the office of the mayor shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office, except as hereinafter provided. The call for the special election shall be no later than 45 days from the occurrence of the vacancy. However, if the call for such an election would fall within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the mayor pro tempore shall serve as acting mayor until the expiration of the term and there shall be no special election called, the council shall function with the remaining five voting members, and the acting mayor shall not vote except to break a tie. In such an instance, the council seat of the mayor pro tempore shall not be deemed vacant, unless and until the mayor pro tempore qualifies to run for the office of mayor at the next regular city election, in which case his council seat shall be deemed vacant upon such qualifications, but he shall continue to serve as acting mayor until his successor is duly elected and installed in office. In the event the mayor pro tempore qualifies to run for the office of mayor and his council seat is deemed vacant, the remaining council members may, but need not, appoint a successor to fill the unexpired term of that office if the remaining term is less than six months, and in any event the election to fill such office shall be held at the upcoming regular city election. 
Editor's note(s)—O.C.G.A. ch. 21-3 was repealed effective January 1, 1999. 
 
Section 5.13. Nonpartisan elections.
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
 
Section 5.14. Election by majority; run-off elections.
Council members running for a ward position shall be elected by a majority of the valid votes cast for that office by electors residing in that ward only. Council members running for an at-large position and the mayor shall be elected by a majority of the valid votes cast for such office by electors residing in the entire city. If no person receives a majority in his respective race, a run-off election shall be held between the two candidates receiving the highest and next highest number of votes cast for such office. 
 
Section 5.15. City council wards; adjustment of wards.
(a)	There shall be four city council wards which shall initially be delineated as set forth on the map filed in the office of the city clerk, and on a copy filed with the secretary of state, marked "Official City Map of the City of Austell"; provided, however, that if the United States Justice Department requires adjustment of such ward boundaries to comply with federal law, the city council may revise such ward boundaries to comply with federal law and such home rule amendment shall be effective immediately and shall apply to the next city election. 
(b)	Within one year of the official publishing of the United States decennial census, the city council shall adopt an ordinance redistricting the city council wards to comply with the following specifications: 
(1)	Each ward shall be formed of compact, contiguous territory, and its boundary lines shall follow the center lines of streets or other well-defined boundaries. 
(2)	Each ward shall contain as nearly as possible the same number of people, with the largest ward not differing in population by more than ten percent of the number of people in the smallest ward. 
(3)	The ordinance shall include a map and description of the wards. 
(c)	The new city council wards and boundaries as of the date of enactment, or as of the date of revision by the city council to comply with federal law, shall supersede previous city council wards and boundaries for the purposes of the next regular city election, including qualification for office. The new wards and boundaries established pursuant to subsection (b) above shall supersede previous wards and boundaries for all other purposes as of the date on which all council members elected at the next regular city election take office. 
 
[Sections 5.16, 5.17. Reserved.]
 
Section 5.18. Grounds for removal.
The mayor, council members, council committee chairpersons or members, or appointed persons filling nonemployee positions provided for in this charter shall be removed from office only for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)	Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)	Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (SB 284), § 12; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 2)
 
Section 5.19. Procedure for removal.
Removal of an above-described officer may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	By the vote of four council members after an investigative hearing. In the event any official is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any official sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the superior court of Cobb County, Georgia. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals of the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)	By information filed in the superior court of Cobb County, Georgia, as provided by state law. 
(3)	If the mayor or a council member shall be indicted for a felony, such official shall be automatically suspended from office with pay until such indictment be resolved. 
 
ARTICLE VI. FINANCE
 
Section 6.10. Property tax.
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, to provide governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
 
Section 6.11. Homestead exemption.
The city council may grant an exemption from all city ad valorem taxes in an amount to be fixed by the governing authority at not more than $1,000.00 on a homestead owned and occupied by a resident of the city as a residence and homestead, and only so long as actually occupied by the owner primarily as such. The value of the residence in excess of the amount to be exempted shall remain subject to taxation. Any such resident shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he or his agent provides the tax assessors of Cobb or Douglas county with such affidavits, copies of deeds, or other information as such tax assessors might request showing that such resident and such property qualify for this exemption. After any such person has filed the proper documents and has been allowed [for] the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he make application thereafter for any subsequent year, and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of such person to notify the tax assessor's office and the city tax collector in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. The homestead exemption provided for herein shall not be granted nor the amount fixed within the limits prescribed herein until the governing authority of the city provides by ordinance for the granting of such exemption and the amount thereof. The amount of such exemption may be increased or decreased from year to year by the same procedure. The governing authority of the city may provide by ordinance for the proper administration of this exemption as the same may be necessary. 
 
Section 6.12. Homestead exemption for persons over age sixty-five.
The city is authorized to grant to each person who is 65 years of age or over an exemption from all ad valorem taxes levied by such city in the amount of $2,000.00 on the homestead owned and occupied by such person as a residence. The city may limit the grant of the exemption provided for in this paragraph to qualified persons whose net income from all sources, as defined by state law except as hereinafter provided, together with the net income of their spouses who also occupy and reside at such residences, does not exceed a limitation established from time to time by the city for the immediately preceding taxable year for income tax purposes. For the purposes of this paragraph, net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the private retirement, disability, or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and his spouse under the Federal Social Security Act, and income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this paragraph. 
 
Section 6.13. Millage rate; due dates; payment methods.
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the length of time in which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum and may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. The city council may, by ordinance, provide for a discount for prompt payment of taxes. 
 
Section 6.14. Occupation and business taxes.
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.20. 
 
Section 6.15. Licenses; permits; fees.
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city, or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and to pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.20. The city council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
 
Section 6.16. Franchises.
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises. 
 
Section 6.17. Service charges.
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer, sanitary, health services, or any other service rendered inside and outside the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.20. 
 
Section 6.18. Special assessments.
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of construction, reconstruction, widening, improving, or installing any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, street lights and lampposts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, waterlines, or other utility mains, lines, and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable in the discretion of the city council. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.20. 
 
Section 6.19. Construction; other taxes.
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
 
Section 6.20. Collection of delinquent taxes and fees.
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, rendering delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fee imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, allowing exceptions for hardship, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions or liens. The director of the finance department shall be the tax collector and tax receiver for the city. 
 
Section 6.21. General obligation bonds.
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time the issue is undertaken. 
 
Section 6.22. Revenue bonds and revenue anticipation certificates.
Revenue bonds and revenue anticipation certificates may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
 
Section 6.23. Short-term loans.
The city council shall have the power to borrow money on a short-term basis. Any short-term loan obtained by the city must be repaid by December 31 of the year in which the loan was obtained unless otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
 
Section 6.24. Fiscal year.
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law, except for the Austell gas system which shall have the power to fix its own fiscal year which may differ from the city's fiscal year. 
 
Section 6.25. Adoption and amendment of budget.
(a)	The city council shall adopt and may thereafter amend from time to time an annual budget, provided that the budget as finally adopted and amended must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues of such annual budget. 
(b)	The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operations for the fiscal year just ended shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall constitute and take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(c)	The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such; and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrances created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable unless by a majority vote of the city council. 
 
Section 6.26. Tax levies.
As the next order of business following adoption of the budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operation budget for defraying the expenses of the city. 
 
Section 6.27. Changes in appropriations.
The city council, by majority vote, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operation budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. 
 
Section 6.28. Independent audit.
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
 
Section 6.29. Contracting procedures.
Subject to general state law provisions on municipal contracts, no contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)	It is in writing; 
(2)	It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney; and 
(3)	It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered into the minutes of the city council. 
 
Section 6.30. Centralized purchasing.
The city council may prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
 
Section 6.31. Sale of city property.
(a)	The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law, as now exists or is hereafter amended. 
(b)	The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city is of no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)	Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying the cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of the street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, or public places, or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by the abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
 
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Section 7.10. Eminent domain.
The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, streets, sidewalks, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas mains and lines, gas system facilities, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under the state law of eminent domain, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other state law applicable now or provided in the future. 
 
Section 7.11. Official bonds.
The officers, officials, directors of departments, and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require, or as may be provided by state law. 
 
Section 7.12. Prior code and ordinances.
All codes, ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full force and effect until amended or repealed by the city council. 
 
Section 7.13. Pending matters.
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue; and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
 
Section 7.14. Penalties.
The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 365 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
 
Section 7.15. Construction.
(a)	Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)	The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is not mandatory, but permissive. 
(c)	The singular shall include the plural and the masculine the feminine and vice versa. 
 
Section 7.16. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independently of each other, and the remainder of this charter would have been enacted without such invalid or unconstitutional part had it been known upon enactment that the part in question would have been held invalid or unconstitutional. 
 
Section 7.17. Repealer.
An act incorporating the City of Austell, approved August 17, 1929 (1929 Ga. Laws, p. 862), as amended, is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are amended to allow the provisions hereof. 
 
Section 7.18. Effective date.
This act shall become effective upon its signature by the Governor. 
 
PART II 
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The material embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Austell, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the shortened title: "Austell City Code." 
(Code 1985, § 1-1)
 
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Austell, Georgia. 
City council, council, mayor and council, governing body. Whenever the term "city council," "council," "mayor and council" or "governing body" is used, it means the mayor and council of the city. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Ordinances, City of Austell, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Cobb County, Georgia, and Douglas County, Georgia, or either of them as applicable. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Fee schedule. The term "fee schedule" means any one of the lists of fees maintained by the various city departments, as such schedules are amended from time to time. 
Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to the other genders also, if the context so permits. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
May. The term "may" is always directory or permissive and not mandatory. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only (i.e., "mayor," "city clerk," etc.), they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., of the city. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and," and the term "and" may be read as "or," if the sense requires it. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the city council of a general and permanent nature. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the city council of a special or temporary character. 
Shall. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated rights-of-way. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Will. The term "will" is construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing. 
(Code 1985, § 1-2)
State law reference(s)—Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines, history notes, editorial notes and cross references.
(a)	The catchlines of sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(c)	Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(d)	All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1985, § 1-3)
 
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1004; Code 1985, § 1-4)
 
Sec. 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 1-5)
 
Sec. 1-6. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portion may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ___ of The Code of Ordinances, City of Austell, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: … (set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)	When the governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the governing body desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ___. It is the intention of the governing body and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of The Code of Ordinances, City of Austell, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1985, § 1-6)
 
Sec. 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
(a)	By contractor or by city personnel, supplements to this Code, including the Charter, shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the governing body. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing body or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, as well as amendments to the Charter. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances, other than Charter amendments, included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1985, § 1-7)
 
Sec. 1-8. Certain ordinances not affected by adoption of this Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances that are intentionally omitted from this Code, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(3)	Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(4)	Granting any right or franchise. 
(5)	Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)	Providing for salaries, employee benefits, and personnel policies and procedures not codified in this Code. 
(7)	Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(8)	Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(9)	Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(10)	Providing for or dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(11)	Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(12)	Rezoning selected parcels of property. 
(13)	Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, bus stops, taxi stands, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones, consistent with this Code. 
(14)	Describing or altering the boundaries of the city or annexing property to the city. 
(15)	Administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(16)	Agreements and contracts with outside entities or other political subdivisions. 
(17)	Legislation that is temporary although general in effect, special although permanent in effect or the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
 
Sec. 1-9. General penalty.
(a)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code, or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order, shall be punishable upon conviction, at the discretion of the municipal judge, by a sentence to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months, and work and labor on the city public works not to exceed 60 days, either or all or any part of either or all. 
(b)	The fine schedule adopted by the mayor and city council pursuant to section 4.13(d) of the Charter may provide for increasing punishment, subject to the maximums in this section, for the repeat offenders. 
(c)	The maximum punishment in this section shall be applicable only to each offense and may be imposed for each separate offense, including those which are deemed to continue daily until remedied. 
(Code 1985, § 1-8; Ord. of 3-2-1998, § 1)
State law reference(s)—Confinement of ordinance violators, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; jurisdiction of court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1-10. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change, or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1985, § 1-9)
 
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 2-1. Official city newspaper.
The Marietta Daily Journal shall be the newspaper in which all official notices which may be required by law to be published by the city government may be published. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6001; Code 1985, § 11-1; Mo. of 8-6-1979; Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 2)
 
Sec. 2-2. Records retention and disposition.
The city hereby adopts the record retention schedule for municipal governments, as amended from time to time by the state, a copy of which schedule may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1008; Code 1985, § 11-2; Ord. of 11-3-1980; Mo. of 10-3-1983)
State law reference(s)—Records management, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 
 
Secs. 2-3—2-22. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
 
Sec. 2-23. City council.
The city council, consisting of six councilmembers and the mayor, shall have the legislative authority of the government of the city and shall exercise its administrative authority through supervision of the various department directors and other appointed officials. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3001; Code 1985, § 2-1; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-1994; Ord. of 1-6-1997, §§ I—IV; Ord. of 6-5-2000, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-2000, § 1)
 
Sec. 2-24. Mayor's power and duties.
The mayor shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To preside at all meetings of the city council and to have the right to take part in the deliberations of the council, but shall not have the right to vote on any question except in the case of a tie; 
(2)	To be the official head and spokesperson for the city for service of process and ceremonial purposes; 
(3)	To sign, as a matter of course, all written contracts, ordinances, deeds, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(4)	To cosign, along with the mayor pro tem or finance director, all checks for the payment of money; alternate signatories may be designated by city ordinance; 
(5)	To have the veto power as hereinafter set out in Charter section 2.35; 
(6)	To keep the council advised from time to time of the general condition of the city and to recommend such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city; 
(7)	To call special meetings of the city council as provided herein; 
(8)	To appoint at the first meeting each year, (or as soon thereafter as expedient), a gas system liaison and members of the following standing committees: police department, fire, public works, general administration, finance, community affairs, and such other committees as the mayor and council may deem necessary; 
(9)	To appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, all department directors and in such manner to fill any vacancy in any such offices; 
(10)	To pardon or parole any offender against the ordinances of the city; 
(11)	To see that all state law, provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(12)	To submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; and 
(13)	To perform such other duties as may be required by general state law, the Charter, or by ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1007; Code 1985, § 2-20; Ord. of 1-8-1990; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 10; Ord. of 4-4-1994; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § XI; Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-2000, § 1)
 
Sec. 2-25. Regular meetings, agenda, order of business and rules of procedure.
(a)	Time and date of regular meetings. Regular meetings of the city shall be held at city hall on the first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m., or at another time provided by the city. When the day for a meeting falls upon a day which is a legal holiday in this state or a regular meeting is cancelled for any reason, the meeting shall be held upon a day and at an hour to be designated by the mayor. Unless otherwise so designated, any regular meetings not held on the first Monday shall be held on the second Monday of that month. 
(b)	Agenda deadline. The agenda of matters to be acted upon by the city at such regular meetings (with the exception of that portion of the meeting which may be set aside for citizen's report and comment) shall be submitted no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Monday prior to the pre-agenda meeting. 
(c)	Agenda amendment. The city may, at an agenda meeting or by majority vote at the regular meeting, amend the agenda in order to take official action with regard to any nonagenda matters. This section shall not, however, serve to invalidate any official action, taken at such regular meeting, with regard to any nonagenda item and shall not supersede any statutory requirement regarding public notification of action by the city. 
(d)	Adjourned meetings. Any session of the city may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(e)	Order of business. The order of business for each meeting of the city shall be as prescribed by its rules. 
(f)	Rules of procedure. Rules of procedure shall be as prescribed by the city; in the absence of any such rule, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern. 
(g)	Meeting to be open to public. All meetings of the city shall be public to the extent required by general state law. Minutes of such meetings shall be promptly recorded and open to public inspection. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-1001—2-1005; Code 1985, §§ 2-21—2-25; Ord. of 2-5-1990; Ord. of 4-2-1990)
State law reference(s)—Notice of meetings and agenda, meetings to be open, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. 
 
Sec. 2-26. Executive sessions.
Executive sessions of the city may be held only as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1. Attendance at executive sessions shall be limited to the members of the city; provided, however, that the city may invite such persons as may be required for advice and information at the next regular council meeting, following an executive session, the mayor shall report for the minutes of the city the date of each executive session, the city officials present at such sessions and the subjects discussed or considered. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1006; Code 1985, § 2-26; Ord. of 4-6-1981)
 
Secs. 2-27—2-55. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTORS
 
Sec. 2-56. Departments and department directors.
(a)	The city shall have the following departments: 
Department 	Divisions 
General Administration 	City Clerk 
	Human Resources 
	Court Services 
Community Affairs 	Planning and Zoning 
	Community Development 
	Economic Development 
	Building Permits and Inspections 
	Business License 
	Code Enforcement 
	Parks 
	Nature Trails 
	Facilities Management 
	Recreation Program 
	Cultural Affairs 
Finance 	Accounting and Operations 
	Utility and Property Taxes 
Fire and Emergency Services 	Fire Department 
	Emergency Services Department 
Police 	Police Department 
	911 Dispatch Center 
Public Works 	Administration 
	Environmental Compliance 
	Erosion Control 
	Fleet Services 
	Solid Waste and Recycling 
	Stormwater Management 
	Streets and Highways 
	Water and Sewer 
Other 	Austell Gas System 

(b)	Each department shall be supervised by a director appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council by majority vote. The duties of the department directors shall be as follows: 
(1)	To hire, appoint, evaluate, reprimand and subject to disciplinary adverse action all city employees supervised by the department director within their department except as otherwise provided by general state law, the Charter, city ordinances or personnel policies adopted pursuant to the Charter. The procedure to be followed by the department director in fulfilling such duties shall be governed by the personnel policies as adopted by the city council. 
(2)	To attend all city council meetings and their respective committee meetings. 
(3)	To submit to the finance director an annual budget for their respective department. The department budgets will be compiled into a proposed balanced budget by the finance director and submitted to the finance committee for review and recommendation to the city council for approval. 
(4)	To advise their respective committees as to the future needs of their departments. 
(5)	To make any report as the council committee or city council may require concerning the operation of their department or any of its employees subject to their direction and supervision. 
(6)	To prepare an inventory showing all real and personal property utilized by their department and to submit such inventory to the finance director for compilation. 
(7)	To make budgeted purchases of supplies, material and equipment for their department up to a dollar amount set by the council from time to time without first obtaining specific approval of the committee chairperson, the council committee or city council, provided that all other provisions of the Charter and the ordinances of the city are complied with, including bid requirements, if applicable. All purchases in excess of such amount must be approved by the committee chairperson, the council committee or city council, depending on the amount of the expenditure. 
(8)	To be responsible for the preparation and publication of all notices, and announcements required by law with respect to the operation of their department. Such notices shall be given to the general administration department for review and submittal for publishing. 
(9)	To supervise and report to the proper council committee regarding the performance of all contracts made for services or material related to their department. 
(10)	To coordinate with the general administration committee of the city council and with other department heads, regarding purchases of equipment, services and office supplies, including maintenance and service agreements, to facilitate the selection and use of vendors that best serve the city's goal of obtaining optimum pricing. 
(11)	To perform such other duties as may be assigned by the city council, the Charter, city ordinances or general state law. 
(c)	Department heads shall recommend to the department's council committee those items of city personal property which the department director deems to have become unnecessary or unfit for use by the city. Upon approval by the council committee, the department director shall coordinate the sale of such surplus property. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3001; Code 1985, § 2-1; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-1994; Ord. of 1-6-1997, §§ I—IV; Ord. of 6-5-2000, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-2000, § 1)
 
Sec. 2-57. General administration department.
(a)	Generally; duties. The city council has established a general administration department for the city consisting of the city clerk as the department director and other personnel as the mayor and council may from time to time determine. The duties of the general administration department shall be to: 
(1)	Assist department directors in fulfilling their personnel duties by providing all documents and forms with regard to insurance, job applications, new employee hiring packages, retirement benefits, and worker's compensation. 
(2)	Review, publish and post all notices of meetings, sales, hearings or other governmental actions as required by the Charter, ordinances or general state law. 
(3)	Distribute to the mayor, council, department directors and other city officials the regular council meeting agenda and supporting material as prepared by the city clerk. 
(4)	Ensure that media is notified of all official city meetings and hearings pursuant to this Code, the Charter and state law. 
(5)	Prepare and maintain the official annual city calendar of all city meetings, hearings and other functions. 
(6)	Act as the city's liaison to all companies providing retirement benefits, insurance coverage and worker's compensation benefits. 
(7)	Coordinate participation by the mayor and council in Cobb Municipal Association (CMA) activities and distribute all related documents. 
(8)	Prepare and maintain directory of all city employees, staff and officials. 
(9)	Provide assistance to citizens present at city hall including receiving utility bill payments, license applications, property taxes and forwarding such items to the proper city department. 
(10)	Perform such other duties as directed by the city council, or as required by the Charter, ordinances or state law. 
(11)	Operate the clerk's office and supervise administration of the municipal court. 
(b)	City clerk; duties. The city clerk shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council by majority vote and shall serve at such compensation as the city council shall provide. Before entering upon the duties of the office, the city clerk shall give a good and sufficient bond, payable to the city, such bond to be fixed and approved by the city. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-3011—2-3013; Code 1985, §§ 2-3—2-5, 2-14; Ord. of 4-2-1984; Ord. of 8-26-1985; Ord. of 11-6-1989; Ord. of 12-3-1990, § 4; Ord. of 7-12-1993; Ord. of 8-2-1993, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-1994; Ord. of 1-6-1997, §§ V, VI, X; Ord. of 2-1-1999, § 1(1), (3), (4), (9); Ord. of 6-5-2000, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 8-7-2000, § 2)
 
Sec. 2-58. Public works department.
(a)	Streets and sanitation division. There shall be a streets and sanitation division within the public works department of the city, which shall include the functions of repair and maintenance of streets and collection and control of sanitation for the city. The department shall be composed of a director of streets and sanitation works and such other city employees as the city may from time to time determine. The director of streets and sanitation shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and shall serve as the director of the streets and sanitation department. 
(b)	Water and sewer division. There shall be a water and sewer division within the public works department of the city, which shall include the functions of construction maintenance and use of water pipes, sewer pipes and related facilities to equipment for the city. The department shall be composed of a director of water and sewer and such other city employees as the city may from time to time determine. The director of the water and sewer department shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and shall serve as the director of the water and sewer department. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-1001—5-1002; Code 1985, §§ 2-10—2-13; Ord. of 11-7-1988; Ord. of 12-3-1990; Ord. of 7-12-1993, §§ 8, 9; Ord. of 2-1-1999, § 1(9))
 
Sec. 2-59. Community affairs department.
(a)	Established. The city council has established a community affairs department for the city. The community affairs department shall relate to the community affairs committee of the city council. The department shall be composed of a department director and such other city employees as the mayor and council may from time to time determine. 
(b)	Director. The community affairs department director shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council by majority vote. 
(c)	Code enforcement division established; duties. The city council has determined that the efficient enforcement of this Code, including city zoning regulations and development standards, is best served through the cross-utilization of city personnel for purposes of inspecting and enforcing certain codes and ordinances of the city. The formation of a code enforcement division under the city's department of community affairs serves the economic interests of the city by maximum use of personnel, and such division has been established by the city council. The code enforcement division shall enforce certain city regulations as provided in article VII of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-4001—5-4002; Code 1985, §§ 16-1, 16-2; Ord. of 11-7-1988; Ord. of 12-3-1990; Ord. of 7-12-1993, §§ 17, 18; Ord. of 4-4-1994, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-1999, § 1(2),(5); Ord. of 8-7-2000 § 5; Ord. No. 09-2017-02, 9-2-2017; Ord. No. 09-2017-01, § 2-30, 9-18-2017)
 
Sec. 2-60. Finance department.
(a)	Established. The city council has established a finance department for the city. The finance department shall relate to the finance committee of the city council. The department shall be composed of a department director and such other city employees as the mayor and council may from time to time determine. 
(b)	Finance director. The finance director shall be appointed to act as head of the finance department by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council by majority vote. The finance director shall receive such compensation as the city council shall provide. The director is responsible for serving as chief fiscal advisor to the mayor. 
(c)	Department duties. Among other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the mayor and city council or required by state law, the finance department shall have duties as follows: 
(1)	Accounting: Maintain and reconcile general ledger accounts. 
(2)	Accounts receivable: Perform monthly and annual billings for utility accounts and taxes. 
(3)	Payroll: Process all payroll and report to required agencies. 
(4)	Accounts payable: Pay all vendors from approved invoices. 
(5)	Cash and investments: Manage all cash and investment balances. 
(6)	Grants: Reconcile grant expenditures and report financial information and reimbursements to agencies. 
(7)	Capital and fixed assets: Maintain citywide records of all fixed assets and depreciation calculations. 
(8)	Annual audit: Coordinate and prepare all financial schedules for annual external audit. 
(9)	Financial statements: Prepare monthly reports for council. 
(10)	Budget: Advise departments regarding procedures for purchasing and budget maintenance. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-3014, 2-3015; Code 1985, §§ 2-6, 2-7; Ord. of 4-2-1984; Ord. of 8-26-1985; Ord. of 7-12-1993, §§ 5, 6; Ord. of 1-6-1997, §§ VII, VIII)
 
Secs. 2-61—2-78. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. OTHER CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
 
Sec. 2-79. City attorney.
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council by majority vote and shall serve at such compensation as it shall provide. 
 
Sec. 2-80. Fire department.
(a)	Established. The fire department shall be composed of a fire chief and such other officers and firefighters as the city may from time to time determine. 
(b)	Fire chief. The fire chief shall be the department director of the fire department and shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council by majority vote. 
 
Sec. 2-81. Police department.
(a)	Established. The police department shall be comprised of a police chief and such other officers as the city may from time to time determine. 
(b)	Police chief. The police chief shall be the department director of the police department and shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council by majority vote. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-3021, 2-3022; Code 1985, §§ 2-8, 2-9; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 7; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § IX; Ord. of 8-7-2000, § 2)
 
Secs. 2-82—2-101. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES AND SIMILAR BODIES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 2-102—2-132. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
Sec. 2-133. Established; membership; term of office; compensation; vacancies.
The city council has created the city planning and zoning commission consisting of seven members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the city. The terms of the members shall be two years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city, which shall also have the authority to remove any member. All members shall serve with such compensation as may be determined by the mayor and council from time to time and may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4001; Code 1985, §§ 18-1, 22-31, 22-32; Ord. of 4-7-1986; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 2-134. Officers, employees and other staff.
(a)	The planning and zoning commission shall elect one of its appointive members as chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. A second appointive member shall be elected as vice-chairperson, and he shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The planning and zoning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or an employee of the city or of the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)	The planning and zoning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning commission and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4002; Code 1985, §§ 18-2(a), (b), 22-33(a), (b))
 
Sec. 2-135. Rules of procedure; open meetings and records.
The planning and zoning commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable for the governing of the commission and adopt such rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable for the public to appear before the planning and zoning commission and be heard as to any changes, modifications or amendments to any planning or zoning resolution that may have been passed on by the mayor and council. All meetings of the planning and zoning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning and zoning commission shall be public records. 
(Code 1985, §§ 18-2(a), 22-33(a), 22-35)
 
Sec. 2-136. Budget; expenses.
The expenditures of the planning and zoning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city. 
(Code 1985, §§ 18-2(b), 22-33(b))
 
Sec. 2-137. Functions, powers and duties.
It shall be the function and duty of the city planning and zoning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote public health, safety, morals, convenience, property or general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy, in the development of the city. In particular, the planning and zoning commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)	Recommend approval of a master plan or parts thereof for the development of the city. 
(2)	Recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a zoning ordinance or resolution and map for the city. 
(3)	Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council regulations for the subdivision of land within the city, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted. 
(4)	Review and make recommendations concerning applications for zoning map amendment, conditional use approvals, annexation or other such applications. 
(5)	Recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a plat or an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within the city or a specified portion thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 22-34)
 
Secs. 2-138—2-157. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. BOARD OF VARIANCE AND ZONING APPEALS
 
Sec. 2-158. Creation.
There is created a board of variance and zoning appeals. 
(Code 1985, § 22-51)
 
Sec. 2-159. Membership; term of office; compensation of members; removal of members.
The board of variance and zoning appeals shall be composed of five members and one alternate. Each member of the council shall be entitled to appoint one member to the board. Each member appointed by a member of the council shall serve concurrently with and at the pleasure of the appointing councilmember's term of office and until a successor is appointed. If an appointing councilmember is no longer in office due to a general election or a special election in which more than one year remains in that councilmember's term, any member appointed by that councilmember shall be subject to removal with or without cause and without regard to any unexpired term by the newly elected councilmember filling such seat. The newly elected councilmember shall have the right to appoint a new member to the board in the same manner as his predecessor. The mayor and council shall determine the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the members of the board of variance and zoning appeals. No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member during the term of such elective office, and the position of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member qualifying as a candidate for elective public office, except that members may be also members of the planning and zoning commission. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(Code 1985, § 22-52)
 
Sec. 2-160. Officers; meetings; rules of procedure.
The board of variance and zoning appeals shall elect one of its members as chairperson, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The board of variance and zoning appeals shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board of variance and zoning appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board of variance and zoning appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of community affairs and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1985, § 22-53)
 
Sec. 2-161. Powers.
(a)	The board of variance and zoning appeals shall have the power to: 
(1)	Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)	Authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The existence of nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same district or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of variance and appeals that: 
a.	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district; 
b.	The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.	Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.	Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
No variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter. No variance may be granted that would conflict with or alter a stipulation or condition imposed by the mayor and council. 
(b)	In exercising the powers described in subsection (a) of this section, the board of variance and zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building official and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1985, § 22-54)
 
Sec. 2-162. Appeal procedure; effect of appeal.
(a)	Appeals to the board of variance and zoning appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the building official or other city official based on this article. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days or as provided by the rules of the board of variance and zoning appeals, by filing with the building official and with the board of variance and zoning appeals a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
(b)	An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of variance and zoning appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of variance and zoning appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(c)	The board of variance and zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the matter within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 22-55)
 
Sec. 2-163. Appeals from decision of board.
Any person severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the board of variance and zoning appeals may take an appeal to the superior court. The appeal to the superior court shall be by writ of certiorari. Such appeal may be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the board of variance and zoning appeals, and upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days the decision of the board of variance and zoning appeals shall be final. 
(Code 1985, § 22-56)
 
Secs. 2-164—2-173. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITIES
 
Sec. 2-174. Industrial development authority.
(a)	Established. The city council has established the public body corporate and politic known as the Development Authority of Austell. 
(b)	Appointment of board of directors; terms of members. The authority shall have a board of directors of the development authority appointed by the city council, each member of which shall be a taxpayer of the city and a resident of the city. The members shall serve staggered four-year terms. The terms of three of the first members shall expire in December 1994, and the terms of four of the first members expire in December 1996. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed to a four-year term. 
(c)	Organization of board; duties and responsibilities. The board of directors of the authority shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 62, development authorities. 
(d)	Scope, intent and applicability. The action taken by the mayor and council of the city, as herein specified, is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development, downtown development, or payroll authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Code 1985, §§ 18-31—18-34; Res. of 4-1-1985; Ord. of 11-8-1993)
 
Sec. 2-175. Downtown development authority.
(a)	Established. The city council has established the public body the public body corporate and politic known as the Downtown Development Authority of Austell. 
(b)	Appointment of board of directors; terms of members. The city council has established a board of directors of the downtown development authority. Members of the board, appointed by the city council, shall be taxpayers of the city, residing in the city. Not less than four members shall either have or represent a party who has an economic interest in the redevelopment and revitalization of the downtown development area. The members shall be appointed for a four-year term. 
(c)	Organization of board; duties and responsibilities. The board of directors shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 62, development authorities. 
(d)	Area of jurisdiction. The downtown development area shall be that geographical area described in a metes and bounds description of the central business district of the city including the Clarkdale Mill Village area and such other areas as may be designated from time to time by the city council. The metes and bounds description, as amended from time to time, shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and with the board of directors of the authority. 
(e)	Scope, intent and applicability. The action taken by the mayor and council of the city, as herein specified, is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development, downtown development, or payroll authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Code 1985, §§ 18-16—18-20; Res. of 11-22-1982; Mo. of 11-5-1984; Res. of 11-14-1994, § 1)
 
Secs. 2-176—2-183. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. FINANCE
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 2-184. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrual basis means the basis of accounting under which revenues are recorded when earned or when levies are made, and expenditures are recorded as soon as they result in liabilities, notwithstanding that the receipt of the revenue or payment of the expenditure may take place, in whole or in part, in another accounting period. 
Appropriation means an authorization granted by the city to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
Assets means property of all kinds of a government, including both current assets and fixed assets. 
Audit means the examination of records, documents, reports, systems of internal control, accounting and financial procedures, and other evidence for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)	To ascertain whether the statements prepared from the accounts present fairly the financial position and the results of financial operations of the constituent funds and balanced account groups of the governmental unit in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to governmental units and on a basis consistent with that of the preceding year; 
(2)	To determine the propriety, legality, and mathematical accuracy of a governmental unit's financial transactions; 
(3)	To ascertain whether all financial transactions have been properly recorded; and 
(4)	To ascertain the stewardship of public officials who handle and are responsible for the financial resources of a governmental unit. 
Balance sheet means a statement ordinarily prepared from books kept by double entry showing assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus of a fund of a governmental unit at a specified date properly classified to exhibit financial position of the fund or unit at the date. 
Bona fide competitive bidding means that a reasonable effort is made to make potential suppliers aware of the purchases to be made and that each potential supplier has a reasonable opportunity to bid on the item to be purchased. 
Budget means a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given time and the proposed means of financing them. The annual budget refers to a period of one year. 
Cash basis means the system of accounting under which revenues are accounted for only when received in cash, and expenditures are accounted for only when paid. 
Debt service means the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on the outstanding debt and the principal of maturing bonded debt not payable from a sinking fund and to provide a fund for the redemption of bonds payable from a sinking fund. 
Delinquent taxes means taxes remaining unpaid on and after the date on which a penalty for nonpayment is attached. Even though the penalty may be subsequently waived and a portion of the taxes may be abated or canceled, the unpaid balances continue to be delinquent taxes until abated, canceled, or converted into tax liens. 
Fund means a sum of money or other resources (gross or net) set aside for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or to attain certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations. A fund is a distinct financial and legal entity. 
Internal audit means an audit made by persons on the staff on the governmental unit whose accounts are being audited primarily for the purpose of internal control. The term "note" means an internal audit is usually a continuous audit. 
Liabilities means debts owed. 
Millage is a term used to express the property tax rate. The term "millage" is derived from the term "mil," which is one-tenth of a cent; thus, ten mils equal one cent or one percent. For tax purposes, millage is determined by dividing the total amount of money to be raised by the total assessed value of the city. 
Taxes receivable means the uncollected portion of taxes which a governmental unit has levied. 
(Code 1985, § 11-20; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 3)
 
Sec. 2-185. Objectives.
The objective of this article is to establish and promote minimum fiscal standards for this local government for the purpose of maintaining public confidence in this government by the demonstration and recognition of fiscal responsibility. 
(Code 1985, § 11-21; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 1)
 
Sec. 2-186. Administration.
The responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this article shall be with the finance director except where the responsibility is explicitly given to the city or others. 
(Code 1985, § 11-22; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 2; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § XV)
 
Sec. 2-187. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 next following. The fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for the financial accounting and reporting of each office, department, or institution, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by city ordinance or state or federal law. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1001; Code 1985, § 11-23; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 4)
 
Sec. 2-188. Modified accrual basis of accounting.
To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on long term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1985, § 11-35; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 17)
 
Sec. 2-189. Financial statements and reports.
Financial statements and reports showing the current conditions of budgetary and proprietary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the city at least every six months. Not later than six months after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared and published. A summary of this report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, will be available online and in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1985, § 11-36; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 18)
 
Sec. 2-190. Audit.
All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the city shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the mayor and city council. The audit shall be conducted according to the standards set forth in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountant's publication, "Audits of State and Local Governmental Units." The accountant shall file a report with the city and shall prepare a summary of the report which shall be furnished and made available to the mayor and every councilmember. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1002; Code 1985, § 11-43; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 19)
 
Sec. 2-191. Revenue bonds and short-term notes.
The city shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Code or general state law. This bond authority shall be exercised in accordance with the state laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time the issue is undertaken. Revenue bonds may be issued by the city as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they are issued. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-3001—3-3003; Code 1985, §§ 11-40—11-42)
 
Sec. 2-192. Appropriation transfer or lapse.
No appropriation transfer shall be made from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund until all the legal obligations and requirements of such fund have been satisfied. All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the unencumbered surplus which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1985, §§ 11-30—11-31; Ord. of 7-11-1983, §§ 11, 13)
 
Sec. 2-193. Community development block grants; procurement policy.
The city shall procure and manage the community development block grant projects according to procurement policy regulations outlined in 24 CFR 85.36 of the administrative requirements for all community development block grant funded along with all applicable regulations relative thereto. The policy shall be adopted by reference. 
(Code 1985, § 16-3; Ord. of 1-4-1999, § 16-2)
 
Secs. 2-194—2-224. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. BUDGET
 
Sec. 2-225. Statement of anticipated revenues.
The mayor shall present the statement of anticipated revenues on the basis of the ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue estimates shall be based upon the anticipated tax digest, less a stated discount for delinquent taxes based on a consideration of the taxes which were delinquent at the close of the three prior fiscal years, plus a stated amount of delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, to be collected in the fiscal year based on consideration of the actual experience in the collection of delinquent taxes in the three prior fiscal years. 
(Code 1985, § 11-24; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 12; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § XVI; Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 3)
 
Sec. 2-226. Time for adoption of budget; temporary expenditures.
(a)	An annual budget will be adopted by the city prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, a resolution authorizing the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. 
(b)	The proposed budget shall be prepared by the finance department and made available for review a minimum of 45 days before the required date of adoption. The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Code 1985, § 11-25; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 5; Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 3)
 
Sec. 2-227. Copy of budget filed for inspection.
At the time the proposed budget is submitted to the mayor and council, a copy will be be made available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk during regular office hours. 
(Code 1985, § 11-26; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 7; Ord. of 4-7-1997, § 3)
 
Sec. 2-228. Public hearing on budget.
No earlier than seven days after the proposed budget is transmitted to members of the city council and no later than the time that the budget is adopted by the city, a public hearing shall be held to give the public the opportunity to comment upon the proposed budget. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city no more than 20 days and no less than five days in advance of the hearing. 
(Code 1985, § 11-27; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 8)
 
Sec. 2-229. Approval of adoption of budget.
The adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget resolution which specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories and the appropriated expenditures for each department and each non-departmental expense and for each fund covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget shall be approved by resolution. 
(Code 1985, § 11-28; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 9)
 
Sec. 2-230. Budget amendment; transfer of appropriations generally.
Any increase in appropriation in a departmental budget or in a non-departmental expense category, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments and non-departmental expenses, shall require the approval of the city in the form of an amendment to the budget resolution. The transfer of appropriations among the various accounts within a departmental budget or within a non-departmental expense category shall not require the approval of the city; except that any transfer of appropriations within a departmental budget so as to increase the salary appropriation for the purpose of employing additional personnel shall require the approval of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1006; Code 1985, § 11-29; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 10)
 
Secs. 2-231—2-253. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS
 
Sec. 2-254. Fund establishment authorized.
The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide for the proper accounting of all financial activities of this city: 
(1)	The general fund to account for the general governmental operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
(2)	Special revenue funds to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources, other than special assessments, or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
(3)	Debt service funds to account for the payment of interest and principal on long term debt other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
(4)	Capital projects funds to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies, including bond funds used, for the acquisition of capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
(5)	Enterprise (utility) funds to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
(6)	Trust and agency funds to account for assets held by the city as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations, and other governmental units. 
(7)	Intergovernmental service funds to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organization unit within the city for other organization units within the city. 
(8)	Special assessment funds to account for special assessments levied to finance public improvements or services deemed to benefit the properties against which the assessments are levied. 
(Code 1985, § 11-32; Ord. of 7-11-1983, § 14)
 
Sec. 2-255. Accounts established.
A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. Additional accounts shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)	A fixed asset account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which: 
a.	Are of a tangible nature; 
b.	Have a life longer than one fiscal year; and 
c.	Have a significant value (or have a value greater than $3,000.00). 
Fixed assets shall be recorded at original cost, shall not be depreciated and shall be removed from the account when disposed of. 
(2)	A general long-term debt account for the purpose of accounting for long term debt which is supported by general revenues and for recording and fairly representing the liability for long term debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(Code 1985, §§ 11-33, 11-34; Ord. of 7-11-1983, §§ 15, 16)
 
Secs. 2-256—2-273. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. PROCUREMENT POLICY
 
Sec. 2-274. Non-budgeted purchases.
(a)	The city council acknowledges that every event cannot be foreseen, but also recognizes that the budget is the basis for the city's financial actions for each respective fiscal year. In keeping with its budget, non-budgeted purchases must be kept to a minimum and subjected to scrutiny, including determination of the degree of necessity for making the purchase. 
(b)	If a department head determines the purchase of a non-budgeted operating or capital item is necessary, he will submit a request for approval to the mayor, citing the reasons the purchase is necessary. If the purchase is approved by the mayor, the budget will be amended or adjusted as provided in this article to accommodate the non-budgeted purchase. 
(c)	The mayor shall notify the council of any non-budgeted capital purchases in excess of $3,000.00 that he has approved at the next regular meeting following the approval and shall obtain formal ratification of the purchase through a budget amendment in the manner provided in this article and by state law. 
 
Sec. 2-275. Budgeted purchases.
(a)	Each department shall be responsible for implementing and enforcing all purchasing rules and regulations and will maintain and distribute to all eligible vendors purchasing rules and regulations as may be written specifically for those vendors. All purchases require department head or designee approval. 
(b)	The finance department shall establish internal procedures for review of all proposed expenditures. The procedure shall have the effect of reserving city funds to cover authorized purchases made within approved appropriations levels based on a modified accrual basis of accounting. 
(c)	All purchasing is done in a competitive environment with qualified vendors being given a reasonable opportunity to do business with the city. 
(d)	To maintain an accurate incremental budget process, purchases should be made against the appropriate accounting code, thus accurately identifying where reductions and increases in specific line items are warranted for future budget years. In the event a particular budget line item, under a particular accounting code, has insufficient funds to allow a proposed purchase, the department head may either: 
(1)	Postpone the purchase until the next fiscal year; 
(2)	Identify a source from within the department budget to cover a shortfall; or 
(3)	Suggest an appropriate budget amendment. 
Resubmitting the documentation with a different accounting code is not permitted. 
 
Sec. 2-276. Criteria for purchases and bids.
(a)	Purchases over $1,000.00 and under $3,000.00. Purchases greater than $1,000.00 and less than $3,000.00 shall be authorized by the respective department heads who are required to document in writing their efforts to obtain at least three written quotes or bids for each purchase. Documentation and all associated paperwork will be maintained by the department. 
(b)	Purchases between $3,000.00 and $25,000.00. The department head, together with the mayor, shall authorize purchases between $3,000.00 and $25,000.00. All such purchases shall require informal (non-advertised, non-sealed) bids. Supporting bid documentation must be in written form. A minimum of three bids must be obtained from qualified vendors who regularly offer or carry the items or services to be purchased. 
(c)	Purchases over $25,000.00. Any purchase in excess of $25,000.00 shall be subject to the following: 
(1)	Must be approved and awarded by the mayor and city council in a regular or special meeting unless otherwise required or permitted pursuant to a county, state or federal negotiated contract purchasing system or law (including, without limitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-69A-4). 
(2)	Must be based on standard specifications that allow maximum competition among qualified vendors whose products or services meet established performance requirements. 
(3)	Such purchases shall require formal competitive sealed bids, which shall be advertised in the state procurement registry pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-80-26; provided, however, any public works construction contract governed by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22 shall be advertised both in the state procurement registry and in the county newspaper of general circulation at least once no less than one week prior to the date at the time of public bid opening, in accordance with state law. In addition, the city shall make other reasonable efforts to make qualified vendors aware of the purchasing opportunity, including direct notification of potential vendors in the geographical area of the city. 
(4)	Following advertisement and time for bids, no item shall be determined a sole source purchase without the approval of the mayor. In such case, there must submitted to the mayor and city council full documentation of the lack of a competitive market as applicable. 
(5)	The purchasing limitations and authority provided in this section shall be followed in all circumstances. Purchases shall not be split or divided to avoid established bid limits. 
(d)	Alternative procedure when no sealed bids are received. Except as otherwise provided in this section, if no sealed bids are received following two lawfully advertised bids, and upon approval by the mayor and council, the department head shall be authorized without additional advertisement to seek and obtain sealed competitive bids from at least three vendors who commonly deal in such supplies, materials, equipment, or vehicles. This subsection shall not apply to purchases in excess of $25,000.00 or to public works projects as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 
(e)	Disqualified bidders. No contract shall be awarded to a bidder that is delinquent on any taxes, permit or license fees owed to the city. In addition, no contract shall be awarded to a bidder that is in arrears on an existing contract with the city or has failed to satisfy all liens against the bidder's property executed by the city. 
 
Sec. 2-277. Emergency purchases.
(a)	A bona fide emergency is a situation that seriously jeopardizes public safety, health or welfare or that otherwise adversely affects the ability of a city department to utilize normal purchasing channels. The department head and the mayor will determine the existence of an emergency situation or condition. Department heads will not use the emergency purchase procedure to abuse or otherwise purposely circumvent the established purchasing procedures. 
(b)	After determination that an emergency situation or condition exists, the department head shall make the purchase and obtain a receipt therefor. No later than the first working day after the purchase is consummated, the department head shall prepare and submit to the finance director a confirmation letter explaining the nature of the emergency. The letter shall be accompanied by the purchase receipt and any related documentation. The finance director shall report the emergency purchase to the mayor and city council no later than the next regularly scheduled council meeting following receipt of the confirmation letter and supporting documentation. 
 
Sec. 2-278. Local vendor preference.
(a)	Because bids awarded to local vendors contribute to the city tax base and promote the local economy, local vendors shall be given preference when bidding against non-local vendors, subject to the following: 
(1)	For purposes of this section, a local vendor is a vendor maintaining a physical presence within the city limits including at a minimum the maintenance of at least one office and continuous employment of at least two persons within the city limits for not less than six months prior to the submission of a bid. 
(2)	For purchases or contracts under $100,000.00, where a local vendor's bid meets all specifications and is within five percent of the lowest responsive and responsible non-local bidder, the city is authorized to negotiate with local vendors to match the lowest bid submitted by a non-local vendor. The lowest bidding local vendor shall be given one business day from the opening of bids to notify the department head or other designated city official that it will match the low bid submitted by the non-local vendor. 
(3)	If the local vendor refuses to match the low bid, then the next lowest local vendor within five percent, if any, shall be given one business day to agree to match the low bid submitted by the non-local vendor, and so on until all local vendors have had an opportunity to match the low bid. 
(b)	To be eligible for consideration under this section, bids submitted by local vendors must meet all other terms and conditions of the bid and must be otherwise qualified to be awarded city contracts. The exercise of local vendor preference shall not be at the sacrifice of the quality of the purchased product or service. 
(c)	Local vendor preference shall not apply to road construction or public works projects otherwise governed by state law or to the purchase of goods or services for which preference is prohibited by state law. 
(d)	The local vendor preference shall be stated in written solicitations for bids unless the preference is not applicable pursuant to this section. 
 
Secs. 2-279—2-304. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. AD VALOREM TAXES
 
Sec. 2-305. Tax rate as prescribed; levy.
The annual ad valorem tax rate upon all real and personal property within the city shall be set and levied annually by the city. Failure to set the rate in any year shall result in the imposition of the rate last set by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2011; Code 1985, § 11-50; Ord. of 10-6-1980)
 
Sec. 2-306. Assessment rate.
All property subject to the ad valorem tax shall be assessed at 40 percent of its full fair market value as established by the county for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2012; Code 1985, § 11-51)
 
Sec. 2-307. Tax appeals.
Any taxpayer may appeal from an ad valorem tax assessment as is provided in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2014; Code 1985, § 11-52)
 
Sec. 2-308. Tax due and payable.
Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before December 31 or in the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, within such reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by the city after receipt from the county of the adjustment information. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2015; Code 1985, § 11-53)
 
Sec. 2-309. Delinquent taxes.
All taxes due to the city when delinquent shall be collected by every means allowed by general state law. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2001; Code 1985, § 11-54)
 
Sec. 2-310. Interest on tax executions.
All tax executions shall earn the maximum rate of interest allowed by general state law. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2002; Code 1985, § 11-55)
 
Sec. 2-311. Issuance of executions and fi. fas.
The tax collector for the city shall issue all executions and fi. fas. for delinquent taxes as soon as the last day for the payment thereof has arrived over his signature alone. The executions shall be directed to all and singular sheriffs and constables of the state. The executions shall be signed by the tax collector under the seal of the city; such signatures may be manual or facsimile signatures. The signature of the mayor or any other person, other than the tax collector, shall not be required for the same to be validly issued. 
(Code 1985, § 11-56; Ord. of 8-3-1987)
 
Secs. 2-312—2-340. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 2-341. Code enforcement division authority.
The personnel of the code enforcement division of the community affairs department shall enforce the city's zoning, sign, and other regulations and standards as directed and approved by the city council, in the manner provided in this article. 
 
Sec. 2-342. Inspection authority, limitations and procedure.
Subject to constitutional limitations, code enforcement division personnel may enter or inspect any building, land, structure or premises in the city for the purpose of inspection of the building, structure, land, premises and all utility connections associated therewith for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of all state laws and city codes and ordinances; provided, however, that: 
(1)	Efforts shall be made to conduct inspections during normal business hours, if practicable, or unless, in the discretion of the code enforcement officer, an emergency is deemed to exist; 
(2)	All code enforcement division personnel shall present themselves, if necessary, to gain entrance or access to the property, at the front door or entrance in order to identify themselves prior to accessing the premises. The code enforcement division personnel shall present official identification upon reasonable request. If code enforcement division personnel are unable to identify themselves prior to accessing the premises, they shall leave notification to the property owner after completing the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 09-2017-01, § 2-31, 9-18-2017)
 
Sec. 2-343. Notice of violation.
Upon ascertaining, being advised by another individual, or believing that a violation of any code or ordinance exists, code enforcement division personnel shall cause a written notice to be directed to the owner of the property or such other appropriate representative unless, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer an emergency is deemed to exist. The notice shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
(1)	The owner or controller of the property; 
(2)	As best it can be ascertained or verified, the location of the property on which the violation exists, including the address, district, land lot and parcel identification; 
(3)	The nature of the violation and penalties, if applicable; 
(4)	A provision for rectifying the violation without further proceedings; 
(5)	A time frame for bringing the property into compliance and completion of the tasks required in order to rectify the violation without further proceedings; 
(6)	A date, or mechanism for determining a date, for a follow-up inspection in order to determine if the violation has been remedied and the property brought into compliance, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 09-2017-01, § 2-31, 9-18-2017)
 
Sec. 2-344. Follow up inspections.
(a)	Consistent with the provisions set forth in the notice regarding further inspection of the premises, the code enforcement division shall cause a follow-up inspection of the property to be performed. 
(b)	If the violation has been remedied, the property in question shall nonetheless be subject to additional follow-up inspections to ensure continued compliance. If, during any additional inspection, it is discovered that compliance has lapsed and substantially the same violations are once again in existence, the code enforcement division shall issue a citation to the owner of the property or the responsible party or refer the matter to the city attorney's office pursuant to section 2-345. 
(Ord. No. 09-2017-01, § 2-31, 9-18-2017)
 
Sec. 2-345. Failure to correct noncompliance upon notice; issuance of citations.
If, at the time of the follow-up inspection, the violation has not been remedied, the code enforcement division shall issue a citation to the owner of the property or the responsible party or refer the matter to the city attorney's office for handling in accordance with the provisions for enforcement under the applicable code section or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-2017-01, § 2-31, 9-18-2017)
 
Sec. 2-346. Emergency action when imminent harm or peril is likely.
(a)	If the code enforcement officer believes that an emergency is deemed to exist such that imminent harm or peril to life or property is likely to occur, or the code enforcement officer is otherwise authorized or directed by this Code to take immediate action to remedy, or attempt to remedy, a violation, the code enforcement officer shall be authorized to take all reasonable and necessary steps to remedy, or attempt to remedy, the violation in order to protect or avoid any imminent harm or peril to life or property without prior notice to the property owner or responsible party. 
(b)	The code enforcement officer shall thereafter make all reasonable efforts to contact the owner of the property or responsible person to inform them of the violations and action taken. Additionally, the code enforcement officer shall issue a citation to the owner of the property or the responsible party or refer the matter to the city attorney's office pursuant to section 2-345. 
(Ord. No. 09-2017-01, § 2-31, 9-18-2017)
 
Sec. 2-347. When notice is not required.
In any matter where a court order was previously rendered regarding a similar violation for the same property, the code enforcement officer shall immediately issue a citation without the necessity of following the notice provisions of this article. A prior notice for a similar violation on the same property shall be effective against the owner of the property or responsible person for substantially the same violation any time after the issuance of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 09-2017-01, § 2-31, 9-18-2017)
 
Chapter 4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, and in addition to the definitions provided in section 1-2, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the officer or employee designated to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more is in use for business purposes and the area is properly zoned in accordance with the city zoning ordinances. 
Church means any permanent building, together with the tract of land upon which it is located, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, but shall not include any other church-owned land or property not regularly used as an assembly area for religious worship services. 
College means only state, county, city, church or other college that teaches the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include a private college where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Distance means the measurement in horizontal lineal feet from the front door of the proposed licensee's premises in a straight line which describes the shortest distance to the nearest church, school ground or college campus. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Family means and includes any person related to the holder of such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity computed according to the civil law. 
Fortified wines means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wines" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Interest in license exists if the person involved is the outright owner of the license, a co-owner of the license, a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license, a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of a license, an owner, lessor, sublessor or stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain owning or leasing any real estate which is occupied by a liquor establishment or shares in any of the income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a liquor establishment. Provided, however, that a stockholder shall not be deemed to have an interest in a liquor establishment where such stockholder owns any stock in a motel or hotel having 50 or more rooms with a liquor establishment located on the premises of such motel or hotel and owned by such motel or hotel. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this section, no one person shall have more than one interest in any one license in the city. 
License means the authorization by the governing authority of the city to engage in the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant, as defined herein, with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 75 except as provided in section 4-125. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing nor more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)	In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
(2)	In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
(3)	In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, having at least 100 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semi-annual or annual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofit activities; except as otherwise defined in section 4-125. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests; except as otherwise defined in section 4-125. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means only those state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall include the adjacent open land used for school purposes but this shall not include any portion of a private school where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Stockholders means and includes the direct, indirect, beneficial and absolute owners of the stock in a corporation and the beneficiaries and trustees of any voting trust for stock. When any stockholder is required to meet any criteria, if the ownership or voting control is so divided, or by any other means avoids or circumvents any requirements of this chapter, the failure of any holder of any such interest or right to meet such criteria shall cause a failure of that entire stockholder share to meet such criteria. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-2001, 7-2006(e); Code 1985, § 3-1; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 7-13-1981; Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-1996, §§ I—III)
 
Secs. 4-2—4-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. LICENSES AND PERMITS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 4-21. License required; scope of article.
(a)	No malt beverage, wine, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverage shall be stored, delivered, sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued pursuant to this article and then only for the specific beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(b)	The requirements of this article shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code, and, if other provisions of this Code conflict with this article, then this article shall control. 
(c)	Licenses which may be issued under this article include: 
(1)	Manufacturing: 
a.	Malt beverages; 
b.	Wine; 
c.	Distilled spirits; 
(2)	Wholesale: 
a.	Malt beverages; 
b.	Wine; 
c.	Distilled spirits; 
(3)	Packaged retail: 
a.	Malt beverages; 
b.	Wine; 
c.	Distilled spirits; 
(4)	Consumption on the premises: 
a.	Malt beverages; 
b.	Wine; 
c.	Distilled spirits; or 
(5)	Combinations: 
a.	Any combination of subsection (c)(3)a, b and c of this section; 
b.	Any combination of subsection (c)(4)a, b and c of this section; 
c.	The combinations of subsections (c)(4)a and (c)(3)a of this section; subsections (c)(4)b and (c)(3)b of this section; subsections (c)(4)a, and b and (c)(3)a, and b of this section; subsections (c)(4)a, b, and c and (c)(3)a, and b of this section; subsections (c)(4)a, and c and (c)(3)a of this section; and subsections (c)(4)b, and c and (c)(3)b of this section. 
(6)	Cabaret, in addition to subsection (c)(4) or (c)(5) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2002; Code 1985, § 3-20; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-22. Applications for new license.
(a)	All applications for new licenses under this article shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check for all the minimum fees and business taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. 
(b)	The city application shall be a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and forms along with a city supplemental application form provided by the city along with the following: 
(1)	A legal description of the property upon which the premises are located; 
(2)	A current photograph of the applicant; 
(3)	Fingerprints of the applicant to be taken by the police department. 
(c)	The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct such business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the city, the acts of the general assembly and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(d)	Any false statement or material misrepresentation or omission in any application hereunder shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted hereunder. 
(e)	All applications for new licenses shall include a plat of survey from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the distance to the property line of the nearest church or school ground or that the distance is more than the limits set forth in section 4-34(a). 
(Code 1976, § 7-2003(a)—(f); Code 1985, § 3-21; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 4-23. False statements in applications.
(a)	Any person who acquires a license or a renewal of the same in violation of this article by any misrepresentation or fraudulent statement shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(b)	Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material omission left out of, an original, renewal, or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial thereof and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, shall be cause for revocation. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-2003(g), (h), 7-2010; Code 1985, § 3-22; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-24. Preliminary approval required; payment of debts; notice of reasons for denial; data; processing time.
(a)	The community affairs department shall cause an inquiry to be made into the city tax records to determine if the applicant or other parties with interest in the application has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against such persons' property or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
(b)	All applications shall be approved or disapproved by the city as a condition to action thereon and issuance of a license by the community affairs department. In the event that the police department determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any police department investigation, the community affairs department shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not issuing the license to the applicant. 
(c)	All applicants shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested of them by the community affairs department or police department and failure to furnish such data, information, contracts, documents, financial statements and other records within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(d)	The police department may require in addition to the licensee, fingerprinting and background investigation of any person interested in the application, including any person with a financial interest, such as stockholders, partners or employees, and any spouse, brother, sister, child or parent of any person with a financial interest. Should the applicant fail to produce such persons within 30 days of the request, the application may be denied by the police department. 
(e)	Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce those persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in a denial of the application by the police department. 
(f)	The city may require 45 days for processing any application for a license required under this article. For investigative purposes, the police chief may extend the 45 day processing period according to the licensee's compliance should the chief deem it necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2004; Code 1985, § 3-23; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § XII)
 
Sec. 4-25. Issuance of license.
All licenses must be obtained and business taxes and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application by the city and, if not so obtained, the license granted by the city shall be void. When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the community affairs department the required taxes and fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2011; Code 1985, § 3-24; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-26. Managers; work permits for managers, employees, and license holders.
(a)	Every person licensed under this article for package sales of distilled spirits and for all consumption on the premises sales shall employ a person as manager, or a like position, for the licensed establishment and the manager shall obtain a manager's permit as provided in this section. This permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(b)	Prior to employment as manager or employee, or prior to obtaining an interest in a license, each person becoming so employed or acquiring such interest shall obtain an employee's or manager's work permit, as the case may be, from the city police department by making application therefor on a form provided by the department. The city police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. 
(c)	Licensees and managers under this section shall keep a copy of the permit on file at all times in the establishment and shall make these permits available for inspection during operating hours. 
(d)	No person shall be eligible to receive a permit if such person shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations; the term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilty of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; where the violation is for a misdemeanor, or where there is a forfeiture of bond, or a violation of municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the city may, after investigation, waive the same as a disqualification. 
(e)	The managers of the licensee shall post their work permit next to the license. The city police shall keep a list of all such managers and check such posted managers' work permits against such list at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2034; Code 1985, § 3-25; Ord. of 1-11-1980; Ord. of 2-1-1982; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-27. Licensee and manager disqualification for prior convictions.
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, nor any manager's permit or work permit shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, or such person's spouse, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any local governmental ordinance except traffic violations; the term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilty or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; where the violation is for a misdemeanor, or there is a forfeiture of bond, or violation of a municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the city may, after investigation, waive the same as a disqualification. The term "traffic violation" herein shall not include driving under the influence. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2005; Code 1985, § 3-26; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-28. Prohibited interests.
(a)	No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license under the terms of this article. 
(b)	No person, related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under the civil law to any wholesale licensee or employee thereof or any person with any interest therein, shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license issued under this article. 
(c)	No person or member of such person's family shall own, hold or control any interest whatsoever in more than one license to engage in the business of selling packaged distilled spirits at retail in the city. 
(d)	No more than one license to engage in the sale of packaged distilled spirits at retail in the city shall be issued to any person which shall include all members of such person's family. 
(e)	A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee personally received directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or stockholder must be approved by the city and, if approved, the business must obtain a new license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2006; Code 1985, § 3-27; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-29. Residence requirements, agents.
(a)	All applicants must be owners of the business and shall have resided continuously within the state for 12 months prior to the date the application is made unless the applicant designates a local agent who meets such residency requirement. When the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is one licensed hereunder, the majority stockholders must meet the within requirements and the license shall be issued to the corporation and the majority stockholders. Where the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is other than the operation of an establishment requiring licensing hereunder, the license shall be issued to the corporation and an officer or agent of such corporation who meets the above requirements. If the applicant is a partnership, the same requirements pertaining to corporations shall apply to the partnership. 
(b)	All applications for licenses under this article by a corporation shall name in the application one or more residents in the state as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any city license. The application shall give the mailing addresses of the persons, and the mailing to any person at that address of any notice required to be given under this article or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any person shall cease to be a resident of the state, another person shall immediately be appointed in writing in such person's place, and written notice shall be given to the administrator stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2007; Code 1985, § 3-28; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 8-3-1987)
 
Sec. 4-30. Denial of license application; granting; appeal.
(a)	The community affairs department shall deny a city license under this article on any of the following grounds: 
(1)	Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
(2)	Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(3)	Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this article; 
(4)	False information in the application or attached documents; 
(5)	Improper residency of applicant, owner, or registered agents; 
(6)	Failure to meet distance or location requirements; 
(7)	Prior convictions as herein provided; or 
(8)	Failure to meet any other requirements in this article for a license of the class applied for. 
(b)	An application which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for 12 months after the denial unless there is a substantial change therein which would affect the reason for denial originally. 
(c)	An application for a location which has been cited for a violation of this Code or state law, with regard to alcohol sales in the previous 12 months, shall come before the city council for review. In such instance the council may, after conducting a hearing with notice to the application, continue the effect and duration of any suspension or probation. 
(d)	Otherwise, the community affairs department may issue any city license provided for in this article after approval of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2009; Code 1985, § 3-29; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § XII; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 2)
 
Sec. 4-31. License constitutes grant of privilege.
(a)	All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code relating to such businesses. 
(b)	All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the city council of the city and is subject to any future ordinances." 
(Code 1976, § 7-2012; Code 1985, § 3-30; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-32. Annual renewal.
All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the community affairs department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2013; Code 1985, § 3-31; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § XII)
 
Sec. 4-33. Duration and renewal of license.
Duration and renewal of licenses under this article shall be as for business licenses generally; and no licensee shall have any vested right to the renewal of any city license. No licenses under this article may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2014; Code 1985, § 3-32; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-34. Distance, area zoning and parking requirements.
(a)	No license shall be issued under this article where the place of business of the licensee is located a distance of less than 100 yards of any church, or 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus; unless such place of business is a retail establishment for consumption on premises; in which case the distance requirement may be waived by the community affairs department if the establishment is located within the city's central business district. The mayor and council may waive at a public hearing the distance requirement for such businesses located in other commercially zoned areas at their discretion if the issuance of such license will not be deemed detrimental to property values or the general health and welfare of the general public. 
(b)	No license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued within the lawful areas described in this article unless the location is zoned commercial or industrial under the zoning laws of the city. 
(c)	Where a retail liquor store exists in an area outside of the city limits, upon annexation of such area the same may be continued and shall be subject to all the provisions of this Code. 
(d)	Locations which will retail alcoholic beverages in package only shall provide one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of floor space in the building used for that purpose. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-2003(i), 7-2008; Code 1985, § 3-33; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 9-12-1994, § 1; Ord. No. 11-2010-01, 11-1-2010)
 
Sec. 4-35. Completion of premises proposed to be licensed.
Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this article is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this article. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article and the city codes. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2016; Code 1985, § 3-34; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-36. Alteration of premises.
Where a building in which any person is licensed or intends to operate under the provisions of this article is to be altered, modified, or renovated, any such interior or exterior work shall be subject to the prior approval of the city and shall meet all applicable codes. If approval is not obtained, the license application or the next subsequent renewal license may be denied. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2015; Code 1985, § 3-35; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-37. Time limits on opening and continuing business.
(a)	All licenses issued under this article must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the administrator for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the city at its discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(b)	Any license issued under this article shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2017; Code 1985, § 3-36; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-38. Restrictions upon transfers.
(a)	Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(b)	In the case of the death of any person holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may, at the discretion of the city, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(c)	Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners, who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(d)	Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any fee or business tax and the new location shall meet the requirements of a new license hereunder. 
(e)	However, a licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee personally received directly not any of the additional capital invested. Under this section, an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the city. 
(f)	All applications for transfer of locations shall comply with the provisions herein set forth governing new licenses. 
(g)	No transfer shall be permitted when the license is subject to revocation, suspension or the licensee is on probation for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2018; Code 1985, § 3-37; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 1)
 
Sec. 4-39. Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearing; refund.
(a)	No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee hereunder shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon a prior five day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. 
(b)	Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of this Code other than traffic ordinances. 
(c)	The mayor is delegated the authority to suspend any license hereunder for due cause in any emergency situation, and the suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the city. 
(d)	When a license is so revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the business license fees. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2019; Code 1985, § 3-38; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-40. Acceptance and consideration of application after rejection or revocation.
When an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages is denied or revoked for cause by the city, it is unlawful for the administrator to accept or consider an application from the same applicant for such license to operate the same type of business within 12 months from the time of the rejection by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2020; Code 1985, § 3-39; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-41. Removal of signs after revocation.
When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased shall be removed from the place of business, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the police department of notices of such revocation, the police department shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2021; Code 1985, § 3-40; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-42. Outstanding licenses, compliance.
(a)	So as to prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the city in compliance with city ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the licenses and continuing to be in compliance therewith shall be exempt from the requirements of this article involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. 
(b)	Renewals and transfers of business ownership at the same location shall also be deemed in compliance hereunder to the extent provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	Business transfers to new locations and new licenses must comply with all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2022; Code 1985, § 3-41; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-43. Licenses subject to state regulations.
All licenses issued under this article shall be subject to the rules and regulations authorized by state law and those prescribed by the state department of revenue and violation of these statutes and regulations shall be violations of this Code. In addition, all businesses, the applicant for the license, the agent in charge of the business and the owners thereof shall observe and obey the regulations provided in this article and any other applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2023; Code 1985, § 3-42; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-44. Open to inspection.
Any establishment holding a license issued under this article shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the police department or any license inspector of the city or to any person designated by the police chief. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2032; Code 1985, § 3-14; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-45. Penalties; license revocation.
(a)	Upon conviction in the municipal court of any violation of any penal provision of this article, unless otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as follows: 
(1)	First offense: Minimum fine of $150.00; 
(2)	Second and subsequent offenses, if within 12 months of the first: Minimum fine of $200.00. 
(b)	Any license under this article may be revoked or suspended by the city for any conviction of the licensee or any agent, officer or employee thereof for violation of any portion of this article. 
(c)	Any license issued under this article may be suspended by the mayor until the next session of the city for reason of any disturbance, acts of disorderly conduct, violence, gambling or by reason of any conviction for violation in subsection (a)(2) of this section having occurred in the establishment or on the premises thereof. 
(d)	When the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this article to the same person at that location for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
(e)	Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in those products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city or any municipal officer. 
(f)	All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this article may be held responsible for any violation of this article by an employee thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2033; Code 1985, § 3-15; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 7-10-2000, § 3)
 
Secs. 4-46—4-63. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PACKAGED BEER AND WINE
 
Sec. 4-64. Scope of division.
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code and the other articles of this chapter, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and operation of retail malt beverage or wine establishments in the city and should any section of this division conflict with other provisions in this chapter or the general business license requirement of this Code, then this division shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2061; Code 1985, § 3-60; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-65. Retailers—Delivery.
Retail dealers in malt beverages licensed under the applicable licensing provisions of the city shall not buy or accept deliveries of malt beverages from wholesalers or other persons offering for sale except from wholesalers duly licensed under this Code. Retail dealers shall not accept deliveries except directly to the premises for which their license and permit were issued, and by no means other than a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as required under this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2063; Code 1985, § 3-62; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-66. Retailers—Storage.
All licensed retailers shall store all malt beverages in their possession on the premises for which the license was issued. All malt beverage stocks shall be available at all times for inspection by authorized city officials. Any brand or type of malt beverages found in any retailer's stock that is handled by a wholesaler who is not licensed to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2064; Code 1985, § 3-63; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-67. Time of sale of wine only.
Wine in package or for consumption on premises may be sold at any time not prohibited by the state, except between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily, and may be sold on any day. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2065; Code 1985, § 3-64; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Secs. 4-68—4-92. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. PACKAGED DISTILLED SPIRITS
 
Sec. 4-93. Scope of division.
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code and other articles of this chapter, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and operation of retail distilled spirits establishments in the city and should any section of this division conflict with other provisions in this chapter or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this division shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2041; Code 1985, § 3-50; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-94. Applications; contents.
(a)	All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest in retail packaged distilled spirits stores. This shall include the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail packaged distilled spirits, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail packaged distilled spirits store; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; the names and addresses (by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building) of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail packaged distilled spirits store is located; and any other information called for by the mayor and council. 
(b)	Any change in any relationship herein declared must be filed with the community affairs department when such change is made, and failure to so file within a period of 30 days after such change is made shall be grounds for revocation by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2042; Code 1985, § 3-51; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-95. Restrictions on other merchandise.
A licensee of a retail establishment under this division shall not operate the business in connection with any other mercantile establishment; provided, this shall not prohibit a licensee from operating in the same building complex with other businesses. No retailer hereunder shall sell, offer for sale, display or keep in stock at his place of business where packaged distilled spirits are offered for sale any other commodity except the following, all of which may be sold by the retailer at his option: 
(1)	Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(2)	Wines and malt beverages, when property licensed; 
(3)	Glasses, stirring sticks and similar paraphernalia commonly used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
(4)	Tobacco products; 
(5)	Packaged ice; and 
(6)	Snack food items. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2043; Code 1985, § 3-52; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-96. Front window display.
If a licensee so desires he may have his name displayed on the inside of the window in neon or other electric lights. Such sign shall be parallel with the window and so constructed as not to extend more than six inches from the window. A neon sign may also be constructed along the border line or edge of the front window inside the glass. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2044; Code 1985, § 3-53; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-97. Display of license.
No retail package distilled spirits license shall be allowed in, or in connection with, any restaurant, cafe or eating place, or in the same room where a bar or soda fountain is maintained for the dispensing and sale of soft drinks or other beverages. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2046; Code 1985, § 3-55; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-98. Price lists or tags.
Each retail licensee shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than two copies of a printed price list of the distilled spirits offered for sale and one printed copy of the penal sections of this chapter; provided, however, that a licensee, in lieu of having two copies of a printed price list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where liquors are exhibited for sale. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2047; Code 1985, § 3-56; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Secs. 4-99—4-124. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES
 
Sec. 4-125. Definitions.
In addition to definitions provided in section 4-1 and other sections of this Code, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant as defined herein with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 40. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, having at least 100 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semi-annual or annual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring, or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen, dining room space, and equipment, and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests, provided that no member, officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare and serve suitable hot meals for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2082; Code 1985, § 3-70; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-126. Scope of division.
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code and the other articles of this chapter, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and operation of all establishments selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and should any section of this division conflict with other provisions in this chapter or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this division shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2081; Code 1985, § 3-71; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-127. Additional application and license requirements.
In addition to the application and license requirements of this chapter, the following shall be required for licenses under this division: 
(1)	No license to engage in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink at retail shall be granted except in the business areas zoned commercial or industrial under the zoning laws of the city. 
(2)	No license under this division shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, lounge or private club as defined herein. 
(3)	The dining area or service area of any business licensed hereunder must be a minimum of 1,200 square feet. 
(4)	Licenses shall be granted only to private clubs or restaurants, as defined hereinbefore, or to lounges operated in conjunction with such restaurants with direct access between the lounge and restaurant. 
(5)	At least 50 percent of the business, by volume, shall be from the sale of prepared foods to be consumed on the premises except private clubs. Authorized officials of the city may examine the records of the businesses licensed hereunder at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this section are met. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2083; Code 1985, § 3-72; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-128. Additional regulations.
(a)	Drinks hereunder shall be served only by employees of the establishment. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any licensee under this article to permit professional belly dancers, strip dancing, exotic dancing, or any exhibitions of any like kind by whatever name called in connection with the operation of a restaurant, lounge or private club, as defined herein. 
(c)	Locations which will retail alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall provide one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet of floor space in the public assembly area in the building, or one off-street parking space for each four seats in the public assembly area in the building, whichever is greater. If the required off-street parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot as the building it serves, the board of variance and zoning appeals may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property. Such property shall be within 400 feet of the premises to which it is appurtenant as measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway and will not require pedestrians to cross a state or national highway. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2084; Code 1985, § 3-73; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Secs. 4-129—4-154. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. BUSINESS OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 4-155. Open containers and consumption restricted.
No bottle, can or other container of any alcoholic beverage shall be opened, consumed or possessed in an open condition by any person in any parking area, street or sidewalk within 300 feet of any place of business licensed under this chapter, whether the container or beverage was obtained at that place of business or elsewhere, nor within the premises of any business licensed for package only sales under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2024; Code 1985, § 3-6; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-156. Hours and days for sale and purchase.
Except as otherwise herein expressly provided, it is unlawful for any licensee under this article or person employed by a licensee to sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any alcoholic beverage on Christmas Day; or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 7:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; and it is unlawful for any person to purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee or person employed by a licensee any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 7:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. Provided, alcoholic beverages may be purchased and sold for consumption on premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served, provided the licensee applies for and receives a permit for such sales from the city and pays the separate license fee therefor as established from time to time by the city. Such application for license shall have attached hereto an accounting by dollars and by percentage of total sales annually, revenues derived from the sale of food and alcoholic beverages. Provided further, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be permitted on any election day, as the same is authorized and defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2025; Code 1985, § 3-7; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-7-1983; Ord. of 4-17-1983; Ord. of 6-2-1986; Ord. of 8-11-1986; Mo. of 10-2-1989; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § IV)
State law reference(s)—Sale on Sundays and election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
 
Sec. 4-157. Prohibited practices; hours and places for drinking.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises to permit any person to drink any whiskey, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 7:00 a.m. on the following Monday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to drink any whiskey, wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverage while upon, or while upon or within any vehicle upon, the streets, sidewalks or parking areas in the city within 300 feet of a licensed premises; or upon, or while upon or within any vehicle upon, the public parks of the city without regard to their distance from a licensed premises. Provided, alcoholic beverages may be purchased and sold for consumption on premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverages sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served, provided the licensee applies for and receives a permit for such sales from the city and pays the separate license fee therefor as established from time to time by the city. Such application for license shall have attached thereto an accounting by dollars and by percentage of total sales annually, revenues derived from the sale of food and alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to every type of alcoholic beverages licensed to be sold in the city, including beer, wine, malt beverages or distilled spirits. 
(d)	Each licensee shall maintain a daily schedule of the prices to be charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the prices from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be maintained in a manner so as to be available to the paying public and law enforcement officers or agents of governmental authority. The schedule shall be effective for not less than a 24-hour period beginning at 2:01 a.m. and ending at 2:00 a.m. the following day and shall show thereon the date for which the schedule is effective. 
(e)	No licensee or holder of any license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or in any part thereof, or employee or agency of a licensee, shall: 
(1)	Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any individual or member of the general public, except as hereinafter provided; 
(2)	Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time, except as hereinafter provided; 
(3)	Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same 24-hour period for which the price schedule herein required is in effect, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(4)	Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more or an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(5)	Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(6)	Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, by the pitcher or carafe, except to two or more persons at any one time or as hereinafter provided; 
(7)	Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same 24-hour period for which the price schedule herein required is in effect; 
(8)	Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of any alcoholic beverages; or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize, unless such prize be in unopened containers and the containers remain unopened on the premises and licensee assumes the responsibility to see that the containers remain unopened until they are removed from the premises. If the containers are opened on the premises, both the licensee and the customer shall be in violation of this section; 
(9)	Sell two or more alcoholic beverages for a price substantially the same as is charged one such alcoholic beverage; 
(10)	Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased; 
(11)	Knowingly allow an alcoholic beverage purchased on the premises to be removed from the premises without having been consumed. The term "premises," for the purpose of this subsection, shall be construed to mean the entire area under the supervision, management or control of the licensee, excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles, and, in the case of licensees whose licensed location is located on a portion of the premises of a club, organization, establishment or entity offering outdoor recreation (for instance, golf or tennis) then the term "premises" shall extend to cover all areas operated as a part of the club or entity excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles. 
(f)	No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)	No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as a part of a meal, package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests, or to prohibit the sale of more than two drinks at one time which are to be consumed by the purchaser out of doors on the premises of the licensee, as hereinabove described, in connection with the purchaser's participation as a player in the games of golf or tennis; otherwise no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall be construed to allow a licensee to circumvent the intent of this section by offering meals which include an alcoholic beverage as a device or scheme to promote drink sales at a price per beverage less than the daily listed price. 
(h)	Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Violations shall be considered due cause for suspension or revocation of any license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2026; Code 1985, § 3-8; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 3-7-1983; Ord. of 10-17-1983; Ord. of 2-3-1986; Ord. of 6-2-1986; Ord. of 3-4-1996, § III)
 
Sec. 4-158. Drive-in and curb service.
(a)	Curb service by retail or consumption on the premises licensees under this chapter or delivery of any alcoholic beverages off the licensed premises, other than by wholesalers licensed hereunder or by the state is hereby prohibited. 
(b)	Drive-in service windows at premises licensed under this chapter are hereby prohibited, except as provided in this section. 
(c)	Any business authorized by the state to provide drive-in windows may do so only as follows: 
(1)	The window shall be clear and unobstructed for a minimum of 24 inches wide and 36 inches in height. 
(2)	The location of the window shall be lighted in a manner that will enable the attendant of the window to clearly view the entire interior of any vehicle being served at the window. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2027; Code 1985, § 3-9; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-159. Furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors; prohibited practices.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person, business or any person in charge of, or employed in, any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept to furnish to a minor, to permit any minor to buy, or to allow to be bought for a minor any alcoholic beverages. A minor shall be defined as anyone under 21 years of age. 
(b)	When any person in charge of, or employed in, any place of business sells any alcoholic beverage to a minor or otherwise violates this division the business shall be subject to the following: 
(1)	On first offense, the alcoholic beverage license will be suspended for a period of 60 days. 
(2)	On second offense, the alcoholic beverage license will be suspended for a period of six months. 
(3)	On third offense, the alcoholic beverage license will be revoked. 
Any licensee who is found to be selling alcoholic beverages to anyone while their license is in suspension shall have their license revoked. Returns of alcoholic beverages to wholesalers shall not be deemed to be sales within the meaning of this section. 
(c)	Any attempt to commit any act made unlawful by this section shall be itself unlawful and subject to punishment in the municipal court. 
(d)	In addition to citations for alcoholic beverage license violations, any person may be issued citations for violation of state law regarding furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors or purchase or possession of alcoholic beverage by minors or any related state offenses. 
(e)	It is unlawful for any person to allow or require a person in such person's employment under 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 21 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(f)	No business or person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow any minors to be in, frequent, or loiter about the premises of the licensee unless such minors are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(g)	Any action with regard to an alcoholic beverage license shall be heard before the city council. Any ordinance violation not involving alcoholic beverage licensing shall be punishable in the municipal court. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-1008, 7-2028; Code 1985, § 3-10; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 6-2-1986; Ord. of 10-3-1988; Ord. of 12-2-1996, § 1)
State law reference(s)—Sale to persons noticeably intoxicated, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22; sale, etc., to minors, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-23—3-3-24.2. 
 
Sec. 4-160. Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises.
It is unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2029; Code 1985, § 3-11; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-161. Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages.
It is unlawful for licensees hereunder or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2030; Code 1985, § 3-12; Ord. of 4-16-1981)
 
Sec. 4-162. Slot machines and pool tables prohibited on licensed premises.
No licensee under this chapter shall operate as a game room on the licensed premises without a game room license issued pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2031; Code 1985, § 3-13; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 4-5-1999, § 4)
 
Chapter 6 ANIMALS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 6-1. Bird sanctuary.
The city is hereby declared a bird sanctuary and no person shall intentionally injure or kill any wild bird within the city with the exception of starlings or other nuisance birds. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1009; Code 1985, § 4-1)
 
Sec. 6-2. Animal and fowl enclosures; size, fencing.
No person shall keep or maintain within the city, any poultry, fowl, rabbits, horses, mules, ponies, cows or cattle, unless the same are kept or maintained on property having a total area of not less than 2½ acres bordered on all sides by a fence not less than five feet in height and which fence at any point shall be at least 50 feet distant from any residence of any adjoining property owner. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3015; Code 1985, § 4-2; Ord. of 10-3-1977)
 
Sec. 6-3. Swine and goats; poultry kept for commercial purposes.
No person shall keep or maintain within the city any swine or goats. In addition, no person shall keep or maintain, within the city, any poultry of any kind for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3014)
 
Secs. 6-4—6-24. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. DOGS
 
Sec. 6-25. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dog means a canine animal of either sex. 
Dog under control means a dog controlled by a leash, at heel, or beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3012; Code 1985, § 4-20)
 
Sec. 6-26. State law adopted; enforcement.
The Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., and Cobb County Code, Chapter 10, Animals, are adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this section, and the Cobb County animal control officer is as designated the city animal control officer, authorized to enforce this chapter and city animal regulations generally. 
(Code 1985, § 4-32; Res. of 8-21-1989)
 
Sec. 6-27. Kennel locations restricted.
No person shall keep or maintain, within the corporate limits of the city, any kennel for the boarding, confinement, breeding or keeping of any dogs, except in zones where breeding and boarding kennels are specifically permitted under city zoning regulations. This section shall not prevent a licensed veterinarian from establishing or maintaining a veterinary clinic within the city for the treatment of dogs and other animals if in compliance with city licensing and zoning regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3017; Code 1985, § 4-22)
 
Sec. 6-28. Conditions for keeping dogs in the city.
(a)	No dogs may be kept or maintained within the city, except on terms and conditions and to the extent provided in this article. 
(b)	Each family unit within the city, the same being all the members of a family living in one residential unit, shall be permitted to maintain and keep permanently up to a limit of four dogs. The offspring of such dogs may be kept and maintained for a period of 90 days after their birth and not thereafter in excess of the limit herein provided. 
(c)	When any dogs are confined and kept in a pen or enclosure at any time, it shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once a week and kept free from filth and stench at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3016; Code 1985, § 4-21)
 
Sec. 6-29. Dog control on city property.
(a)	The owners or persons in possession or control of guard dogs, sentry dogs or watch dogs in the city shall immediately clean up any waste, excrement or damage left by or caused by such dog on any city street, sidewalk, parking area, park or other city property. Any dog kept at a place of business is hereby declared to be a sentry dog. 
(b)	Any person violating this section shall be liable for a fine of $50.00 per occurrence. 
(Code 1985, § 15-13; Ord. of 6-15-1984)
 
Sec. 6-30. Tags and collar required; removal.
(a)	It shall be the duty of each dog owner to provide a collar, to which shall be attached an owner identification tag and the vaccination tag, which collar shall be worn by the dog as provided herein, except when such dog is under immediate control of the owner or other person having custody of the dog or when it is participating in a dog show or exhibition. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to remove the collar without the permission of the owner or lawful custodian. 
(Code 1976, §§ 9-3005, 9-3009; Code 1985, § 4-23)
State law reference(s)—Removal of collars or identifying items or marks, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-71. 
 
Sec. 6-31. Identification tag required.
Unless exempted herein, every person owning or having custody of a dog shall provide therefor an identification tag showing the name and address of the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3002; Code 1985, § 4-24)
 
Sec. 6-32. Vaccination; tag.
It is unlawful for any owner or lawful custodian of a dog to fail to have a valid vaccination tag for such dog as required by the laws of the state. In addition, it is unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to any dog for which it was not issued, or to remove a vaccination tag from any dog without the consent of its owner or lawful custodian. No person shall vaccinate a dog against rabies who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
(Code 1976, §§ 9-3002, 9-3009, 9-3010; Code 1985, § 4-25)
State law reference(s)—Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-33. Vicious dogs.
It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit or be responsible for the presence of any vicious dog on the streets of the city or in any other public place therein, at any time, unless, and in addition to the other requirements of this article, such dog shall be securely muzzled to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3006; Code 1985, § 4-27)
 
Sec. 6-34. Dogs at large prohibited; impoundment.
(a)	It is unlawful for the owner or other custodian having a dog in possession and control, to permit such dog to be out of control and unattended off the premises of such owner or other custodian, or upon public property, or upon the property of another person without permission of the owner or person in possession thereof. 
(b)	All dogs found running at large in violation of this article shall be immediately impounded by the county or the city, or their duly authorized agents. In the event any authorized officer or employee or authorized agent sees a dog which is apparently out of control and unattended, such officer or employee or agent may go upon any property to determine if this article has been violated. 
(c)	In the event that the ownership or lawful custodian of a dog is not known, and such dog is upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, public places, or premises of another, any law enforcement officer or agent or employee duly authorized by the county or city shall be authorized to take possession of such dog and impound it in accordance with the rules and regulations provided or adopted in this chapter for the detention, control and disposition of dogs impounded under this article. 
(Code 1976, §§ 9-3001, 9-3003, 9-3004; Code 1985, §§ 4-26, 4-28, 4-30)
 
Sec. 6-35. Dog bite procedure.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by a dog to refuse to notify promptly one or more of the officers, employees or agents mentioned in this section. 
(b)	It is unlawful for the owner of the dog to refuse or fail to comply with the written recommendations made by the officer, employee or agent in any particular case involving a biting dog. 
(c)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, whenever any authorized public officer or employee or agent shall receive information that any person has been bitten by a dog, such officer, employee or agent shall be required to have the dog confined for a period of ten days or whatever period is required by the adopted county animal regulations. 
(d)	Any dog confined under this section shall be housed at the county dog pound or at a licensed veterinarian if, in the discretion of the pound master, the latter would be necessary to protect the pound staff and other dogs housed at the pound. Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog, under this section, shall be borne by the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3013; Code 1985, § 4-29; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 6-36. Disposition of impounded dogs; fees.
(a)	Any dog seized or impounded under any provision of this article shall be detained at the county dog pound. The officers, agents, and employees of the county shall notify the owner of such dog by mail, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the dog has been impounded. The owner of any dog impounded may, within ten days after the mailing of the notice, reclaim the dog upon the payment of the fees charged by the county for impounding, boarding, rabies inoculation or tagging, and any other expenses due to the county for the impoundment and boarding of the dog. 
(b)	In the event the dog is not claimed in the time provided herein, the county may offer for the adoption by any person, any dog unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner upon payment of all costs due to the county for impoundment, boarding and other services provided for the dog. 
(c)	If the dog is not claimed by the owner within the time prescribed herein, then the county shall be authorized to dispose of the dog in as humane and painless a manner as possible. 
(d)	All dogs, if not claimed or adopted as provided, may be donated to any public or private institution for disposition. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3007; Code 1985, § 4-31)
 
Chapter 8 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief appointing authority means the City of Austell, Georgia. 
Board of adjustments and appeals means the city council. 
Building, heating, air conditioning, electrical, swimming pool, and plumbing official, and flood control administrator means those officials appointed by the city council to administer such codes. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1002; Code 1985, § 5-1; Ord. of 6-3-1991; Ord. of 12-18-1991; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 11)
 
Sec. 8-2. Condemnation board.
The city has created a condemnation board consisting of the fire chief or his designee, the building inspector, one councilmember and two citizens the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector, the mayor and one citizen appointed by the city council for a two-year term beginning on January 1 of odd-numbered years. This board shall act as the building official for the purposes of enforcement of city unsafe building regulations the Unsafe Building Abatement Code. All decisions of the board shall be by majority vote of all its members and its recommendations shall be sent to the city for action. 
(Code 1985, § 5-2; Ord. of 6-5-1989; Ord. of 8-6-1990, § 1; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 12)
 
Sec. 8-3. Construction and maintenance codes adopted.
(a)	The following codes, as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20 and 8-2-21, are adopted by the city as though fully set forth herein, as supplemented and amended by the state department of community affairs, and as may be amended by provisions of this chapter or of this Code, generally, to the extent permitted by state law: 
(1)	International Building Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014, 2015, 2017 and 2018 Georgia amendments. 
(2)	International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014, 2015 and 2018 Georgia amendments. 
(3)	International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 Georgia amendment. 
(4)	International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. 
(5)	International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. 
(6)	International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 and 2015 Georgia amendments. 
(7)	National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition. 
(8)	International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition, with 2011 and 2012 Georgia amendments. 
(9)	International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, with 2014 Georgia amendment. 
(10)	International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, with 2015 Georgia amendment. 
(11)	International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, with 2015 Georgia amendment. 
(12)	International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, 2012 Edition, including Appendix chapters. 
(b)	Section 5601.1.3 (Fireworks) of the International Fire Code, adopted in subsection (a) of this section, is revised to state that the possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited, except as follows: 
(1)	The storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in section 5604. 
(2)	The use of fireworks for fireworks displays as allowed in section 5608. 
(3)	The possession, storage, sale, handling and use of these specific types of fireworks: "Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture 
(c)	The International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, adopted in subsection (a) of this section, is subject to the following insertions: 
(1)	Section 101.1. Insert: City of Austell. 
(2)	Section 103.1. Insert: Fire department. 
(3)	Section 109.4.7. Insert: Misdemeanor, $1,000.00, 120 days. 
(4)	Section 114.4. Insert: $150.00 and $1,000.00. 
(d)	Subsequent editions or amendments to the adopted publications and state amendments and errata shall become effective 30 days after the city council receives notice that copies of such publications have been obtained, unless the council within such 30-day period disapproves the subsequent edition or amendment. 
(e)	A copy of each adopted code shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk and kept on file in the community development department available for public inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1001; Code 1985, § 5-3; Ord. of 5-4-1981; Ord. of 8-6-1990; Ord. of 9-7-1990; Ord. of 6-3-1991; Ord. of 12-18-1991; Ord. of 4-6-2015(4), § 1; Ord. of 4-6-2015(5), § 1)
State law reference(s)—Minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 
 
Sec. 8-4. Codes remedial in nature.
The construction codes adopted herein are remedial in nature, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
 
Sec. 8-5. Requirements not covered by adopted codes.
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this chapter or the adopted construction codes, shall be determined by the building inspector. 
 
Sec. 8-6. Alternate materials and methods.
The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building inspector. The building inspector shall approve any such alternate, provided the building inspector finds that the alternate, for the purpose intended, is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building inspector shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
 
Sec. 8-7. Liability of city.
The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this chapter or the adopted construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, that may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
 
Sec. 8-8. Property fronting on a state highway; state highway department permit required.
No city building permit shall be issued for property fronting on a state highway unless a valid state highway department permit has been issued so that right-of-way control may be maintained. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1006; Code 1985, § 5-6)
 
Sec. 8-9. Structure moving.
(a)	Public service certificate and license. Only persons having a state public service commission certificate and public service license may move in the city houses or other buildings having a width greater than 12 feet and only in accordance with the restrictions provided in this section. 
(b)	Notice; permit. Any person desiring to move in the city a house or other building of a width greater than 12 feet shall first give 24 hours' notice to the police department and obtain a moving permit therefor from the police chief. 
(c)	Time limited. Houses or other buildings may be moved through the city only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and only on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. 
(d)	Escort. Any person moving houses or other buildings through the city shall have at least two qualified escorts, one in front and one following the house or other building; city police will be available to act as escorts at such mover's expense, provided the duties of the police are not required elsewhere. The city police department may act as escorts for a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. If the services of any other city department is required, the department shall be compensated in an amount determined the mayor. 
(e)	Warning lights and signs. The escort preceding the moving structure must have a flashing light and a wide load sign on the front of the vehicle. The escort following must have a flashing light and a wide load sign on the rear of the vehicle. 
(f)	Damages. Any damages caused by the moving of houses or other buildings, including damages to or the moving of traffic signals, wires, signs, and similar devices may be required to be paid by the mover prior to the time the house or other building leaves the city limits. 
(g)	Violations. Violations of this section are punishable as provided in section 1-9, and any house or other building moved in violation of this section shall be immediately moved off the public right-of-way to the nearest space available, at the violator's expense, and held until this section is fully complied with. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-4001, 8-4007; Code 1985, § 5-8; Ord. of 3-6-1989)
 
Secs. 8-10—8-34. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. BUILDING PERMITS
 
Sec. 8-35. Building permit fees.
Building permit fees shall be as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1005; Code 1985, § 5-5; Ord. of 3-6-1989; Ord. of 6-5-2000, § 2, exh. A; 7-10-2000)
 
Sec. 8-36. Purpose and intent; building official to enforce; building permits required.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to: 
(1)	Promote the general health, safety and welfare and to maintain required local uniformity with the administrative and technical requirements of the construction and maintenance codes adopted by the city; 
(2)	Acquire information on the type, size, and location of all buildings and structures constructed, deconstructed, remodeled, removed, or demolished; 
(3)	Exercise jurisdiction over the construction and inspection of new buildings, as well as additions that increase the physical dimensions of dwellings and commercial buildings, alterations to building structure or alterations to a building's heating, ventilating air conditioning, electrical or plumbing system; 
(4)	Provide plan review and on-site inspection performed by persons designated by the building official; and 
(5)	Establish and collect fees to defray the cost thereof. 
(b)	Building official. There is hereby created the position of building official, who shall administer and enforce this chapter. The building official also has the following duties: 
(1)	Issuing of building permits and certificates of occupancy in accordance with all provisions of this article. 
(2)	Making field inspections to determine that the building or structure being constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered or used is being pursued in accordance with the site plan for which a building permit has been issued. 
(3)	Making field inspections to ensure compliance of existing buildings, uses, and structures to provisions of this article. 
(4)	Ensuring that all construction has been completed in accordance with all applicable Code requirements prior to allowing occupancy. 
(5)	Enforcing provisions of this article through legal or other appropriate means to ensure compliance. 
(6)	Administering consent variances with minor setback changes. 
(7)	Issue temporary land use permits for construction or education mobile units. The temporary land use permit shall not exceed the time limits as set forth in this article. 
(c)	Building permits required. Prior to commencing any of the following work, unless exempted by the city's adopted building code, the owner or agent shall obtain a valid permit from the city for the following: 
(1)	Construction of new building, including one- and two-family dwellings, garages, and other structures. 
(2)	Additions that increase the physical dimensions of a building, including decks. 
(3)	Alterations to the building structure, or an alteration to the building's heating, electrical or plumbing systems, except where exempted below. Restoration or repair of an installation to its previous code-compliant condition as determined by the building official. 
(4)	Water heater replacements shall require a permit if the plumbing, venting, electrical or gas supply systems are altered. 
(5)	Electrical service modifications. 
(d)	Exemptions from permit requirements. The following buildings, structures and activities are exempt from the permit requirements of this section: 
(1)	Buildings or structures owned by the city; 
(2)	The restoration or repair of building equipment, such as furnaces, central air conditions, water heaters, and similar mechanical equipment (except electric service) without the alteration of, or addition to, the building or structure. 
(3)	Minor repairs performed for maintenance or replacement purposes in an existing building which does not involve the structural portions of the building or structure, or which does not affect room arrangement, light and ventilation, access to or efficiency of any exit stairways or exits, fire protections and which does not increase a given occupancy or use, for example window and door replacement if it does not affect structure. 
(4)	Re-siding, re-roofing and finishing interior surfaces, and installation of cabinetry. 
(5)	Fences not over seven feet (2,134 mm) high or other similar like enclosures. 
(6)	Portable buildings, or buildings less than 144 square feet, as long as they are not placed upon a permanent slab or foundation. 
(e)	Application for building permit. All applications for building permits shall be made to the building official. Any permit for new construction applied for shall be accompanied by five sets of complete plans, drawn to scale, which shall have been prepared by an architect or engineer whose state registration is current and valid, and whose seal shall be affixed to the plan submitted. Such plans shall include the following: 
(1)	The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)	The sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings. 
(3)	The shape, size, height, use and the location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be built. 
(4)	Such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(f)	Building permit fees. The building permit fee shall be determined from time to time pursuant to resolution adopted by the mayor and council. 
(g)	Duration of permit validity. A building permit for the purpose of remodeling or an addition to an existing structure shall be valid for a period of six months. A building permit for the purpose of new construction shall be valid for a period of one year. The building permits will expire at the end of the validity date whether work has been completed or not at which time the permit will be required to be renewed for work to continue. 
(h)	Certificate of occupancy required.
(1)	A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official is required in advance of the use or occupancy of the following: 
a.	Any lot or a change or extension in the use thereof. 
b.	A building hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing building. 
c.	Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of this article or an amendment thereto or that is changed, extended, altered or rebuilt thereafter, the certificate of occupancy shall state specifically herein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provision of this article. 
d.	Nothing contained herein shall require a user to comply with minimum setback or side yard requirements for use of an existing building. 
(2)	A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alterations of such building or part thereof, and shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(3)	A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the lot, building, or structure, or use thereof complies with all the provisions of this article. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the building official shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and copies shall be furnished on request to any person upon request. . 
(i)	Penalties for violation. Any person found in violation of subsection (c) of this section shall be charged an increased permit fee of twice the original permit cost. Any person who is violation of any part of this section may also be subject to the penalties as set forth in section 1-9. 
(j)	Remedies. In any case in which any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, maintained or used, or any land that is or is proposed to be used in violation of the provisions of this article or amendments thereto, the building official or other appropriate city authority or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the violation, institute injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate action or actions, proceeding or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use. 
(Code 1985, § 22-161)
 
Sec. 8-37. Daycare facility permit and certificate procedure.
(a)	Generally. For construction of daycare facilities, a commercial building permit form shall be completed and submitted to the city community affairs office for approval. In addition, when plans are required by this section, four sets of construction plans shall be submitted to the fire marshal's office for review and approval. 
(b)	Sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems required. All daycare facilities must have an approved fire alarm system. In addition, daycare facilities over one story and all commercial daycare facilities must have an approved sprinkler system. Fire alarm or sprinkler system work will require separate plans to be submitted by a licensed subcontractor after issuance of the building permit. 
(c)	Plans for facilities for fewer than seven occupants. Plans for facilities designed to have fewer than seven occupants may be rendered on eight-inch by 11-inch paper and shall include the following: 
(1)	Dimensions for the overall space. 
(2)	Dimensions for each room. 
(3)	All doors and windows including dimensions of each. 
(4)	Emergency lighting and exit sign locations. 
(5)	Fire extinguisher number and location. 
(6)	Fire alarm device number, type and location. 
(d)	Plans for facilities for seven or more occupants. Facilities designed to have seven or more occupants are subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)	Plans must be stamped with the seal and state registration number of the drafting architect or engineer, per O.C.G.A. § 25-2-14(a). 
(2)	A site plan shall be submitted with the plans, showing locations of fire hydrants and the distance from the structure to the hydrant. 
(3)	A water flow test result of the closest hydrant showing a minimum flow 1,500 gallons per minute at 20 psi must also be submitted with the plans. 
(e)	Filing approved plans. Plans stamped as approved by the fire marshal's office shall be filed with the city community affairs office. 
(f)	Field inspection. The applicant must request appropriate field inspections by the city building inspector and the fire marshal's office. 
(g)	Certificate of occupancy. When the facility has been approved by and passed all inspections by the building inspector and fire marshal's office, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
 
Secs. 8-38—8-60. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATING AND TRENCHING
 
Sec. 8-61. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certificate means the certificate issued by Cobb County upon satisfactory completion of a mandatory training/educational program regarding excavation and trench safety practices, such program to be provided by the county. 
Certificate holder means the holder of the certificate identified in the definition of the term "certificate" in this section. 
Excavation means any manmade cavity of depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions by reasons of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth-to-width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the Federal Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing or controlling an excavation or trenching site. 
Trench is a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of a trench is not greater than 15 feet. 
(Code 1985, § 5-61; Ord. of 11-7-1988, § 1)
 
Sec. 8-62. Compliance with regulations required.
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in compliance with the provisions of this article and in compliance with any applicable state and federal laws and rules. 
(Code 1985, § 5-62; Ord. of 11-7-1988, § 2)
 
Sec. 8-63. Adoption of OSHA safety and health regulations.
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly 1926 CFR 1926.650—1926.653 (subpart P—excavations, trenching and shoring), as the same now exist or may be amended, are adopted as a part of this article the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(Code 1985, § 5-63; Ord. of 11-7-1988, § 3)
 
Sec. 8-64. County certificate required.
(a)	No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench unless such person holds a valid certificate from the county evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices provided by the county. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. 
(b)	In the event any person who holds a valid certificate is found to be in violation of the safety standards and requirements on any job site, the offense shall be promptly reported to the county. 
(Code 1985, § 5-64; Ord. of 11-7-1988, § 4)
 
Sec. 8-65. City permit required.
(a)	No excavating or trenching shall be performed until a permit or authorization for the same has been obtained from the city. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the job site. No such permit shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing before the mayor and council after notice to the permit holder of the date, time and place of hearing, along with notice of the charges, except a permit may be suspended prior to such hearing in the event of a cave-in of an excavation or trench resulting in human injury or death. Due cause shall consist of the violating of any laws or ordinances regulating excavating or trenching. Three days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor and council may deem the circumstances to justify. At such hearing, the permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by an attorney, to cross examine any witnesses who may appear against him, and to present evidence in his own behalf. 
(b)	After July 1, 1988, no permit or authorization shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(Code 1985, § 5-65; Ord. of 11-7-1988, § 5)
 
Sec. 8-66. Inspection by the city.
City personnel shall periodically inspect trench/excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards hereinabove adopted. 
(Code 1985, § 5-66; Ord. of 11-7-1988, § 6)
 
Sec. 8-67. Violations.
(a)	Violations of this chapter may result in revocation or suspension of any permit issued hereunder as hereinabove set out. 
(b)	A notice of violation shall be issued for any deficiency. Upon receipt of such notice, the deficiency shall be corrected immediately. 
(c)	All excavation and trenching work upon any job site shall cease immediately when there is trench activity by any person not a certificate holder or when the deficiencies cannot be corrected immediately or when there is a refusal or failure to correct immediately or when such work is being done without a permit. 
(d)	If deficiencies identified in a notice of violation are not corrected, the building permit, land disturbance permit or any other permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked for due cause upon the conditions herein identified for revocation of permit. 
(e)	Flagrant or repeated violations shall be reported by the city to OSHA and Cobb County for action. 
(f)	Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity of any kind whatsoever, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or six-month imprisonment or both for each violation. 
(g)	In addition, every violation of the terms of this chapter by any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or entity of any kind whatsoever, shall be deemed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued; and such violation is subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state. 
(h)	Any violation of this article shall be subject to injunction. 
(i)	The above remedies are cumulative. Pursuance of any one remedy shall not be deemed an election of remedies and shall not prohibit pursuance of more than one remedy simultaneously. 
(Code 1985, § 5-67; Ord. of 11-7-1988, § 7)
 
Chapter 10 BUSINESSES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 10-1. Construction of terms; definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation, or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly, except those occupations licensed by the state or some agency thereof to the exclusion of the city. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Engaged in business means when a person performs any act of selling any goods or service or solicits business or offers goods or service for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator, or agent in any business, trade, profession, or occupation within this city; provided, however, the term "engaged in business" shall exclude activities of organizations and entities which are: 
(1)	Nonprofit, charitable organizations; and 
(2)	The activities of which are not in competition with businesses otherwise required to obtain business licenses. Furthermore, the term "engaged in business" shall not include the following activities: nonprofit organization suppers and bake sales, annual church bazaars, amateur youth athletic club sales, and amateur athletic booster club sales. 
Itinerant merchants, flea market vendors and other retailers without permanent places of business means:
(1)	All itinerant merchants, flea market vendors and other retailers without permanent places of business are exercising the same taxable privilege as other merchants when selling at retail in this city. For the exercise of this privilege, a tax is levied. 
(2)	For the purpose of this rule, the term "itinerant merchant" means any person who solicits, engages in, transacts or offers for sale any new or used merchandise either in one location or while traveling from place to place in the city. The term "itinerant merchant" is further defined as any person who does not intend to become or who does not become a permanent merchant at any one location and who for the purpose of transacting such business, rents, hires, leases, occupies or uses any building, structure, lot, tract, motor vehicle, sample case, or display case. 
License means a certificate issued by the city authorizing a person to engage in a business, and a certificate issued by the city evidencing payment of a professional occupation tax. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Manufacturer means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities; including all the activities of a commercial nature wherein labor or skill is applied by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different, or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced; and including the production or fabrication of specially or custom-made articles; and including the making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning and preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables, and meats. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Professional occupation means an occupation licensed by the state or some agency thereof to the exclusion of the city. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Retailer means a person who sells to the consumer or any other person for any purpose other than for resale, any article or substance in the form of tangible personal property. 
Service means the accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Wholesaler means a person who sells to jobbers or to another person other than the consumer anything in the form of tangible personal property. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-2041, 7-1001; Code 1985, § 6-1; Ord. of 3-7-1988; Ord. of 9-11-1989; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-2. Occupation tax required; registration.
(a)	Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for the business, trade, profession, or occupation. The record of such payment and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city finance director or the director's designee or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(b)	Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. The occupation tax, administrative or regulatory fee shall be paid within 90 days of January 1 or, with regard to a new business, the date upon which beginning to conduct business within the city. Each business which fails to timely pay the occupation tax or regulatory fees shall incur a penalty of $50.00. The penalties and interest shall be in addition to all other revocation or rights of the city to revoke business licenses or other licenses or permits granted by the city as well as other penalties, civil and criminal provided for in the Charter and this Code. The penalties and taxes may be collected by the remedies provided herein for collection of the occupation tax, and any penalties shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(c)	Any business which commences following July 1 in any year shall pay a tax for that year of only 50 percent of the tax which would be payable for the full year. There shall be no such reduction in regularity or administrative fee. 
(d)	The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the community affairs department, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2044; Code 1985, § 6-2; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-1995, § A; Ord. of 10-5-1998, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-3. License or certificate required.
(a)	Every business in the city required to register under section 10-2 is required to have a business license from the city for the privilege of engaging in a business within the corporate limits of the city if such license is not prohibited by the state. 
(b)	Every occupation licensed by the state to the exclusion of the city is required to have a certificate issued by the city evidencing payment of its occupation tax. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1002; Code 1985, § 6-3; Ord. of 10-6-1980)
 
Sec. 10-4. Occupation tax levied; restrictions.
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the finance department of the city: 
Employees	Tax Liability
1—9 	$125.00 
10—19 	$175.00 
20—49 	$200.00 
50 or more 	$350.00 

(b)	No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(c)	No occupation tax shall be required for those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(d)	Notwithstanding the tax schedule set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the occupational tax payable by each insurance company or agency with a business location in the city shall be as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2043; Code 1985, § 6-5; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-1999, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-5. License application.
(a)	Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this Code shall submit an application for such license to the community affairs department, which application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this Code. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the community affairs department and submitted before March 1 of each year or ten days prior to opening a new business. Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership. 
(2)	Place where the proposed business is to be located and, if the property is leased, a copy of the lease contract or agreement and any related documents. 
(3)	Kinds of businesses to be carried on and the kinds of goods or services to be offered. 
(4)	Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership. 
(5)	Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation. 
(6)	Complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any laws and ordinances of the city, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
(7)	A schedule listing the number of all employees who are or were employed during the preceding 12-month period, including the status of each as full- or part-time. (The term "employee" means any worker, full- or part-time, supervised by the employer and for whom the employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax or to whom an IRS form W-2 is issued by the employer. For each such employee the business must provide the employee's position, typical hours worked per week and dates of employment.) 
(8)	A statement, under oath, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1 et seq., providing that the applicant is a United States citizen or legal permanent resident 18 years of age or older or that the applicant is a qualified alien or nonimmigrant under federal law and rules, 18 years of age or older, lawfully present in the United States and provide the applicant's alien number issued by the Department of Homeland Security or other federal immigration agency. 
(9)	Such additional information as the community affairs department or city may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
(b)	Each application shall be sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(c)	All information furnished or secured under the authority of this section, except as otherwise by state law provided, shall be kept in strict confidence by the community affairs department, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	False or incomplete statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of such license and for the imposition of other penalties as herein provided. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1003; Code 1985, § 6-6; Ord. of 10-5-1981; Ord. of 9-4-1987; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-1995, § E; Ord. of 2-1-2010)
 
Sec. 10-6. Procedure for issuance of license.
(a)	If any provision of this chapter provides for the review of an application for a license by a city officer designated therein, the community affairs department shall forward a copy of the application to such officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return such recommendation to the community affairs department after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)	Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer as hereinabove provided, or upon the receipt of the application if no reviewing officer is designated, the community affairs department shall forward such recommendation and application to the city for consideration and action at its next regular scheduled public meeting. 
(c)	No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard construction codes adopted by the city. 
(d)	Upon the express approval of the city, the community affairs department shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signatures of the mayor and community affairs department. 
(e)	The granting of a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in such business. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1004; Code 1985, § 6-7)
 
Sec. 10-7. When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
(a)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this chapter. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a penalty imposed. 
(b)	The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the community affairs department and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this chapter without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the judge of the municipal court, be punished by a fine not to exceed one-half of the unpaid occupation tax for each year the tax is not paid. In addition, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2045; Code 1985, § 6-8; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-8. Prorating of tax.
When any person shall commence any business after the beginning of the business tax year, the tax levied by this chapter may be prorated such that the full scheduled rate of tax shall be due for businesses beginning operations before June 1 and one-half of the scheduled rate shall be due for businesses beginning operations on June 1 or later. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2050; Code 1985, § 6-9)
 
Sec. 10-9. Issuance of license or certificate.
Upon the payment of the taxes assessed in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the community affairs department to issue to each person a business license or occupational tax certificate. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2046; Code 1985, § 6-10)
 
Sec. 10-10. License or certificate to be displayed.
All persons shall exhibit and display the license or certificate in some conspicuous place in their business establishment. Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the city shall carry such receipt and certificate either upon the person or on any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in such business, and such person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when requested to do so. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2047; Code 1985, § 6-11)
 
Sec. 10-11. Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed.
(a)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1005; Code 1985, § 6-12; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-12. Transfer of license.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a license may not be transferred to another person, new owner, or location except as follows: 
(1)	If the ownership and business type remain the same and only the address or business name has changed then upon a ten day notice to the community affairs department and compliance with all building and zoning requirements, the change shall be allowed; 
(2)	Any other change may be allowed at the discretion of the city on a case by case basis. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1008; Code 1985, § 6-13)
 
Sec. 10-13. Change of address.
Any person moving from one location to another shall notify the community affairs department of such move and of the new address in writing, no later than ten days after moving. The same tax receipt and certificate will be valid at the new location. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2048; Code 1985, § 6-14)
 
Sec. 10-14. Evidence of qualification required if applicable.
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an the city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1010; Code 1985, § 6-15; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-15. Termination and renewal of licenses.
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the year when no provision to the contrary is made. Unless otherwise provided, each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the community affairs department no later than March 1 of each year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1006; Code 1985, § 6-16)
 
Sec. 10-16. Delinquency penalties.
Any person failing to register on or before March 1 or, in the case of a new business, within ten days of commencing business, or failing to pay the tax due under the terms of this chapter by the due date, shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2053; Code 1985, § 6-17)
 
Sec. 10-17. Revocation, suspension.
(a)	By the mayor. Whenever a person doing business under a city license shall violate any law or ordinance of the United States or of the state or of the city, in pursuance of that business, or when it shall be proven before the mayor that the health, morals, interest and convenience of the public demand the revocation of that license, the mayor shall suspend that license and report such to the next regular meeting of the city for its ratification or rejection. Should the action of the mayor be sustained by the city, the license shall be revoked, for at least one year, otherwise it shall be restored and remain in full force. 
(b)	By the city generally. The city, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this Code to have been violated by the licensee, licensee's agent, or employee, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the city may deem necessary. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1007, 7-1011; Code 1985, §§ 6-18, 6-19)
 
Sec. 10-18. Issuance of executions.
The community affairs department shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this chapter. Such executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2052; Code 1985, § 6-20)
 
Sec. 10-19. Subpoena and arrest powers or city finance department.
(a)	The city finance department and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this chapter. 
(b)	In any case the finance department of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city representative shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city representative such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the city representative at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(c)	Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of the returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this chapter permitting the owner of the business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city representative in accordance with provisions found in subsection (b) of this section. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-2054, 7-1012; Code 1985, § 6-21; Ord. of 10-5-1981; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-1997, § XIII)
 
Sec. 10-20. Financial institutions.
(a)	Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, the city has levied for each year, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations at the rate of 0.025 percent of the gross receipts of the institutions as defined in the O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, as now or hereafter amended. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)	Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 each year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(c)	The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1985, § 6-23; Ord. of 8-1-1983, §§ 1, 2)
 
Sec. 10-21. Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state.
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-24; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-22. Allocation of employees of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations.
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, only those employees working within the city shall be counted for the purpose of determining the occupation tax liability. 
(Code 1985, § 6-25; Ord. of 6-3-1991; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-23. Each line of business to be identified on business registration.
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Code 1985, § 6-26; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-24. More than one place or line of business.
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 1985, § 6-27; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-25. Practitioners of professions.
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall pay an occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 10-4. 
(Code 1985, § 6-28; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-26. Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government.
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, or a city or county of the state, or instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a city or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1985, § 6-29; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-27. Purpose and scope of tax.
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 6-29.1; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-28. Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose.
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1985, § 6-29.2; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-29. Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this chapter shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained the registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 6-29.3; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-30. Businesses not covered by this chapter.
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other state law or by local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. ch. 46-3. 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1985, § 6-29.4; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-31. Occupation tax prohibited by state or federal law.
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1985, § 6-29.5; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-32. Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.
(a)	After January 1, 1996, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)	The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioner of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 6-29.6; Ord. of 12-5-1994, § 1)
 
Secs. 10-33—10-52. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 10-53. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult dancing establishments and adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dancing establishments and adult entertainment establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult dancing establishments versus the protected rights of these establishments and their patrons. 
(Code 1985, § 6-93; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-54. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features live dancers for the entertainment of the establishment's patrons. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, including, but not limited to, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult hotels or motels, adult motion picture arcades, adult bookstores, adult video stores, encounter centers, rap establishments, escort bureaus and introduction services, as hereinafter defined. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Appropriate attire means opaque clothing fully covering: 
(1)	The human male or female genitals, pubic area and buttocks; and 
(2)	The entire nipple of the female breasts. 
Crime involving moral character means any drug- or alcohol-related crime or any sex-related crime or any felony. 
Encounter center orrap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction service means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character, according to this article, if that person has not been convicted of a drug- or alcohol-related crime or sex-related crime or any felony in the past five years. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)	Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral or anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; 
(2)	Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(3)	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)	Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; or 
(5)	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(Code 1985, § 6-94; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 2)
 
Sec. 10-55. Unlawful operation declared nuisance.
Any adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Code 1985, § 6-109.3; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 21)
 
Sec. 10-56. Violation penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Code 1985, § 6-109.2; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 20)
 
Secs. 10-57—10-85. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. LICENSING
 
Sec. 10-86. License required.
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city of an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment defined in this article, without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under state or federal law. 
(Code 1985, § 6-97; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 5)
 
Sec. 10-87. Location restrictions.
No adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned or used for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes. 
(2)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, neighborhood public park or neighborhood playground is located. 
(3)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)	Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by a direct line of measurement from property line to property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land in any warranty deed, limited or general, or any quitclaim deed recorded in the deed records of Cobb County or Douglas County. 
(Code 1985, § 6-98; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 6)
 
Sec. 10-88. Application for license.
(a)	Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the community affairs department. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department, shall be paid to the city to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. The community affairs department shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)	The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1985, § 6-100; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 8)
 
Sec. 10-89. Application contents.
Each application for an adult dancing establishment license or adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The applicant's full true name and any other names used by applicant, including any trade names. 
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)	Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(4)	Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application, including the business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation. 
(5)	The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under any governmental license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors and stockholders. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certification of limited partnership filed with the county clerk or secretary of state. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this division, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(7)	If the applicant, or any of its partners, limited partners, officers, directors, or stockholders (if the applicant or any partner of the applicant is a corporation which has 20 or fewer stockholders), have been convicted of any crime involving moral character in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)	If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(9)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of the applicant and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(10)	Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(11)	Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(12)	A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site, or other business hereunder regulated. 
(13)	Each applicant for an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.	If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.	If by a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.	If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.	If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 1985, § 6-101; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 9)
 
Sec. 10-90. Applicant to appear.
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at a public hearing before the city council. 
(Code 1985, § 6-102; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 10)
 
Sec. 10-91. Application; investigation.
The city shall have 15 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)	The required fee has been paid; 
(2)	The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this division; 
(3)	The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)	The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)	The applicant, or any of its partners, limited partners, officers, directors or stockholders (if the applicant or any partner of the applicant is a corporation which has 20 or fewer stockholders), has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-, drug- or alcohol-related crime or any felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses; 
(6)	Applicant has not had an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause in this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)	The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws; 
(8)	The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)	That the applicant, his employees, agents, partners, directors, officers, or managers have not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities, as defined herein, to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein have occurred; 
(10)	That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)	That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state, or the United States. 
(Code 1985, § 6-103; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 11)
 
Sec. 10-92. Persons prohibited as licensees.
No license provided for by this division shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes to the city. 
(2)	Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)	Any corporation, any of whose directors, officers and stockholders (if such corporation has 20 or fewer stockholders) are not of good moral character. 
(4)	Any partnership or association, any of whose partners (general or limited) or members or stockholders (if any partner or member of such partnership or association is a corporation which has 20 or fewer stockholders) are not of good moral character. 
(5)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, state or city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-104; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 12)
 
Sec. 10-93. License refusal.
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this division, it shall notify the community affairs department of such opinion and, within 15 days from the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the community affairs department. The community affairs department shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. 
(Code 1985, § 6-105; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 13)
 
Sec. 10-94. Appeal to city council.
Denial of license issuance or renewal may be appealed to the city council. When an appeal hearing is placed on the council agenda, the council shall set a hearing date and instruct the community affairs department to give the appealing party at least ten days' written notice of such a hearing. At such hearing, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appealing party, from interested parties and from city staff. The council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the council shall be final. 
(Code 1985, §§ 6-109, 6-109.1; Ord. of 2-6-1995, §§ 17, 19)
 
Sec. 10-95. License renewal.
Licenses for adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this division. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishment licenses and adult dancing establishment licenses shall be as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department. 
(Code 1985, § 6-106; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 14)
 
Sec. 10-96. Licenses nontransferable.
No adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license. An adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned; provided and excepting, however, that if a stockholder dies, one or more of the remaining stockholders may acquire the interest of the deceased stockholder without effecting a surrender or termination of such license. 
(Code 1985, § 6-107; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 15)
 
Sec. 10-97. Change of location or name.
(a)	No adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee in the amount of $500.00 has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the community affairs director. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in this Code, have been met. 
(b)	No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)	Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 6-108; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 16)
 
Sec. 10-98. Grounds for revocation.
(a)	It shall be grounds for revocation of an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment license if the applicant is convicted of committing an offense that would have prevented an issuance of the original license under this division. 
(b)	It shall also be grounds for revocation if the applicant or applicant's agents or employees knowingly allow any criminal offense to occur on the licensed premises. Criminal offenses shall include any violation of the city ordinance or criminal laws of the state. 
(c)	It shall also be grounds for revocation if the person, corporation, partnership or association possessing an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment license fails to pay any fee or fines required by this division. 
(d)	It shall also be grounds for revocation if the licensee fails to pay when due all ad valorem taxes assessed against the licensee or if the ad valorem real property taxes assessed against the property upon which the licensee operates its business are not paid when due. 
(e)	It shall also be grounds for revocation if the licensee or any employee of a licensee violates any provision of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 6-109.4; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 22)
 
Sec. 10-99. Revocation hearing.
No license issued under this division may be revoked, except as provided herein and only after a hearing before the city council, for the city, upon a prior written notice to the licensee of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a general statement of the reason the license would be revoked. Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be deemed reasonable. 
(Code 1985, § 6-109.5; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 23)
 
Sec. 10-100. Judicial appeal.
Any decision of the city council in the revocation of an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment license may be appealed to the Cobb County superior court for review. 
(Code 1985, § 6-109.6; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 24)
 
Secs. 10-101—10-128. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. BUSINESS OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 10-129. Adult dancing establishment regulations.
(a)	No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, operate or cause to be operated an adult dancing establishment without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)	No later than March l of each year an adult dancing establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the community affairs department or its designee showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)	An adult dancing establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)	No adult dancing establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer or a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)	No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult dancing establishment. 
(f)	An adult dancing establishment shall not be open, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m. on Saturday. 
(g)	No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(h)	No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any person. 
(i)	All dancers must wear appropriate attire when in view of or performing for the establishment's patrons. 
(j)	No adult dancing establishment shall allow any of its employees to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of such establishments, and no employee of an adult dancing establishment shall engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of such establishments. 
(k)	No adult dancing establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(Code 1985, § 6-95; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 3)
 
Sec. 10-130. Adult entertainment establishment regulations.
(a)	No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(b)	No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)	An adult entertainment establishment shall not be opened, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m. on Saturday. 
(d)	No adult entertainment establishment shall allow any of its employees to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of such establishment, and no employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of such establishment. 
(Code 1985, § 6-96; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 4)
 
Sec. 10-131. Employee restrictions.
(a)	Qualifications. Employees of an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed in any such establishment or under contract to any such establishment shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" includes an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere. 
(b)	Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city police department of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section. The city shall have 15 days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to meet the qualifications of subsection (a) of this section, the city shall issue the applicant a license under this section. Upon issuance of the license, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of the denial, apply to the city council for a hearing. The city council shall hold a hearing and shall issue such order as is required. An investigation fee as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department shall accompany the notice of intended employment. 
(c)	Suspension, revocation of license. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of a license. It shall be grounds for revocation of a license to operate an adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment if the applicant commits an offense which would have prevented an issuance of the original license or if the applicant or applicant's agents, employees or manager knowingly allow any criminal offense to occur on the licensed premises. 
(d)	Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult dancing establishment or adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1985, § 6-99; Ord. of 2-6-1995, § 7)
 
Secs. 10-132—10-160. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. AUCTIONEERS AND AUCTIONS 
 
Sec. 10-161. Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all auctions, auctioneers, auction houses and any city licenses issued for such business activity. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3001; Code 1985, § 6-110)
 
Sec. 10-162. Auctioneer's license exemption.
Auctioneers required to obtain separate licenses under the existing license schedule are exempt from the requirement of obtaining such license provided they are employed by a licensed auction house in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3002; Code 1985, § 6-111)
 
Sec. 10-163. Auction house parking; limit on number of days.
No auction house shall be licensed hereunder unless it shall have available no less than 25 parking places reserved for its customers and unless it limits its conduct of auctions to no more than two days per week. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3003; Code 1985, § 6-112)
 
Sec. 10-164. Auction license; days per week limited; false advertising.
(a)	Except for judicial auctions or auctions under a power contained in a will or trust, no auction shall be conducted in the city unless a license therefor is first obtained from the community affairs department. If the auctions are limited to no more than one day, an auctioneer's license as otherwise provided will be sufficient. In the event auctions are to be conducted on a regular basis or more than once a year, an auction house license must be obtained before any auction can be held. 
(b)	All auctions shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 43-6. In addition, no auction shall be conducted more than two days per week in the city and all such auctions must be conducted on the premises of the licensed auction house. 
(c)	No person shall make any statement or advertisement regarding an auction or the merchandise to be sold therein or the conditions or terms of sale, which advertisement or statement contains any assertion or representation which is untrue, misleading or deceptive. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3004; Code 1985, § 6-113)
 
Sec. 10-165. State sales tax return.
Each auction house upon applying for reissuance of its annual license shall attach thereto copies of its state sales tax return showing its gross sales for the year. The sales tax return shall be certified under oath by the applicant or applicant's accountant. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3005; Code 1985, § 6-114)
 
Secs. 10-166—10-183. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. AUTO REPAIR ESTABLISHMENTS
 
Sec. 10-184. Scope.
This article shall apply to all businesses and locations within the city limits that meet the definition of an automotive paint and body repair shop, a light automotive repair establishment or a heavy automotive repair establishment (hereinafter "establishments") and all owners, operators and employees of said establishments. The general provisions of article I of this chapter shall apply herein except to the extent that they are inconsistent with the more specific provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-2017-01, § 6-220, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 08-2017-03, § 1(6-220), 8-7-2017)
 
Sec. 10-185. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automotive paint and body shop means an establishment for restoring auto bodies, painting or refinishing, with all activities carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
Establishment employee means any individual employed, directly or indirectly, as a subcontractor or 1099 employee, of an establishment. 
Establishment owner means all persons, firms, corporations, partnerships or other forms of business entities operating, maintaining and/or managing an establishment and in whose name the business is licensed in the city. 
Heavy automotive repair establishment means an indoor repair establishment for performing automotive and truck repair, including engine and transmission overhauls. 
Light automotive repair establishment means an indoor repair establishment (no outside storage) for performing light auto and small truck repair (under one ton) such as brake repair, oil changes, lubrication, transmission repair, installation of belts and hoses, inspections and the like. 
(Ord. No. 08-2017-01, § 6-221, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 08-2017-03, § 1(6-221), 8-7-2017)
 
Sec. 10-186. Business license requirements.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate an establishment without a business license issued from the city. Business licenses issued for an establishment shall be valid only for the licensed location. 
(b)	All persons or entities desiring to obtain a business license as the operator of an establishment shall make written applications to the city on forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Applicants shall supply such reasonable and necessary information as may be required by the city. 
(c)	All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records reasonably related to the evaluation of an application, as may be required by the city or an interested city department. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for oral interrogatories any person under the applicant's supervision or control who might have information pertinent to the application, upon request of the city. Failure to furnish such information or produce persons within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(d)	No application for any license hereunder shall be granted where the application or investigation shows any of the following to exist: 
(1)	The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental entity previously suspended or revoked. 
(2)	The location, if applicable, is not properly zoned. 
(3)	The applicant, as a previous holder of a license for this type of establishment, has violated any law, including this article, relating to such business, within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)	No similar business license is in effect for the location, if applicable. 
(5)	The applicant has supplied false information either on said application or in any communication with any official of the city relative to said application. 
(6)	The applicant has failed to pay any fee required under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)	The applicant, during the 12-month period next preceding the filing this application has engaged in any deceptive business practice as defined by state and/or federal law. 
(8)	No original license hereunder shall be issued to an person, partnership, or corporation for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder owning at least 25 percent of the stock of the corporation, such interest being direct or indirect, beneficial or absolute, or his spouse or the manager of the operation, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application for a felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal or county ordinance except traffic violations. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a municipal or county ordinance or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the city council may, after investigation, if appealed by the applicant, waive the same as a disqualification. 
(9)	In addition to the above and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted his business thereunder, and particularly as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.	The location for which the license is sought, if applicable, as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and surrounding area, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.	If it appears as though a third party is just using the applicant as a guise or "dummy" to obtain a license. 
(e)	Application fees and license fees for business licenses required hereunder shall be set from time to time by the city council. A schedule of said fees shall be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of the city. Licenses shall be issued for the time period selected as allowable upon the schedule of fees. 
(f)	Any license issued hereunder shall be posed conspicuously at the place of doing business of the licensee. 
(g)	No license hereunder shall be transferrable. 
(h)	Each license under this article shall be for one location only. Applicants with multiple locations shall obtain a separate license, paying a separate fee, for each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 08-2017-01, § 6-222, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 08-2017-03, § 1(6-222), 8-7-2017)
 
Sec. 10-187. Zoning.
No license or permit shall be issued for an establishment under this article for a location, nor shall any business of such an establishment be conducted at any location or upon any property unless the property has been zoned PSC planned shopping center district, GC general commercial, LI light industrial or HI heavy industrial. 
(Ord. No. 08-2017-01, § 6-224, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 08-2017-03, § 1(6-224), 8-7-2017)
 
Sec. 10-188. Requirements.
(a)	Establishments issued a license under this article cannot have bay doors facing a single- or two-family residential district. 
(b)	Establishments issued a license under this article cannot store vehicles that are being held for repair for more than 45 days from the date the vehicle is accepted for repair. However, the 45-day time limit may be extended to no more than 90 days from the date the vehicle is accepted for repair if the process to obtain a lien on the vehicle by the owner/operator of the establishment has been initiated. 
(c)	If an establishment cannot repair a vehicle that is accepted for repair on the same day on which it is accepted for repair, and the vehicle must be kept overnight by the establishment, the owner/operator of the establishment must: 
(1)	Catalogue and inventory each vehicle received including: date, make and model. 
(2)	Have no more than two vehicles stored per bay or work station after regular business hours. Any additional vehicles must be parked indoors or behind a solid screening fence at least six feet tall. 
(3)	If the establishment is within 200 feet of residentially zoned property, all vehicles being stored overnight must be hidden from view by either storing them indoors or behind a solid screening fence at least six feet tall. Said fencing must run along all property lines facing the residential property. 
(4)	For all establishments receiving a license under this article, all wrecked or dismantled vehicles must be stored indoors in an enclosed structure or completely hidden behind a solid screening fence at least six feet tall. 
(d)	Establishments issued a license under this article cannot store or display any merchandise in the open or on the outside of the building and/or structure located on the property. Merchandise shall include, but not be limited to, the following items: 
(1)	Automotive parts (transmissions, engines, mufflers, etc.). 
(2)	Automotive accessories (toolboxes, bed liners, bed covers, etc.). 
(3)	Related automotive accessories (jack stands, polishes, waxes, floor jacks, etc.). 
(4)	Exception. An establishment issued a license under this article may display racks of rims, wheels, mags, or tires (no more than three sets or a total of 12 tires) during hours of operation. All such displays and merchandise must be moved indoors during the time that the establishment is closed. 
(e)	Except for the replacement of a battery, an establishment issued a license under this article must perform all repair work indoors including replacement and removal activities such as changing/repairing tires, spark plugs, oil, filters, etc. 
(Ord. No. 08-2017-01, § 6-225, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 08-2017-03, § 1(6-225), 8-7-2017)
 
Sec. 10-189. Revocation, suspension, probation of license.
(a)	Whenever a person doing business under a license pursuant to this article shall violate any law or ordinance of the United States, the state or the city, in pursuance of that business, or when it shall be proven before the mayor that the health, morals, interest and convenience of the public provide due cause for the revocation or suspension of that license, the mayor shall suspend that license and report such to the next regular meeting of the governing body for its ratification or rejection. Should the action of the mayor be sustained by the governing body, the license shall be revoked for one year, otherwise it shall be restored and remain in full force and effect. 
(b)	Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)	Violation of the provisions of this or any other city ordinance; 
(2)	Violation of any laws, ordinances or resolutions regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business; 
(3)	A licensee or permittee has supplied false information to the city either during or following application for a permit or license, regardless of when the city shall have become aware of the same; 
(4)	A licensee or permittee makes a misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication, oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead a party with whom the licensee or permittee deals in pursuance of the licensed or permitted business. The term "misrepresentation of fact," as used herein, shall embrace not only express misrepresentations but also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the licensee's or permittee's conduct, including acts and omissions; 
(5)	If any reasons exist which would have been grounds for denial of the original application or renewal of the license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 08-2017-01, § 6-226, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 08-2017-03, § 1(6-226), 8-7-2017)
 
Sec. 10-190. Violations; penalties.
Any person or entity violating any provision of this article shall be punished as follows: 
(1)	Upon first conviction, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere, issued a fine of not more than $300.00, as well as potential suspension or revocation of the license pursuant to section 10-189; 
(2)	Upon second conviction, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere, issued a fine of not more than $600.00, as well as potential suspension or revocation of the license pursuant to section 10-189; 
(3)	Upon third conviction, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere, issued a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and up to one year in jail, as well as potential suspension or revocation of the license pursuant to section 10-189. 
In addition, every violation of the terms of this article by any person or entity shall be considered a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued; and such violation is subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by this Code for the city and laws of this state. The above remedies are cumulative. Pursuance of any one remedy shall not be deemed an election of remedies and shall not prohibit pursuance of more than one remedy at any time. 
(Ord. No. 08-2017-01, § 6-227, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. 08-2017-03, § 1(6-227), 8-7-2017)
 
Secs. 10-191—10-218. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. BAIL BONDING COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 10-219. Professional bonding companies, definition.
All persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bail bonds for compensation, and who are licensed as provided herein, are declared to be professional bonding companies, whether operating as a corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship. 
(Code 1985, § 6-40; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-220. Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to any city business license issued to any professional bail bonding company as herein defined and to regulate the activities of others herein provided for in relation to this bonding business. 
(Code 1985, § 6-41; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 2)
 
Sec. 10-221. Qualification for license.
(a)	Application. To qualify for a license as a professional bonding company, the applicant shall submit the following applications to the community affairs department office: 
(1)	A completed application for bonding company. This application shall provide information in regard to the overall operation of a bonding business including the name of all partners, officers, stockholders and any other person or corporation having an interest in the bonding company. 
(2)	A completed application for bonding company employees. This application shall provide personal information in order that a background investigation on the bonding company employees can be conducted. Any individual who will have power of attorney extended for the purpose of writing bonds must submit the above described applications. 
(3)	The applicant furnished with the application, a complete set of the fingerprints and a recent credential-size full face photograph and a consent form permitting full background and criminal record examinations of each person who will act as an agent or employee of the bonding company. The fingerprints shall be processed by the police chief who shall certify the person to be free of any record of any crime of moral turpitude or any violation of law applicable to the bail bonding business. 
(4)	The applicant must set forth affirmatively that the applicant and its employees meet the qualifications set forth herein. 
(b)	Qualifications. No person including the applicant, its principals or employees, shall be permitted to sign professional bonds or act as an agent or representative of a bonding company if such person shall not meet the following qualifications: 
(1)	No such person shall have been convicted of a felony offense, convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, failed to meet bonding obligations in the city, Cobb County or any other county in the state or elsewhere, or failed to qualify under applicable state statutes governing who may act in such a capacity. 
(2)	No persons employed by an agency having access to criminal history information, or persons related to those having such access, will be permitted to operate, own an interest in, or act in any capacity as an agent for a professional bonding company. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "persons related" includes spouses, children, stepchildren, parents, stepparents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, stepbrothers, stepsisters and first cousins. 
(3)	Such person shall have reached the age of 21 years, be a citizen of the United States and shall have been a bona fide resident of the state for the immediately preceding one-year period. 
(4)	The bail bonding company employing such person shall be located in the state and will be actively engaged in the bail bonding business and maintain a place of business accessible to the public. 
(5)	Such person shall be of good character and the applicant (or its officers, if a corporation) shall be vouched for by two other reputable citizens who are residents of the county. 
(Code 1985, § 6-42; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 3)
 
Sec. 10-222. Prohibited practices.
Professional bonding companies, their agents and employees shall be prohibited from taking the following actions: 
(1)	Suggesting employment of attorney. Professional bonding companies shall not suggest or advise the employment, or name for employment, any attorney to represent the defendant, during the negotiations for the bondsman to sign the bond or subsequent thereto. 
(2)	Soliciting business, etc., by bondmen. No professional bonding companies shall solicit business as a bondsman, nor shall such bondsman lounge about or around the county jail , for the purpose of engaging in or soliciting business as a bondsman; nor shall any officer or personnel of the county jail suggest to or advise in any manner whatever any prison of the city, the employment of the services of any particular professional bonding company to sign bonds for appearance in court at any time. 
(3)	Participation in defense. Professional bonding companies shall not advise defendants, principals in bonds signed by them, or give any directions in the defense or disposition of the cases in which bonds are signed. 
(4)	Payments to and by. No professional bonding companies, becoming surety on a bond and receiving the compensation in the case for signing a bond as surety, shall thereafter receive any other sum in the case to the final disposition of the case. 
(5)	Indirect bonds. No professional bonding company may sign a bond in which another bonding company or third party receives compensation to arrange the release of an inmate from the county jail or other detention facility. 
(6)	Persons prohibited from signing bonds. No attorney at law and no official authorized to admit to bail, nor any city or county official, shall become surety on any bond. 
(7)	Fees of sureties. Professional bonding companies shall not, when receiving compensation, charge or receive more than ten percent of the principal amount of the bond from the defendant or from anyone acting for the defendants. 
(8)	Prohibited payments and delegation of authority. No professional bonding company shall: 
a.	Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to a jailer, police officer, peace officer, city recorder, or any other person who has power to arrest or to hold in custody; or to any city official or city employee in order to secure a settlement, compromise, remission or reduction of the amount of any bail bond thereof; 
b.	Pay a fee or rebate or give anything of value to an attorney in bail bond matters, except in defense of any action on a bond; 
c.	Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to the principal or anyone in the principal's behalf; 
d.	Sign or countersign in blank any bond, or give a power of attorney to, or otherwise authorize, anyone to countersign such person's name to bonds unless the person so authorized is directly employed by the bondsman giving such power of attorney. 
(Code 1985, § 6-43; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 4)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-223. Proof of financial responsibility.
It is unlawful for any professional bonding company to engage in the bonding business within the city without first offering proof of financial responsibility. Such proof shall be provided by the city by execution of an agreement with the city providing for an escrow account in any one or more financial institutions approved by the city. This escrow shall be ten percent of that company's bonding capacity and shall not be less than $10,000.00. If this escrow is encroached upon for any reason, or if the city council otherwise determines that additional escrow funds are required to insure the solvency or reliability of the professional bonding business, the city may require additional deposits to the escrow account. 
(Code 1985, § 6-44; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 5)
 
Sec. 10-224. Bonds in excess of financial capacity.
In the event a bonding company issues and has outstanding bonds of a face amount in excess of its proven financial responsibility or bonding capacity, it is unlawful for that company to issue further bonds without first offering proof of additional financial responsibility to the extent of such new bonds or cancelling sufficient outstanding bonds to reduce its bonding limits to a dollar amount within its proof of financial responsibility. 
(Code 1985, § 6-45; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 6)
 
Sec. 10-225. Monthly reports.
All bonding companies shall file with the police chief a monthly report. All reports shall be submitted on the form designed by the city council. These reports will include the following information and shall be filed in the form of an affidavit: 
(1)	List by name, in alphabetical order, amount and date of bonds signed during each month. 
(2)	List by name, in alphabetical order, case or indictment number and date of all bonds officially settled during each month. 
(3)	List by name, amount and date of bond all judgments rendered by the city court, the state or superior court of Cobb County or other jurisdictions subject to collection in the city. 
(4)	List by name, amount and date of bond all forfeitures pending in the city, Cobb County or other counties subject to collection in the city. 
(5)	List personnel in the employment of submitting bonding company. 
(6)	Report shall be filed with the city police chief on or before the tenth calendar day of each month. 
(Code 1985, § 6-46; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 7)
 
Sec. 10-226. Equal access to jail.
All professional bonding companies which hold a currently effective license, issued by the community affairs department, shall be entitled to equal access to the jail of this city for the purpose of making bond. 
(Code 1985, § 6-47; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 8)
 
Sec. 10-227. Termination of business.
Any professional bonding company which discontinues writing bail bonds during the period for which it is licensed shall notify the police chief and the community affairs department and immediately return such license. 
(Code 1985, § 6-48; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 9)
 
Sec. 10-228. Employee termination.
Any professional bonding company which terminates the appointment of any employee authorized to sign bonds shall immediately file written notice thereof with the police chief and the community affairs department, with a copy given or mailed to the terminated employee. Such notice filed shall state the reasons, if any, for such termination. Information so furnished shall be privileged and shall not be used as evidence in any action against the bonding company. 
(Code 1985, § 6-49; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 10)
 
Sec. 10-229. Denial, suspension, refusal to renew or revocation of license, penalties.
(a)	The city may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued in accordance with these requirements for any of the following causes: 
(1)	Any cause for which issuance of the license could have been refused had it then existed and been known to the city. 
(2)	Material misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining the license. 
(3)	Misappropriation, conversion or unlawful withholding of money belonging to others and received in the conduct of business under the license. 
(4)	Felony conviction of professional bonding company principal. 
(5)	Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of business under the license. 
(6)	Willful failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)	Willful failure to return collateral security to the principal when the principal is entitled thereto. 
(8)	When in the judgment of city, the licensee has, in the conduct of affairs under the license, demonstrated incompetency, or untrustworthiness, or conduct or practices rendering licensee unfit to carry on the bail bonding business, or making the licensee's continuance in such business detrimental to the public interest, or that the licensee is no longer in good faith carrying on the bail bond business, or that the licensee is guilty of rebating, or offering to rebate, or offering to divide the licensee's compensation, and for any of such reasons, is found by the city to be a source of detriment, injury or loss to the public. 
(b)	Any violation of this article shall subject the bonding company, and its principals, agents or employees in violation, to suspension of the license and punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1985, § 6-50; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 11)
 
Sec. 10-230. Bonding procedures.
All bonding companies must comply with the bonding procedures as established for use in the city court. 
(Code 1985, § 6-51; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 12)
 
Sec. 10-231. Display of signs.
(a)	Each professional bonding company, duly licensed by the city, shall be allowed to display a sign, in a place designated by the police chief, at or near the book-in book-out section of the county jail. 
(b)	One sign per licensee shall be permitted and shall be limited to lettering and numbering of no more than three inches high and 1.5 inches in width for each letter or numeral. 
(c)	Signs shall be limited to two lines to allow name of business at top and phone number at bottom. 
(d)	Signs shall be restricted to black and white in coloring and shall be hung in place so designated on a first come first serve priority. 
(Code 1985, § 6-52; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 14)
 
Sec. 10-232. Prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment.
(a)	All professional bonding companies, which accept money or any other consideration for any bail bond which they execute, must for each payment received, give to the persons paying the money or giving the consideration, a prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment, which receipt shall state the date, name of the principal amount of money or consideration received and purpose of which received, number of the power of attorney form attached to the bond, penal sum of the bond, and name of person making payment or giving consideration. 
(b)	All professional bonding companies must retain a duplicate copy of each receipt issued as part of such person's records. 
(Code 1985, § 6-53; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 15)
 
Sec. 10-233. Power of attorney.
All professional bonding companies must attach to each bail bond a duly executed power of attorney in an amount of at least the penal sum of the bond. This section shall not apply to any card or certificate of membership of any automobile club. 
(Code 1985, § 6-54; Ord. of 7-1-1996, § 16)
 
Secs. 10-234—10-259. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. CABARETS
 
Sec. 10-260. Scope of article; cabaret defined; license required.
(a)	In addition to all other license requirements of this Code, the following sections shall apply to the licensing and operation of a cabaret, which is defined as any establishment, indoor or outdoor, which provides entertainment (live or otherwise), or a place for entertainment, or a dance floor, or any facility for participatory entertainment, regardless of whether or not alcoholic beverages are served therein, provided this shall not apply to a motion picture or live theater unless alcoholic beverages are served therein. 
(b)	A separate business license shall be required for the operation of a cabaret according to the business license schedule adopted from time to time by the city, provided a separate business license is required for the operation of the business initially. Should any section of this article conflict with other provisions of this Code, then the most restrictive provisions shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2091; Code 1985, § 6-150; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 9-8-1986)
 
Sec. 10-261. Entertainment; hours.
Entertainment at a cabaret shall be permitted only from 8:00 a.m. until the following 2:00 a.m. each day, Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2092; Code 1985, § 6-151; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 6-2-1986; Ord. of 9-8-1986)
 
Sec. 10-262. Private guards.
Private security must be provided by the holder of a cabaret license at the holder's own expense as follows: 
(1)	All establishments operating under a cabaret license shall have at least one private duty guard on the premises who shall be a person other than an owner, bartender, cook or cashier. 
(2)	Any person so employed as a guard shall first submit to a records and identification check by the police department in the discretion of the police chief based on the results of the records and identification examination. 
(3)	The cost of a records and identification examination and the issuance of a city identification card shall be $10.00 and shall be borne by the licensee. 
(4)	Any person so employed as a guard shall not be allowed to carry any firearm in the performance of such person's duties unless such guard is an employee of a licensed security agency and is individually licensed by the state as a security guard. 
(5)	All guards shall wear prominently displayed on their person an identification card or badge identifying them as guards and shall at all times carry on their persons the city identification card. 
(6)	No person shall be employed as a guard unless such person shall be age 21 years or older. 
(7)	Private security guards shall be on duty from 5:00 p.m. until the following 2:00 a.m. both Friday and Saturday nights. 
(8)	Private security guards shall be given a copy of the relevant portions of this Code. It shall be their duty to enforce such ordinances, provided they shall not have the power to arrest or detain any offender but shall call for police assistance to affect any arrest or citation for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2093; Code 1985, § 6-152; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 6-2-1986; Ord. of 9-8-1986; Ord. of 3-6-1989)
 
Sec. 10-263. Loitering.
(a)	For the purposes of a cabaret license, the term "loitering" means remaining outside the place of business of any cabaret license holder for a period of more than ten minutes; or, if a crowd of more than ten people has assembled, for any period of time longer than necessary to walk to one's automobile and drive directly from the premises. 
(b)	Loitering outside the place of business of any cabaret license holder is prohibited at any time. 
(c)	Violations of this section by customers of the cabaret license holder or members of the public not customers shall subject the customers or members of the public to punishment as for a misdemeanor. 
(d)	The cabaret license holder shall be in violation of this section by permitting loitering or upon being notified that loitering is taking place outside such holder's place of business failing to take all reasonable steps to cause the same to cease. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2094; Code 1985, § 6-153; Ord. of 4-16-1981; Ord. of 9-8-1986)
 
Secs. 10-264—10-289. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-290. Permit required.
Any person desiring to solicit or canvass upon the public streets, areas or parks or call from house to house in the city for the purpose of raising funds or seeking donations for any religious, charitable or eleemosynary organization shall register with and obtain a written permit from the community affairs department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3091; Code 1985, § 6-120; Ord. of 6-4-1979)
 
Sec. 10-291. Application for permit.
Any person desiring a permit to solicit or canvass upon the public streets, areas or parks or call from house to house under this article in the city shall file, on a form to be supplied by the city, an application stating the following: 
(1)	Name of applicant. 
(2)	Permanent home address. 
(3)	Social Security number. 
(4)	Name and address of employer or organization represented. 
(5)	Names and addresses of all persons assisting in the soliciting or canvassing or calling from house to house in the city. 
(6)	Nature of any merchandise, wares, goods or any similar items to be sold or offered for sale or given away in conjunction with the soliciting or canvassing or calling from house to house in the city. 
(7)	Proof of nonprofit and tax-exempt status shall be required when registering with the community affairs department. No organization shall be considered a nonprofit organization within the meaning of this subsection except a tax-exempt organization within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law as such code and such law are now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3092; Code 1985, § 6-121; Ord. of 6-4-1979)
State law reference(s)—State registration of charitable organizations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-2. 
 
Sec. 10-292. Issuance; card.
Upon proper registration with the community affairs department, a written permit shall be issued to be valid for a period of 90 days from the date of issuance. In addition, identity cards shall be issued which must be carried by all persons while engaged in soliciting or canvassing upon the public streets, areas or parks or calling from house to house in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3093; Code 1985, § 6-122; Ord. of 6-4-1979)
 
Sec. 10-293. Conduct of solicitations restricted.
Soliciting or canvassing upon the public streets, areas or parks, or calling from house to house in the city shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	All soliciting or canvassing upon the public streets, areas or parks or calling from house to house in the city shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(2)	The number of solicitors or canvassers or callers from house to house in the city for any single firm, corporation or organization shall not exceed 25 in number, at any one time. 
(3)	Immediately prior to any solicitation of funds within the city, each solicitor, canvasser or caller shall present such person's identity card, issued by the city, to each person solicited. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3094; Code 1985, § 6-123; Ord. of 6-4-1979)
 
Sec. 10-294. Exemption from card requirement and number restriction.
Any nonprofit organization conducting annual fundraising or annual sales within the city shall not be required to obtain identity cards from the city, nor shall the number of such solicitors, canvassers or callers be restricted, provided such annual fundraising or annual sales do not exceed seven days per year; however, such nonprofit organizations must comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3096; Code 1985, § 6-124; Ord. of 6-4-1979)
 
Sec. 10-295. Prohibited acts.
It is unlawful for any solicitor, canvasser or caller to do any of the following: 
(1)	Falsely represent, directly or by implication, that funds are being solicited on behalf of any person or organization other than such as is registered with the community affairs department. 
(2)	Without the express prior permission of an occupant or property owner, to solicit at any residence, business, apartment complex or shopping mall, where there is posted a sign forbidding any solicitation, other than areas open to public parking. 
(3)	To remain on private premises after being asked to leave the premises or continued solicitation after being refused upon the public streets, areas or parks; such action shall constitute trespass or harassment, respectively. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3095; Code 1985, § 6-125; Ord. of 6-4-1979)
 
Secs. 10-296—10-323. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. FLEA MARKETS 
 
Sec. 10-324. Scope.
This article shall apply to all businesses and locations in the city which meet the definition of flea market and all flea market vendors, promoters, owners and operators as defined in section 10-325. This article shall not apply to developed and operating shopping centers, antique shops, jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores or special sales events as accessory uses not to exceed 14 days or other businesses dealing in merchandise common to that dealt in by flea markets, where vendors therein are not operating among a collection of vendors renting or securing individual spaces within an overall operation. The general provisions of this chapter shall apply herein except to the extent they are inconsistent with the more specific provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-200; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-325. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Flea market means any business whereby there is operated a center for shopping among collected flea market vendors marketing merchandise to the public from booths, stalls, tables, benches, individual rooms or display areas, and similar display and marketing configurations and arrangements for the sale of new and used merchandise. The term "flea market" shall not include developed and operating shopping centers, antique stores, jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores or special sales events as accessory uses not to exceed 14 days, or other businesses of common merchandise with flea markets where the vendor therein is not operating among a collection of vendors or renting or securing individual space within an overall operation. 
Flea market promoter, operator or owner means all persons operating, maintaining, managing and promoting flea markets. 
Vendor orflea market vendor means all persons operating among collections of other flea market vendors for sales to the public of new and used merchandise in collected marketing centers for sales from stalls, booths, stables, benches, rooms and other similar displays or marketing configurations and arrangements, except as excluded under the definition of the term "flea market," above. 
(Code 1985, § 6-201; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-326. Business license requirements.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person or entity to conduct a flea market business or for any flea market promoter, operator or owner to operate, or allow to be operated, such a business or for any flea market vendor to display or sell wares of any kind at a flea market without a business license issued by the city. 
(b)	Business licenses issued for a flea market or to any flea market promoter, operator or owner shall be valid only for the licensed location. Business licenses issued for a flea market vendor shall be valid when the vendor is operating from any duly licensed flea market in the city. 
(c)	It is unlawful for any flea market promoter, owner, operator or agent providing or renting space for flea market vendors, to rent any sales area to any vendor or to provide space free of rent or to allow any vendor to use any sales area within a flea market unless the vendor has a valid business license from the city. It shall be the duty of the flea market promoter, operator, owner or agent renting or providing space, to issue to each vendor a license on forms to be provided by the city and to verify that such license is in effect for each vendor. Failure to verify that each vendor has a valid business license, or the renting or provision of space for any unlicensed vendor to display or sell wares shall subject the business license of the flea market operator, owner or promoter to revocation. 
(d)	All persons desiring to obtain a business license as a vendor or for a flea market as a flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall make written application to the city on forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Applicants shall supply such reasonable information as may be required by the city. If the license is for a flea market operation, the information shall include the square footage of sales area within the flea market. An application fee, which is nonrefundable in the event a permit is not issued, shall be submitted with each application to operate a flea market. 
(e)	All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records reasonably related to evaluation of an application, as may be required by the city or an interested city department. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for oral interrogatories any person under the applicant's supervision or control who might have information pertinent to the application, upon the request of the city to do so. Failure to furnish such information or produce persons within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(f)	No application for any license hereunder shall be granted where the application or investigation shows any of the following to exist: 
(1)	The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental entity previously suspended or revoked. 
(2)	The location, if applicable, is not properly zoned. 
(3)	The applicant, as a previous holder of a license as a flea market promoter, operator, owner or vendor, has violated any law, including this article, relating to such business, within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)	No flea market use permit is in effect for the location, if applicable. 
(5)	The applicant has supplied false information either upon his application or in any communication with any official of the city relative to his application. 
(6)	The applicant has failed to pay any fee required under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)	The applicant, during the 12-month period next preceding the filing of the application, has engaged in any deceptive business practice as defined by state or federal law. 
(8)	No original license hereunder shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder owning at least 25 percent of the stock of the corporation, such interest being direct or indirect, beneficial or absolute, or his spouse or manager of the operation, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal or county ordinance except traffic violations. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a municipal or county ordinance or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the city council may, after investigation, if appealed by the applicant, waive the same as a disqualification. 
(9)	The flea market promoter/operator/owner shall fail to show proof of, at the time of application and during existence of the flea market, a general liability insurance policy in the amount of $200,000.00. 
(10)	In addition to the above and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder, and particularly as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.	The location for which the license is sought, if applicable, as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.	If it appears that the applicant's spouse or other person is using the applicant as a guise or "dummy" to obtain a license. 
(g)	All applicants for business licenses for a flea market owner or operator required by this article shall be investigated by the city police department. The department shall report its recommendations to the city council. The applicant for a license to operate a flea market shall be fingerprinted and shall supply such other information as the city police department deems necessary to complete its investigation. 
(h)	Application fees and license fees for business licenses required hereunder shall be set from time to time by the city council. A schedule of the fees shall be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of the city. Licenses shall be issued for the time period selected as allowable upon the schedule of fees. 
(i)	Any license issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously at the place of doing business of the licensee. 
(j)	No license issued hereunder shall be transferrable. 
(k)	Each license for a flea market or flea market promoter, operator or owner shall be for one location only. Flea markets or flea market promoters, operators or owners shall obtain a separate license, paying a separate fee, for each place of business. 
(Code 1985, § 6-202; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-327. Use permit required.
(a)	No flea market shall be operated upon any realty or in or upon any personalty located on any realty unless and until a special use permit for a flea market is granted by the city council. This special use permit for a flea market shall be in addition to all other requirements of the city. 
(b)	Applications for flea market use permits shall be applied for and advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted, as the same may be amended from time to time. Fees for filing and processing of applications shall be in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. A schedule of the fees shall be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of the city. 
(c)	Permits may be issued for such period of time as the city council deems appropriate under the circumstances of each application. 
(d)	Flea market use permits shall be granted only if the city council determines that there will be no significant adverse effect on the surrounding neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located; that no nuisance as defined by state law would result to the general area; that the quiet enjoyment of surrounding property would not be adversely affected; that property values of surrounding property would not be adversely affected. No permit shall be issued where the application or any investigation shows the existence of any of the conditions enumerated in this subsection. 
(Code 1985, § 6-203; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-328. Zoning.
No license or permit shall be issued for a flea market or to a flea market promoter, operator, owner or vendor for a location, nor shall any business of a flea market be conducted, at any location, unless the premises has been zoned heavy industrial under the zoning ordinances of the city. In no event shall a license or permit be issued for flea market operations in which the real property upon which the flea market is to be operated is within 500 feet of a residence. 
(Code 1985, § 6-204; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-329. Business operation restrictions.
(a)	There shall be no on-street parking at any flea market. Each flea market shall provide on-site paved parking at the rate of one space per 100 square feet of sales area. No parking or parking spaces shall be located on or within any road right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of the promoter, operator or other to ensure at all times that no vehicle of any vendor, customer, patron, visitor, guest, invitee or other person frequenting the flea market is parked on any street or road or street or road right-of-way or off the site of the flea market but is parked in a space acceptable under the applicable parking regulations and this article. 
(b)	The flea market owner or operator shall do whatever is necessary, based upon the circumstances of his individual property, to ensure ingress and egress only at curb cuts and locations approved by the appropriate city official. 
(c)	There shall be no outside storage of any kind whatsoever. There shall be no outside sales of any kind whatsoever from any space, stall, shed or area which is not permanently covered by a roof and completely floored by a concrete floor of a minimum thickness of four inches. 
(d)	No sales of any kind whatsoever shall be made from any shed, structure, or building of any kind unless the same meets or exceeds the minimum requirements of all the city codes (for example, building code, fire code, plumbing code, electrical code, etc.). Structures shall require building permits and inspections by the city personnel the same as for other construction. Flea markets shall be classified as "Group M, mercantile occupancy" under the city building code and shall meet all such requirements except that applications for permits for all open structures shall require plans to be submitted which are signed and sealed by an architect or engineer along with design calculations to substantial compliance with code wind uplift requirements. 
(e)	All plumbing shall meet minimum code requirements, except that each flea market shall provide, at a minimum, for use by the public, facilities based on occupant loads as follows: 
(1)	Flea markets located within enclosed structures: The occupant load is determined the same as mercantile occupancy and exit capacity. 
(2)	Flea market located in open air: The occupant load is determined; two people for each table, counter, or booth of no more than 20 square feet. 
(3)	After occupant load is identified, toilet facilities will be provided the same as commercial buildings of multiple tenants. No temporary bathroom facilities shall be permitted. 
(f)	Notwithstanding the provisions of any other article, no person, including, but not limited to, a flea market promoter, operator, owner, employee, manager, or vendor or invitee shall be allowed to camp or reside overnight with or without a recreational vehicle, tent, sleeping bag, vehicle or other structure at a flea market except that the owner may allow a reasonable number of overnight security personnel who may be either the owner or who are agents or employees of the owner. 
(g)	No animal, fish, fowl, or insect of any kind shall be sold, traded, housed, caged, bartered, swapped, or given away at any flea market. 
(h)	No flea market may be operated without the presence of sufficient security guards during all hours of operation. The city council shall determine the required number of security guards necessary at the time it issues the permit or at such time a review of security needs is necessary. 
(Code 1985, § 6-205; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-330. Records required.
(a)	Each flea market promoter, operator or owner shall maintain accurate records for each day of the flea market's operation, of each vendor conducting business from the flea market, which shall include, at a minimum, the name, address, telephone number, business license number, general type of merchandise, and the dates during which the vendor conducted business at the flea market. Such records shall also be maintained on the flea market promoter, operator, or owner if he is also a vendor. 
(b)	Each flea market vendor shall maintain accurate records in such form that annual sales can be determined for business license fee calculation purposes. 
(c)	Any records required hereunder shall be open for inspection by the city or any of its agents or employees at any reasonable time from 11:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. weekdays or at any other time the flea market or a vendor is open for business. 
(Code 1985, § 6-206; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-331. Revocation, suspension, probation of licenses.
(a)	Whenever a person doing business under a license pursuant to this article shall violate any law or ordinance of the United States or of the state or of the city, in pursuance of that business, or when it shall be proven before the mayor that the health, morals, interest and convenience of the public provide due cause for the revocation of that license, the mayor shall suspend that license and report such to the next regular meeting of the city for its ratification or rejection. Should the action of the mayor be sustained by the city, the license shall be revoked, for at least one year, otherwise it shall be restored and remain in full force. 
(b)	Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)	Violation of any of the provisions of this or any other city ordinance; 
(2)	Violation of any laws, ordinances or resolutions regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business; 
(3)	Licensee or permittee has supplied false information to the city either during or following application for a permit or license, regardless of when the city shall have become aware of the same; 
(4)	A licensee or permittee makes any misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication, oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead any party with whom the licensee or permittee deals in pursuance of the licensed or permitted business. The term "misrepresentation of fact," as used herein, shall embrace not only express misrepresentations but also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the licensee's or permittee's conduct, including acts and omissions; 
(5)	If any reason exists which would have been grounds for denial of the original or renewal license or permit. 
(Code 1985, § 6-208; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Sec. 10-332. Violations; penalties.
(a)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or six months imprisonment or both. 
(b)	In addition, every violation of the terms of this article by any person shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued; and such violation is subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state. 
(c)	Any violation of this article shall be subject to injunction. 
(d)	Violations shall also be punished by revocation, suspension or probation of the license or permit. 
(e)	The above remedies are cumulative. Pursuance of any one remedy shall not be deemed an election of remedies and shall not prohibit pursuance of more than one remedy simultaneously. 
(Code 1985, § 6-209; Ord. of 8-6-1990)
 
Secs. 10-333—10-352. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. GAME ROOMS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 10-353. Defined.
The term "game room," as used in this article, means an establishment that allows or provides four or more coin-operated electronic devices or other devices to be used for amusement and entertainment through customer participation in games, including, but not limited to, pinball machines, billiard tables, pool tables, juke boxes, cushion ball, slot cars, air hockey, and electronic video games; or an establishment that derives at least 60 percent of its gross income from the operation of such devices. The entire establishment may be used for other purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 6-181; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-354. Applicability; exemptions.
This article shall not apply to billiard tables or game rooms operated by private industrial concerns, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county, or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Code 1985, § 6-199; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-355. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the city police department, or other constituted authorities to inspect all game rooms in the city for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this article are being observed; and it shall be his and their duty to report all violations promptly to the appropriate authorities and furnish them with such information and assistance as is necessary for the prosecution of such violations. Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license held by the licensee, the license shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 6-198; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Secs. 10-356—10-383. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. LICENSING
 
Sec. 10-384. Required.
No persons shall keep, operate or maintain a game room for use of the public without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1985, § 6-180; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-385. Application for license.
All persons desiring a license to conduct a game room shall make written application to the administrator upon forms to be supplied by the city. The application shall include the general plan and layout of how the area concerned is to be used and shall include parking facilities, proof of liability insurance, inspections and approval by the fire, building, plumbing and electrical inspectors and such other regulated information as may be required by the administrator. The building used must meet all the current city codes upon issuance and subsequent renewals. 
(Code 1985, § 6-188; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-386. Investigation of application.
All applicants shall be investigated by the city police department, and a report made to the business license office before the hearing by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 6-189; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-387. Issuance.
Upon approval of the application by the administrator, a license shall be issued to the designated location upon approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 6-190; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-388. Additional standards for issuance of game room license.
(a)	In the issuance of licenses for the purposes of operating a game room, an application may be denied on the basis of any one of the following standards, in addition to standards previously stated: 
(1)	Where there is evidence that the activity to be conducted involves illegal conduct. 
(2)	Where there is evidence that the location, type of structure or activity could create unreasonable difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)	Where there is evidence that a license for the location would be unreasonably detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(4)	Where there is evidence that a license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles. Within 250 feet of a proposed game room, there must be a minimum of two parking spaces for public use for each game device. 
(5)	Where there is evidence that the conducting of the business creates an unreasonable disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, nuisance, or causes the police to answer an unreasonable number of complaints or conduct extra surveillance of the premises. 
(b)	In addition to the above, and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
(2)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to operate a business of this type, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business. 
(3)	If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to operate a business of this type, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business. 
(4)	If the applicant is a person whose license for the operation of a business of this type has been previously suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1985, § 6-191; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-389. Transferability of license.
A license for the operation of a poolroom shall not be transferable except by application to the license review board in the same form and manner as an original application. 
(Code 1985, § 6-192; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-390. Grounds for refusal of license.
(a)	No license shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation, or any individual having an interest, directly or indirectly, either as owner, partner or principal stockholder, who shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere, within the past ten years immediately prior to filing of the application, for any felony of any state, or of the United States. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(b)	No license shall be issued where there is evidence that the granting of such license will have an adverse effect on the community. 
(Code 1985, § 6-193; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-391. Violations and grounds to revocation of license.
Commission of any of the following acts by a licensee, agent or employee of a game room shall be a violation of law and shall be grounds for revocation of a game room license: 
(1)	Permitting the sale or use of any illicit drug or controlled substance in any form in or around a place of business. 
(2)	Permitting any gambling or betting in the place of business or on the premises. 
(3)	Permitting or committing any violation of state law, county code, or city code. 
(4)	Permitting public drunkenness and disorderly conduct among patrons or employees; 
(5)	In the event of conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude by the licensee of the premises, the conviction shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(Code 1985, § 6-195; Ord. of 3-5-1990; Ord of 4-5-1999, § 2)
 
Secs. 10-392—10-410. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. BUSINESS OPERATION RESTRICTIONS
 
Sec. 10-411. Alcoholic beverages; license, operating requirements.
A game room licensee may sell malt beverages or wine on the premises only under the following conditions: 
(1)	Application and obtaining an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises pursuant to this Code and state law. 
(2)	Compliance with the application and operation requirements applicable to alcoholic beverage licensees. In addition, the alcoholic beverage licensee may be subject to adverse action, suspension or revocation upon a conviction for violation of any ordinance regarding the operation of game rooms as set forth in this division. 
(3)	The monthly revenue of the game room licensee arising from the sale of alcoholic beverages cannot be more than 25 percent of the total monthly revenue of the business operating on the premises. The total monthly revenue shall include, but not be limited to, revenue from the sales of alcoholic beverages, food, merchandise and games. 
(4)	The game room license shall be required to sell food, prepared on the premises, and pursuant to the requirements of section 10-416. 
(Code 1985, § 6-194; Ord. of 3-5-1990; Ord of 4-5-1999, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-412. Gambling.
No dice, cards, dominoes, or other games of chance shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling allowed, in any billiard room or in any other business place operated in connection therewith; and such games as Kelly pool, keno, pigeon pool, star pool, scrub and similar gambling devices are prohibited. No racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited or sold in such place of business. The use of baseball tickers and the posting of results of sporting events is expressly prohibited in game rooms or in any place operated in connection therewith. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of game rooms or any place operated in connection therewith, except that this prohibition shall not apply if such premises or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1985, § 6-182; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-413. Hours of operation.
Licensees for the operation of a billiard room shall be permitted to engage in such activities between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. through 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(Code 1985, § 6-183; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-414. Zoning.
The place of business shall be zoned for CB (central business), NS (neighborhood shopping center), GC (general commercial), and shall have adequate parking facilities so that parking of applicant's customers shall not be upon the street, road right-of-way or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-184; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-415. Clear view of premises required.
It is unlawful for the owner, keeper or manager of any billiard parlor or poolroom in the city to keep any blinds, screens or partitions in the doors or windows of the place. All pool tables and billiard tables shall be so located that they can be seen from the sidewalk by passersby, and the owner, keeper or manager shall not construct any partition or obstruction, paint any door or window or erect any blind which will obstruct the clear view thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 6-185; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-416. Serving food.
If food is served, the applicant shall have a valid health certificate issued by the Cobb County health department before any license can be issued. 
(Code 1985, § 6-186; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-417. Sanitary and toilet facilities.
The place of business shall have restrooms for males and females. Such restrooms must be kept clean, and the premises shall be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the health department or other departments of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-187; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Sec. 10-418. Safety of public areas; loitering, drinking alcohol, etc.
(a)	No person shall remain upon any premises to which the public has access, including, but not limited to, such places as parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(b)	No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage outside the area of the premises designed for the sale and consumption of food and alcoholic beverages, or where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, or use of business for which premises are made available to the public. 
(Code 1985, § 6-196; Ord. of 3-5-1990; Ord of 4-5-1999, § 3)
 
Sec. 10-419. Security guard required.
A security guard shall be required to be on the premises from 7:00 p.m. until closing on Fridays and Saturdays. The security guard must be a Peace Officer's Standards Training (POST) certified, uniformed off-duty police officer of the city or Cobb County. Police officers from another jurisdiction may be used by specific written approval of the city police chief. 
(Code 1985, § 6-197; Ord. of 3-5-1990)
 
Secs. 10-420—10-436. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE X. HOTEL-MOTEL OCCUPANCY EXCISE TAX 
 
Sec. 10-437. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel-motel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. The term "hotel-motel" does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-136; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-438. Imposition and rate of tax.
There is hereby imposed an excise tax in the amount of five percent of the charge to the public, upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room, lodging or accommodations furnished by any person licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel or motel within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-137; Ord. of 4-2-1984; Ord. of 4-4-1988)
 
Sec. 10-439. Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules.
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city, as provided in section 10-438, and renting guest rooms in the city, not exempted under section 10-440, shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(Code 1985, § 6-138; Ord. of 4-2-1984; Ord. of 4-4-1988)
 
Sec. 10-440. Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident. 
(Code 1985, § 6-139; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-441. Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority.
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the community affairs department, on a form provided by the clerk. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed as set forth in section 10-438; but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Code 1985, § 6-140; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-442. Determination, returns and payments.
(a)	Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which this tax shall become effective and on or before the 20th day of every month thereafter. 
(b)	Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the clerk. 
(c)	Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due. 
(Code 1985, § 6-141; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-443. Deficiency determinations.
(a)	Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, the clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information which the clerk has or may acquire. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)	Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)	Notice of determination; service of. The clerk or a designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)	Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1985, § 6-142; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-444. Determination if no return made.
(a)	Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 10-443(c). 
(b)	Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Code 1985, § 6-143; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-445. Administration of article.
(a)	Authority of clerk. The clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)	Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(c)	Examination of records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)	Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(Code 1985, § 6-144; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-446. Violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in this Code. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-145; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Sec. 10-447. Collection of tax.
(a)	Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)	Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)	Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)	Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the clerk, he will have three years from date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the clerk, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Code 1985, § 6-146; Ord. of 4-2-1984)
 
Secs. 10-448—10-477. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XI. INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL PRODUCTS DISTRIBUTORS
 
Sec. 10-478. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous substance means any substance or chemical product for which any one of the following applies: 
(1)	The manufacturer or producer is required to prepare an MSDS for the substance pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation. 
(2)	The substances is listed pursuant to title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)	The substance is listed as radioactive material in 10 CFR 110, Appendix B. 
(4)	The substances is defined in section 46-141(c)(3), (6) and (7). 
(5)	The substance is a toxic pollutant as that term is defined in section 46-174. 
(6)	The substance meets the characteristics of ignitability, corrosiveness, toxicity and reactivity as set forth in 40 CFR 261.21 through 261.24. 
Industrial chemical distributor means any entity whose primary business is the production, for resale or distribution, of chemical products or compounds where either the distributed product, the component chemicals used to produce the distributed property or the byproduct or waste of the process is a hazardous substance. 
License fee means the fee paid to the city to obtain a business license. 
MSDS means a material safety data sheet prepared pursuant to state law or pursuant to the regulations of the federal occupational safety and health administration of the federal department of labor. 
Taxable gross revenue means the gross revenue of an industrial chemical distributor from the business of production or storage, for resale chemical products or compounds within the city limits without reduction for taxes, costs, fees or other expenses. 
Taxable gross revenue fee means the fee paid to the city under this article and in addition to the business license fee. 
(Code 1985, § 14-80; Ord. of 6-1-1992)
 
Sec. 10-479. Licenses and permits, generally.
(a)	In addition to a business license or any other permit required by the city, or other governmental or regulatory entity, all persons now or hereafter engaged as industrial chemical distributors in the city shall annually register their businesses with the city and obtain a permit to operate as an industrial chemical distributor. It is unlawful to engage in such business in the city without a business license, the applicable permit and without paying the fees set forth in this Code. 
(b)	No persons shall engage in the business as an industrial chemical distributor until a permit for the same has been issued by the city. 
(c)	Any industrial chemical distributor shall register with the city and shall apply for renewal of any existing permit and shall pay the annual permit fee not later than March 1 of each calendar year; provided, however, any new business shall register with the city and shall obtain the permit before it commences business. Upon application of renewal, the industrial chemical distributor shall provide any updated information as required by the mayor. 
(Code 1985, § 14-81; Ord. of 6-1-1992)
 
Sec. 10-480. Taxable gross revenue fee schedule and penalties.
(a)	There shall be paid by all industrial chemical distributors a taxable gross revenue fee of five percent of the taxable gross revenue as herein defined. The fee shall be payable monthly and shall be paid no later than the 20th of the month following the month for which such fee is due. No proration pursuant to section 10-8 shall apply to such fees. 
(b)	Failure to pay a license fee or taxable gross revenue fee when due shall result in a penalty of ten percent of the fee or any portion thereof. Any fee not paid on or before the due date shall be considered delinquent and shall from that date bear interest at the rate of one percent per month until paid in full. 
(c)	The city shall retain the right to audit all financial records related to the operations within the city of all licensees hereunder, and all licensees hereby agree to fully cooperate in such audit. Failure to cooperate in an audit shall be grounds for revocation. The following may also be grounds of revocation or denial of a permit: 
(1)	The applicant has failed to obtain any paper, document or approval necessary in pursuance of its business as may be required by an officer, agency or department of the city, state, or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution the county, state or United States. 
(2)	The applicant has supplied false information to the city. 
(3)	The applicant has failed to pay any fee required under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(4)	The applicant, during the 12-month period preceding the filing of this application has engaged in any deceptive business practices. 
(5)	The applicant has failed to comply with the requirements or regulations imposed by this Code or federal or state law or rules with regard to the production, handling, storage or transportation of its products or materials. 
(d)	No permit required under this article shall be transferable under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 14-82; Ord. of 6-1-1992)
 
Secs. 10-481—10-498. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XII. INSURANCE BUSINESSES
 
Sec. 10-499. Company and agency reports.
(a)	Every insurance company doing business within the city shall file with the community affairs department, on forms prescribed by the city, a report showing the names and addresses of its agents representing such company in the city; the location and person in charge of each business location within the city operated and maintained by such company; the classes of insurance written; and such other reasonable information as may be required, and, in addition, shall furnish complete information regarding the premium received, by class, from policies written on risks residing or located within the city. Such reports shall be made over affidavit of an officer of such company. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this Code for any person, including any agents, to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. This report shall be filed at the time of paying the premium tax. 
(b)	The person responsible for each insurance business location shall file with the community affairs department a report, on forms prescribed by the city, showing the address of the business location; the class or classes of insurance written; the names of the persons writing insurance at the location; the names of the companies represented; and such other reasonable information as may be required. This report shall be made over affidavit of the person in charge of that business location. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this Code for any person, including agents, to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. This report shall be filed at the time of paying the premium tax. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1009; Code 1985, § 6-30)
 
Sec. 10-500. Insurer license fees.
The city has levied for each year, an annual license fee of $50.00 upon each insurer doing business within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 10-501, which is operating on behalf of insurers within the city, the city has levied a license fee in the amount as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2031; Code 1985, § 6-31; Ord. of 12-12-1983; Ord. of 8-6-1984, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-1987; Ord. of 2-1-1999 § 1(7))
 
Sec. 10-501. License fee for insurance certain risks at additional business locations.
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional license fee per location in the amount provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department for the year 1987. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2032; Code 1985, § 6-32; Ord. of 12-12-1983; Ord. of 8-6-1984, § 2; Ord. of 4-6-1987)
 
Sec. 10-502. Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed.
The city has levied for the year 1987 and for each year thereafter on independent agencies and brokers an annual license fee per location in the amount provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 10-500. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2033; Code 1985, § 6-33; Ord. of 12-12-1983; Ord. of 8-6-1984, § 3; Ord. of 4-6-1987)
 
Sec. 10-503. Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurance.
The city has levied for each year an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10-500. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2034; Code 1985, § 6-34; Ord. of 12-12-1983)
 
Sec. 10-504. Gross premiums tax on all other insurers.
The city has levied for each year an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1976, § 3-2035; Code 1985, § 6-35; Ord. of 12-12-1983)
 
Sec. 10-505. Due date for license fees.
License fees imposed in sections 10-500 through 10-502 shall be due and payable on February 15 of each year. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2036; Code 1985, § 6-36; Ord. of 12-12-1983)
 
Sec. 10-506. Additional insurance license fee provisions.
The standard industrial classification business license schedule adopted from time to time by the city council shall amend the fees set forth in the previous sections dealing with insurance licenses. 
(Code 1985, § 6-38; Ord. of 4-6-1987)
 
Secs. 10-507—10-535. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIII. LIQUIDATION SALES
 
Sec. 10-536. Special license required.
(a)	No person in the city shall advertise, notice or hold out by advertising in newspapers, magazines, periodicals, billboards, radio, television, handbills, or in any other manner whatsoever that any sale of goods, wares or merchandise is a liquidation sale, including, but not limited to, an insurance, bankrupt, sell-out, bankruptcy, bankrupt stock, mortgage, mortgagee's, insolvent, assignee's, executor's, administrator's, receiver's, trustee's, pledgee's, lease-expiring, removal, retiring, quitting, liquidating, closing-out sale, going-out-of-business sale or other designation of similar name or import within the city, unless and until he shall first have obtained a special license to conduct the sale from the community affairs department as herein provided. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall apply to all such sales whether conducted by the owner, his agent, a consignee or otherwise. 
(Code 1985, § 6-160; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-537. Application and inventory.
At least ten days prior to the commencement of any sale set forth in section 10-536, unless waived by the community affairs department, the person intending to hold the sale shall submit to the community affairs department an application in writing stating the reasons for the sale, an inventory of all goods, wares or merchandise on the premises where the sale is to take place, purchase orders showing the order date and the inventory and any other reasonable details required by the community affairs department as necessary to fully identify the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold at the sale. 
(Code 1985, § 6-161; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-538. Special license fee.
(a)	The license fee for sales covered by this article shall be as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department. The license shall be in addition to any other license fee or business tax being paid by the person to the city. 
(b)	The application shall specify the period of time during which the sale shall continue. This time shall in no case exceed 90 days. A new application and special license shall be procured for each 90-day sale period or portion thereof. No extension shall be made for going-out-of-business sales unless approved by the council. 
(Code 1985, § 6-162; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-539. Inspection of applications restricted.
The community affairs department shall file these applications and shall endorse on each application the date the special license is granted, and when it expires, and shall notify the city manager or his designee of the date of the expiration of the license. 
(Code 1985, § 6-163; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-540. False statements prohibited.
No person shall make any false statement in any application required by this article or in any advertisement or notice of any sales of goods, wares or merchandise covered by this article. 
(Code 1985, § 6-164; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-541. Scope of license.
The licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid only for the inventoried goods, wares or merchandise as provided in section 10-537, and items ordered before obtaining the license required hereunder and items previously ordered, but on back order with the supplier. Additions to such inventory shall cause the goods, wares or merchandise so inventoried to lose their identity, and any such license issued shall be void. The licensee shall retain purchase orders on-site for inspection to determine compliance with this article; failure to do so shall be grounds for the city to revoke the license. 
(Code 1985, § 6-165; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-542. Change in ownership.
If there shall be any change in ownership of the goods, wares or merchandise so inventoried, advertised or noticed for sale, notice thereof shall immediately be given in writing to the community affairs department, and a new license obtained as provided in sections 10-536 and 10-537. 
(Code 1985, § 6-166; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-543. Advertising.
Only those goods, wares or merchandise set out in the inventory provided in section 10-537 shall appear in any advertising of the sale. No such advertising, either directly or indirectly, shall imply that the sale is being held with the approval of any officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 6-167; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-544. Sale of regular stock.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent a merchant from selling his regular stock in trade at any sale mentioned in section 10-536, the inventory of which would not cover his regular stock in trade, provided that the regular stock in trade is separated from the inventoried sale stock, and clearly designated as not being part of the goods, wares or merchandise as advertised in the sale notice. 
(Code 1985, § 6-168; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-545. Exempt sales.
This article shall not apply to public or court officers, or persons acting under the directions of a city, state or federal court, and pawnbrokers selling unredeemed pledges in accordance with the law. 
(Code 1985, § 6-169; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-546. Expiration of license.
At the end of the 90-day period specified in the special license issued hereunder, the special business license and the regular business license of any licensee will stand revoked. 
(Code 1985, § 6-170; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Sec. 10-547. Intent.
The intent of the foregoing sections is to promote and preserve public morals and welfare, economic integrity and fair dealing, and to prevent fraud, deceit and dishonesty, by regulating the conduct of the type sales set out in section 10-537. 
(Code 1985, § 6-171; Ord. of 6-1-1987)
 
Secs. 10-548—10-572. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIV. PAWNBROKERS 
 
Sec. 10-573. License required.
Each pawnbroker doing business within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the community affairs department in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3061; Code 1985, § 6-80)
 
Sec. 10-574. Bond, regulatory fee.
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any applicant unless such applicant shall post a bond in an amount up to $10,000.00, as set by the city, using as criteria for the amount: the permanent residence of the applicant; the length of time applicant has engaged in such a business; applicant's business record in connection therewith; any criminal record applicant may have; and the applicant's record of cooperation with the police. Upon application each applicant shall pay an application fee of $2,000.00 to defray the city's expense in processing the application and conducting an investigation of applicant. Each licensed pawnbroker shall thereafter pay an annual regulatory fee of $2,000.00 to defray city expense of regulating the operation of the pawnbroker. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3068; Code 1985, § 6-81; Ord. of 11-22-1982; Ord. of 11-10-1997, § 1)
 
Sec. 10-575. Review of application.
No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be taken by the city until the police chief has reviewed such application and forwarded a recommendation thereon to the community affairs department in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3062; Code 1985, § 6-82)
 
Sec. 10-576. Convictions limiting issuance.
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3063; Code 1985, § 6-83)
 
Sec. 10-577. Employees.
No person shall be employed in a pawn shop who has not been fingerprinted by the county sheriff's department and had an annual personal identification card issued by the county authorizing employment by a pawnshop. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3069; Code 1985, § 6-84)
 
Sec. 10-578. Hours of operation.
The hours within which a pawnshop may be open for business are from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. each day except Sundays. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3070; Code 1985, § 6-85)
 
Sec. 10-579. Holding period before sale of articles.
All articles pawned or sold to a pawnbroker by the public shall be held for 30 days from the date they are pawned or sold to the pawnbroker. New articles, obtained from licensed wholesalers, may be sold without a waiting period, provided the pawnbroker holds a proper city business license to sell the same at retail. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3071; Code 1985, § 6-86; Ord. of 11-22-1982)
 
Sec. 10-580. Weapons.
It is unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale any kind of metal knucks, dirks, swords-in-cane, spears, bowie knives, switchblade knives, black jacks or any similar weapons. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3065; Code 1985, § 6-87; Ord. of 11-22-1982)
 
Sec. 10-581. Minors.
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist in such business. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3066; Code 1985, § 6-88)
 
Sec. 10-582. Records.
Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall furnish to the police chief each day a list of every article pledged with or sold to the licensee during the previous day, giving a full and accurate description of the article, from whom it was received, the hour of the day received and the right hand index finger print, or other finger if missing that finger, of each customer pawning or selling. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3064; Code 1985, § 6-89)
 
Sec. 10-583. Report of stolen goods.
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with such licensee, or which is sought to be pledged with such licensee, if such licensee shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3067; Code 1985, § 6-90)
 
Sec. 10-584. Vehicle park and pawn business and license.
For a business to be able to obtain such license, it must be located in a zoning area permitting the sale of automobiles and meet the city codes for business establishments with car sales lots. 
(Code 1985, § 6-91; Ord. of 8-7-1989)
 
Secs. 10-585—10-601. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XV. TAXICABS 
 
Sec. 10-602. Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all business licenses or permits issued to taxicab businesses. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3041; Code 1985, § 6-70)
 
Sec. 10-603. Chauffeur's license required.
It is unlawful for any taxicab to be operated by any person who does not hold a valid state chauffeur's license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3042; Code 1985, § 6-71)
 
Sec. 10-604. Insurance required.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab without first obtaining insurance for personal injury and property damage in the respective limits of $10,000.00 for personal injury, $20,000.00 per accident and $5,000.00 property damage. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3043; Code 1985, § 6-72)
 
Sec. 10-605. Prior convictions.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab within the city who has a prior record of conviction, guilty plea or nolo contendere plea, for driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages within the preceding five years. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3044; Code 1985, § 6-73)
 
Sec. 10-606. Permit number.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab within the city without first obtaining a permit number for each taxicab from the community affairs department, to be displayed on the right lower corner of the rear windshield of each taxicab; as a condition of obtaining a permit number, the applicant must exhibit to the clerk a chauffeur's license as above provided and insurance as above provided and must submit to a record investigation by the police chief to determine whether or not there are any previous convictions for driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages or any other moving traffic violation. If such a person has an accumulation of points under the motor vehicle laws of the state equal to five or more, that shall be grounds for the denial of such permit. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3045; Code 1985, § 6-74)
 
Sec. 10-607. Driver registration.
Each driver of a taxicab shall register with the community affairs department in addition to the registration of the individual taxicabs and be subject to police investigation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3046; Code 1985, § 6-75)
 
Sec. 10-608. Penalties.
If any taxicab owner or driver is found to be in violation of this article, such person shall be subject to suspension of the business license and permits, and punishment as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3047; Code 1985, § 6-76)
 
Chapter 12 CEMETERIES 
 
Sec. 12-1. Rules for interment.
There shall be no interment in a municipal cemetery unless: 
(1)	The person arranging for the burial of the deceased has a right to such use of the lot; 
(2)	The lot is not used beyond its capacity; 
(3)	A burial vault is used in the grave for such interment; and 
(4)	Proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the grave. 
It shall be the ultimate responsibility of the user, owner, funeral home, vault company, etc., to ensure that interment is entirely within the proper cemetery lot and does not violate the rules listed above. The city shall not bear any responsibility for locating the site of an interment. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5001; Code 1985, § 7-1; Ord. of 5-2-1988; Ord. of 3-4-1991)
 
Sec. 12-2. Records of lot ownership, etc.
The city shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all municipal cemetery lots, of the burial capacity of each lot, sold and unsold, of the location of each grave and the names of the persons buried therein and the date of burial of each. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5002; Code 1985, § 7-2)
 
Sec. 12-3. Digging of graves.
Any person digging graves in a municipal cemetery must remove all unused or surplus dirt, rocks and other materials from the cemetery so as to leave the lots, walks and roads in good condition. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5003; Code 1985, § 7-3)
 
Sec. 12-4. Damage to graves or cemetery; permit to exhume body, trespassing in cemetery.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to in any way damage or disturb any grave, ornaments, or other structures in a municipal cemetery. 
(b)	No body shall be exhumed without a permit from the city. 
(c)	No persons shall be permitted in or on the city cemetery including grave sites or walkways, in other than daylight hours. Violators shall be deemed to be trespassing on city property. 
(d)	Violation of the provisions of this section shall subject the violator to punishment pursuant to section 1-9. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5004; Code 1985, § 7-4; Ord. of 2-7-1994)
State law reference(s)—Illegal removal of body, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-21-43, 31-21-44; municipal permit, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
 
Sec. 12-5. No burial in corporate limits except in cemetery.
No person shall bury, or cause to be buried, any dead body in any place within the corporate limits of the city, other than in a public cemetery, or other lawful burying ground, without permission of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5005; Code 1985, § 7-5)
 
Chapter 14 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES
 
Sec. 14-1. County emergency plan adopted.
The city has adopted the Cobb County Emergency Management Resolution, a copy of which may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Chapter 16 ENVIRONMENT
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 16-1—16-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. REDEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE FOR BLIGHTED PROPERTIES
 
Sec. 16-19. Intent and purpose.
(a)	The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including, but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
(b)	In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, the city council, in exercise of powers granted to municipal corporations under O.C.G.A. ch. 36-61, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
(c)	In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-01, § 1(13-39), 3-7-2016)
 
Sec. 16-20. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Blighted property, blighted, orblight means: 
(1)	Unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use; 
(2)	Not compliant with applicable codes; 
(3)	Vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(4)	A public health or safety endangerment as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment through an urban area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or through local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, which is established by the city council for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Person means such individuals, partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
Public officer means the building official or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the mayor and council to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-01, § 1(13-40), 3-7-2016)
 
Sec. 16-21. Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property.
(a)	There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate in the city, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)	Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)	Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the finance director and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-01, § 1(13-41), 3-7-2016)
 
Sec. 16-22. Identification of blighted property.
(a)	In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)	An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed a request may be made by a city official or a citizen of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, the inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in this section, or the public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. The public officer shall present findings to the condemnation board 
(2)	A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, or fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)	Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)	The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the persons shown on the most recent tax digest of Cobb County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the persons known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)	The written notice given to the persons chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the persons is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of request of hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)	Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the persons requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the Marietta Daily Journal, or other designated legal publication in Cobb County, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)	At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the tax commissioner of Cobb County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)	Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the superior court of Cobb County for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-01, § 1(13-42), 3-7-2016)
 
Sec. 16-23. Remediation or redevelopment.
(a)	A property owner or person who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)	Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's community affairs director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)	Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to city nuisance regulations. 
(b)	Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the persons chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax commissioner of the county. 
(c)	All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the persons chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the community affairs director, and contain the following: 
(1)	The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)	The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)	On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)	The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)	The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)	Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-01, § 1(13-43), 3-7-2016)
 
Sec. 16-24. Decrease of tax rate.
(a)	Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer in this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the city or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the persons chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)	In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the persons chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-01, § 1(13-44), 3-7-2016)
 
Sec. 16-25. Notice to finance department.
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the finance department of the city in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Cobb County tax assessor's office. The public officer shall cooperate with the finance department to ensure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-01, § 1(13-45), 3-7-2016)
 
Secs. 16-26—16-53. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. FLOOD PREVENTION AND DAMAGE CONTROL
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 16-54. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structureor facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on the city's FIRM with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to average depth of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the city's FIRM. 
Baseflood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Basefloodelevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building means a structure as defined in this section. 
CLOMA means conditional letter of map amendment. 
CLOMR means conditional letter of map revision. 
Criticalfacility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. The term "critical facility" includes: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevatedbuilding means a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existingconstruction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before August 30, 1974. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 30, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the city, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard or risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Floodplain or floodpronearea means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionallydependentuse means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes on docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but not including long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditionsflood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. The term "future-conditions flood" is also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on the city's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historicstructure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Federal Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
LOMR means letter of map revision. 
Lowestfloor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufacturedhome means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a mobile home regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on the city's FIRM are referenced. The term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Newconstruction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after August 30, 1974. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 30, 1974. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreationalvehicle means a vehicle that is built on a chassis, has 400 square feet or less of area when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck, and is not designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitiveloss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 12-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Startofconstruction includes substantial improvement, and is the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank) that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantialdamage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term "substantial damage" also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantialimprovement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure taking place during a 12-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term "substantial improvement" also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantiallyimprovedexisting manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-22)
 
Sec. 16-55. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)	Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)	Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-21.1)
 
Sec. 16-56. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-21.2)
 
Sec. 16-57. Designation of administrator; duties.
(a)	The floodplain administrator is appointed to administer and implements the provisions of this article. The duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)	Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344; 
(3)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of subsections (a)(4) and (5) of this section; 
(4)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)	When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, review the design and operation and maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)	Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA; 
(8)	Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the state department of natural resources and FEMA; and 
(9)	Review variance applications and make recommendations to the city board of variance and zoning appeals. 
(b)	When interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(c)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, §§ 5-21.3, 5-23)
 
Sec. 16-58. Source documents.
(a)	For the purpose of defining and determining areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard, areas of shallow flooding, base flood elevations, floodplains, floodways, future-conditions flood elevations, future-conditions floodplains, potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this article, the following documents and sources shall apply: 
(1)	The FIS for the city dated August 18, 1992, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)	Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and floodprone areas including: 
a.	Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; and 
b.	Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared by utilizing a FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city stormwater management department. 
(3)	Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas including: 
a.	Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.	Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared by utilizing a FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city stormwater management department. 
(b)	The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the office of the city's department of public works. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-21.4)
 
Sec. 16-59. Compatibility with other regulations.
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other article, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-21.5)
 
Sec. 16-60. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-21.7)
 
Sec. 16-61. Violation.
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-22)
 
Secs. 16-62—16-78. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PLANS, PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
 
Sec. 16-79. Permit application requirements.
(a)	No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this division prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)	Unless specifically excluded by this division, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city stormwater management office a permit application on a form provided by the city stormwater management office for that purpose. 
(c)	No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this division. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-23.1)
 
Sec. 16-80. Floodplain management and damage prevention plan.
(a)	An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management and flood damage prevention plan which shall include the following items: 
(1)	Site plan drawn to scale, which includes, but is not limited to: 
a.	Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.	For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.	Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.	Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.	Proposed grading plan; 
f.	Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.	Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.	If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.	Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)	Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.	Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in division 3 of this article; 
d.	For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in division 3 of this article; and 
e.	Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
(3)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)	Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)	Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; including, but not limited to, permits required by section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344; and 
(6)	All appropriate certifications required under this division. 
(b)	The approved floodplain management and flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-23.2)
 
Sec. 16-81. Construction stage submittal requirements.
(a)	For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management and flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. 
(b)	A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. 
(c)	When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by the same using FEMA's floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation and maintenance plan to ensure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
(d)	Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-23.3)
 
Secs. 16-82—16-105. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
 
Sec. 16-106. Criteria for establishing boundaries and elevations.
(a)	Studied A zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city stormwater management office. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city stormwater management office, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city stormwater management office. 
(b)	The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city stormwater management office. If floodway data is not available from the city stormwater management office, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city stormwater management office. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, §§ 5-24.1, 5-24.2)
 
Sec. 16-107. Development prohibited in specified areas.
No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)	Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)	Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)	Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)	Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-24.3(1))
 
Sec. 16-108. Conditions for development generally.
Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions allowed under section 16-107 shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)	Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)	Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
(3)	Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)	Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 16-109; 
(5)	Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)	Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a CLOMR or CLOMA, whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city stormwater management office using FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a LOMR. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-24.3(2))
 
Sec. 16-109. Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments.
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a currently licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city stormwater management office prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)	Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA approved methodology approved by the city stormwater management office. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)	Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)	The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-24.4)
 
Sec. 16-110. Floodway encroachments.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) of this section; 
(2)	Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)	If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city stormwater management office until an affirmative CLOMR is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the city stormwater management office. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-24.5)
 
Sec. 16-111. Maintenance requirements.
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The city stormwater management office may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city stormwater management office. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-24.6)
 
Secs. 16-112—16-135. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
 
Sec. 16-136. Standards applicable to all flood hazard areas.
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 have been met. 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(3)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)	New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)	All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot abovegrade; and 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.	So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this division, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(7)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(8)	All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city stormwater management office to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(9)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(10)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(11)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding. 
(12)	Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding. 
(13)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this division, is undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(14)	If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations across the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(15)	When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future-conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this division. 
(16)	Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.	All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the floodprone areas; 
b.	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.	Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.1)
 
Sec. 16-137. Increased cost of compliance.
(a)	The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires the city to conduct assessments for substantial damage following a flooding event. A building is considered to be substantially damaged when damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(b)	If a substantially damaged building is rebuilt in violation of this division including not properly elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential buildings only), flood insurance will be significantly higher. In addition, the property owner will not be eligible for an increased cost of compliance claim payment. The NFIP has implemented a new coverage called increased cost of compliance, which is an endorsement to the standard flood insurance policy. It applies to all new and renewed flood insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. Structures that have suffered substantial damage from flooding may be required to elevate, demolish, relocate, or floodproof (nonresidential buildings only) the damaged structure upon rebuilding. Through increased cost of compliance coverage, funds are available to the property owner to pay for flood protection measures that meet NFIP standards. 
(c)	Property owners may file for increased cost of compliance coverage in two instances: 
(1)	If the city determines that the home or business is damaged by flood two times within a 12-year period to the point that repairs will cost 50 percent or more of the building's pre-damaged market value. This is substantial damage. 
(2)	If the city determines that the home or business was damaged by a flood two times within a 12-year period, where the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of its market value at the time of each flood event. This is repetitive damage. Additionally, there must have been flood insurance claim payments for each of the two flood losses. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.2)
 
Sec. 16-138. Protection of floodplain storage capacity.
Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for development, the volume of space occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely to the watercourse. No area below the waterline of a pond or other body of water can be credited as a compensating excavation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.3)
 
Sec. 16-139. Structures within the future-conditions floodplain.
(a)	Residential buildings. The following provisions, in addition to those in section 16-136, shall apply to residential buildings: 
(1)	New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatic equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-136(5)a. 
(2)	Substantialimprovements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-136(5)a. 
(b)	Nonresidential buildings. The following provisions, in addition to those in section 16-136, shall apply to nonresidential buildings: 
(1)	Newconstruction. New construction of principal nonresidential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 have been met. If the requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 16-136(5)a. New construction that has met the requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the floodplain administrator using FEMA's floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation and maintenance plan. 
(2)	Substantialimprovements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the floodplain administrator to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest flood, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, opening sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-136(5)a. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain administrator using FEMA's floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation and maintenance plan. 
(c)	Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (for example, barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities, and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with section 16-136(5)a and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(d)	Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(2)	Meet all the requirements for residential buildings, substantial improvements (division 3 of this article), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(e)	Manufacturedhomes. The following provisions apply to manufactured homes: 
(1)	New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 16-107 through 16-110 have been met. If all of the requirements of section 16-107 through 16-110 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section16-136(5)a. 
(2)	Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
a.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
b.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(3)	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with the standards of section 16-136(7). 
(f)	Criticalfacilities. New critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.4)
 
Sec. 16-140. Structures adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain.
(a)	Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least four feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-136(5)a. 
(b)	Nonresidentialbuildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 16-136(5)a. Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.5)
 
Sec. 16-141. Areas with no base flood data (A zones).
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), the floodplain administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this division. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for in floodprone enclosures in accordance with section16-136(5)a. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.6)
 
Sec. 16-142. Areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet aboveground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section16-136(5)a; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice and shall provide such certification to the floodplain administrator using FEMA's floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.7)
 
Sec. 16-143. Subdivision of land.
All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. Residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 16-80(a)(2). 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-25.8)
 
Secs. 16-144—16-169. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 16-170. Variance and appeal criteria and procedure.
(a)	Applicability. The variance and appeal procedure in this division shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Variances requests; notice to parties. Requests for variances from the requirements of this division shall be submitted to the city stormwater management office. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city stormwater management office. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(c)	Time of seeking variance. Variances shall not be issued after the fact. 
(d)	Requesting party to provide information as necessary. Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the city stormwater management office and the board of variance and zoning appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(e)	Variance criteria. The provisions of this division are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. A variance shall be issued only when there is a finding of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. Variances shall be further limited as follows: 
(1)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(2)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(3)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(f)	Standards for review of variance requests. In reviewing such requests, the city stormwater management office and board of variance and zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(g)	Additional conditions may be imposed on variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this division, the city stormwater management office and the board of variance and zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this division. 
(h)	Notice of cost of flood insurance. Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
(i)	Appeal to board of variance and zoning appeals; notice to parties. Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the board of variance and zoning appeals as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the board of variance and zoning appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(j)	Judicial appeal. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of variance and zoning appeals may appeal such decision to the superior court of Cobb County or Douglas County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(k)	Administrator to maintain records and report variances. The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-28)
 
Sec. 16-171. Enforcement authorized; scope and effect; alternative remedies.
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this division or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-29)
 
Sec. 16-172. Notice of violation; notice of failure to remedy condition as directed in notice of violation.
(a)	If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city stormwater management office by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after notice. 
(b)	In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the penalties and remedies provided in section 16-173 may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
(c)	Before taking any of the actions or imposing any of the penalties provided in section 16-173, the city stormwater management office shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, §§ 5-29.1, 5-29.2)
 
Sec. 16-173. Penalties and other remedies.
In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city stormwater management office may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)	Stop work order. The city stormwater management office may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation. 
(2)	Denial of certificate of occupancy. The city stormwater management office may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city stormwater management office may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city stormwater management office may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city stormwater management office shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city stormwater management office may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city stormwater management office may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-4-2013, § 5-29.3)
 
Secs. 16-174—16-199. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
 
Sec. 16-200. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. The term "cut" is also known as excavation. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals, shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the state environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Cobb County soil and water conservation district. 
DNR means the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
EPD orthe division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes as a minimum protection at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 16-202(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). The term "final stabilization" applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 16-201(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the city. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA), O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et. seq., means a state legislative act that addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by the EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by the EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party that has operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications or day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Phase orphased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Cobb County soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and under O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-6. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures mean measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term "wetlands" generally includes swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 1985, § 5-47; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-47)
 
Sec. 16-201. Exemptions and variances.
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the city public works department; 
(5)	Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 16-202(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the Federal Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city public works department from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1) through (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city public works department and shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the state public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city public works department shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Code 1985, § 5-48; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-48)
 
Sec. 16-202. Minimum requirements using best management practices.
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/best management practices. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the city public works department or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30 for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by the city public works department or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The city public works department may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)	Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table yearround; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent the city public works department from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)	The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 1985, § 5-49; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-49)
 
Sec. 16-203. Application and permit process.
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal of the general development plans. The city public works department shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the city's zoning, stormwater management, subdivision, and flood damage prevention regulations, this article and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements
(1)	No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city public works department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to city public works department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. The plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 16-202(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R. 391-3-7.10. 
(3)	A fee, as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department, shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city public works department shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 16-202(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(7) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The city public works department with the plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the city public works department with the plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)	The city public works department may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city public works department may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the city public works department with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements.
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 16-202(b) and (c) or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for a site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits.
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city public works department of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by city public works department unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and city public works department has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 16-202(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land disturbing activities by the city shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the city. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city public works department as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)	The city public works department may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Code 1985, § 5-50; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-50)
 
Sec. 16-204. Inspection and enforcement.
(a)	The city public works department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city public works department shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The city public works department must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7. 
(c)	The city public works department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)	The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. 
(Code 1985, § 5-51; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-51)
 
Sec. 16-205. Penalties and incentives.
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining the permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)	Stop work orders. The city public works department may issue stop work orders as follows: 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the city public works department shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the city public works department shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the city public works department shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the city public works department shall issue an immediate stop work order; 
(3)	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city public works department or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city public works department or by the director or his designee; and 
(5)	All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 16-203(b)(7) the city public works department may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 1985, § 5-52; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-52)
 
Sec. 16-206. Education and certification.
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of the entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in the paragraph. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-53)
 
Sec. 16-207. Administrative appeal judicial review.
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city public works department upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council of the city within 30 days after receipt by the city public works department of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the city public works department, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Cobb County. 
(Code 1985, § 5-53; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-54)
 
Sec. 16-208. Liability.
(a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city public works department or the district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)	The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)	No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, the Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved hereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Code 1985, § 5-54; Ord. of 11-5-2001; Ord. of 9-12-2016, § 5-55)
 
Secs. 16-209—16-239. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION
 
Sec. 16-240. Findings and purposes.
(a)	The mayor and city council has found that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)	Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)	Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)	Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)	Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)	Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)	Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)	Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)	Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)	Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)	Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)	Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)	It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources and minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-92)
 
Sec. 16-241. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. The term "impervious cover" includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area orstream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established under section 16-243(a)(1) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)	The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)	A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)	Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-93)
 
Sec. 16-242. Applicability.
(a)	Generally. This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 16-241. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(b)	Preexisting activities. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)	Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)	Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)	Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)	Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)	Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)	Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.	A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.	Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.	Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.	Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.	Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.	Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)	Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(3)	Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)	Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including, but not limited to, manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)	Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the (review and permitting authority) on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the (review and permitting authority) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)	Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(d)	Development within established buffer or impervious cover within a setback. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 16-243(b). 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-94)
 
Sec. 16-243. Land development requirements.
(a)	Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)	An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)	No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)	Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the mayor and city council may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)	Except as provided above, the mayor and city council shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the mayor and city council shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
a.	Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
1.	When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions, existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
2.	Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this article would create an extreme hardship. 
b.	Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)	At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.	A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.	A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.	A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.	Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.	At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.	A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.	A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.	Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)	The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.	The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.	The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.	The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.	Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.	The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.	Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-95)
 
Sec. 16-244. Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements.
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-96)
 
Sec. 16-245. Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties.
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)	A site plan showing: 
a.	The location of all streams on the property; 
b.	Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.	Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.	Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.	Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)	A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)	Any other documentation that the (review and permitting authority) may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone regulations are addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-97)
 
Sec. 16-246. Responsibility.
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-98)
 
Sec. 16-247. Inspection.
(a)	The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-99)
 
Sec. 16-248. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-100)
 
Sec. 16-249. Notice of violation.
If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-100.1)
 
Sec. 16-250. Penalties.
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)	Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation. 
(2)	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)	Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-100.2)
 
Sec. 16-251. Administrative appeal and judicial review.
(a)	Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of city, may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the public works director of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and city council of the city within 15 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Cobb County. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(2), § 5-101)
 
Secs. 16-252—16-280. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. SWEETWATER CREEK WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED
 
Sec. 16-281. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances. Specific buffer uses may be approved by the city consistent with these criteria. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas specified in the article. 
Impervious surface means manmade structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Perennial stream means a stream, which flows through the whole year as indicated on a U.S. Government Survey Quadrangle Map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoirs means a governmental owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmental owned public drinking water systems. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmental owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed protection plan means the land use plan prepared and adopted by local governments for the protection of the quality of drinking water obtained from the watershed. 
(Code 1985, § 14-96; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 6)
 
Sec. 16-282. Inclusions; findings of fact.
(a)	The watershed protection district shall overlay other zoning districts so that all land lying within the watershed protection districts shall also be included in the underlying district. Each parcel of land within the watershed protection district shall be subject to the provisions, regulations, and restrictions of both the watershed protection district and its underlying district. In the event of a conflict or discrepancy between the requirements of the watershed protection overlay and the underlying district, the more stringent shall apply. 
(b)	In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the Sweetwater Creek watershed, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicant, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated, expensive in rendering water resources unusable. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(Code 1985, § 14-87; Ord. of 6-1-1998)
 
Sec. 16-283. Purposes.
The purpose of the water supply watershed protection district regulation is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply for the cityof East Point, Georgia. Also, to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediments to the water supply and maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds. 
(Code 1985, § 14-88; Ord. of 6-1-1998)
 
Sec. 16-284. District delineation.
The protected water supply watershed protection districts are designated and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the public water supply intake or water supply reservoir. The boundaries of these districts are defined by the ridge lines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes. The area encompassed by the official city limits boundary of the city is with a seven-mile radius upstream of the water supply intake for the cityof East Point, Georgia. The entire area delineated by the city limits is incorporated and made a part of this article as a protected watershed. 
(Code 1985, § 14-89; Ord. of 6-1-1998)
 
Sec. 16-285. Permitted uses.
All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts under city zoning regulations except for those listed in prohibited uses below, are permitted in the water supply watershed protection district, subject to the following conditions and standards. The water supply watershed protection district shall be defined and described as follows: 
(1)	Natural buffer requirement.
a.	A natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet for residential and 100 feet for commercial on both sides of a perennial stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.	A natural buffer shall be maintained of 150 feet from the boundary of an existing or future water supply reservoir. 
(2)	Impervious surface limitations.
a.	Within a seven mile radius of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150 feet setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream bank. 
b.	Septic tanks and the drain fields of septic tanks are prohibited in the setback areas of subsection (2)a of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 14-90; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 1)
 
Sec. 16-286. Exemptions.
The following uses are exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback requirements if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
(1)	Utilities.
a.	Utilities shall be located as far as reasonably possible from the stream bank and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
b.	Utilities shall be installed and maintained without changing the integrity of the buffer and setback areas, as much as possible. 
(2)	Forestry and agricultural activities.
a.	Agricultural activities involving the planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to the best management practices established by the state department of agriculture. 
b.	Silviculture activities must conform to the best management practices established by the state forestry commission. 
(3)	Existing use. Any land use within the Sweetwater Creek water supply watershed existing prior to the adoption of regulations by the city implementing this plan is exempt. Any undeveloped lot which is part of a subdivision plat recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations by the city implementing this article, shall also be exempted from these provisions and provided such activities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream as authorized by state department of natural resources Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 391-3-16. 
(Code 1985, § 14-91; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 2)
 
Sec. 16-287. Site plan requirements.
(a)	Except for the exemptions listed below all forms of development within the watershed protection district shall be required to have a site plan submitted and approved according to this article before any rezoning requests or building permits may be approved or any land disturbing activity may take place. Each site plan submitted shall include the following: 
(1)	A site plan drawn to scale and showing all planned improvements including width, depth, and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses, drainageways, water, wastewater, and stormwater facilities, and utility installations. 
(2)	Location, dimensions, and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)	The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest back of an affected perennial stream or body of water. 
(4)	Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 100 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)	Erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(6)	Any facility in the process of expanding shall provide location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous toxic waste. 
(b)	Any noncompliance to this article shall be stated and addressed on the site plan. 
(Code 1985, § 14-92; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 3)
 
Sec. 16-288. Exemptions from site plan requirement.
Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development and construction of minor structures such as sheds or additions to single-family residences are exempt from the site plan requirements of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 14-94; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 5)
 
Sec. 16-289. Activity compliance.
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of the site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, results in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of vegetation during construction, or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building officials for the city. Minor changes such as realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Code 1985, § 14-93; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 4)
 
Sec. 16-290. Prohibited uses.
All sanitary landfills with or without synthetic liners are leachate collection systems and any facility using hazardous materials are prohibited uses within the water supply watershed protection district. 
(Code 1985, § 14-95; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 6)
 
Sec. 16-291. Penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be liable for a monetary penalty of $250.00 per day, per violation, but not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, per violation, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1985, § 14-97; Ord. of 6-1-1998, § 7)
 
Chapter 18 FIRE PREVENTION, PROTECTION AND CONTROL 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 18-1. Fire lanes; authority to prevent blocking of private ways and alleys.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire lane means an area designated by the fire chief or his designee, which provides access for fire department vehicles to buildings, fire connections and fire hydrants. The term "fire lane" includes all alleys, including private alleys, private ways or driveways, where parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with ingress or egress of fire department vehicles and equipment. 
Property owner means each person, possessing any estate or leasehold right in the property being designated as a fire lane. 
(b)	Authority. The fire chief or his designee may properly designate fire lanes and prevent blocking of any private alley, private way or driveway in the city by the parking of automobiles or otherwise. This authority applies equally to new and existing structures and property. 
(c)	Posting of signs. The property owner is required to post signs meeting the following criteria in areas designated as fire lanes: 
(1)	Signs shall read: "No Parking—Fire Lane." 
(2)	Signs must meet design specifications furnished by the fire department. 
(3)	One sign shall be posted at the beginning of the fire lane and one at the end of the fire lane as established by the fire chief or his designee and at intervals not more than 50 feet apart. 
(4)	Signs posted shall not be more than four feet from the edge of the curb and shall be visible from both directions of the driving surface. 
(d)	Painting of curbs. The fire chief or his designee may order curbs adjacent to a fire lane to be painted red. 
(e)	Parking in fire lane. No person shall park any motor vehicle or place any other property in a fire lane; however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(f)	Obstructing posted private alley or driveway. Any person who shall park any vehicles or place any other property in any private alley, private way or driveway which has been posted in accordance with this section and any person owning or occupying property abutting the private alley, private way or driveway who shall cause or permit the placing of anything therein which impede or block the passage of fire trucks and equipment shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(g)	Enforcement officials. Fire officials, police officers, the sheriff and deputy sheriffs, or other duly authorized law enforcement officials shall have the authority for enforcement of fire lanes. Fire officials, police officers, the sheriff or deputy sheriffs or other duly authorized officials may cause to be removed to the nearest authorized place of impound or other place of safety any unattended vehicle or other property left standing in violation of this section. 
(h)	Summons, notice of violation for vehicles. Enforcement of this section shall be through an action in municipal court by the issuance of a summons, which notice shall be given by placing a parking citation on the vehicles or by issuing a uniform traffic citation to the owner or operator who parked the vehicle in violation of this section. For the purpose of such action, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of a vehicle is in control or possession thereof. A person parking a vehicle in violation of this section or the owner thereof who allows such vehicle to be parked in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(i)	Summons, notice of violation for real property owners. When a fire official finds an owner of real property in violation of this section, notice of the violation shall be given in person or by certified mail to the address where the violation has occurred and where personal service has not been given to the owner's address listed on the tax records of the county if different from the address of the violation. The owner shall be given a reasonable time to come into compliance but not more than 30 days from the date of notice. It shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided for in section 1-9 for a real property owner to fail to comply with the requirements of this section after notice and an opportunity to correct the violation. Enforcement of this section shall be in the municipal court by summons issued by any fire official having knowledge of the violation. 
(Ord. of 4-6-2015(3), § 1)
 
Sec. 18-2. Fires or barbecues on balconies or patios.
(a)	Open flame prohibited. In any structure containing three or more dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain, or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, or on any ground level, or any ground floor patio within 15 feet of a structure. 
(b)	Fuel storage prohibited. No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch, or other similar heating or lighting chemical device in the locations designated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	Exception. Listed electric or gas-fired barbecue grills that are permanently mounted and wired or plumbed to the building's gas supply or electrical supply system and that maintains a minimum clearance of 18 inches on all sides, unless listed for lesser clearances, may be installed on balconies and patios when approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. of 4-6-2015(2), § 1)
 
Sec. 18-3. Hazardous materials routes.
(a)	As used herein, the phrase "hazardous materials access route" means any street which has been designated pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of providing vehicular access from the primary hazardous material route to locations within the city where hazardous materials are used, produced or stored. 
(b)	Primary hazardous material routes within the city limits may be established by resolution of the city council. The initial primary hazardous material routes within the city as of the enactment of this Code shall be as follows: 
(1)	Eastbound and westbound going from or to I-20 through traffic shall use Hwy. 278. 
(2)	Eastbound and westbound going from or to I-285 through traffic shall use Hwy. 78. 
(c)	Every motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a hazardous materials placard, shall be operated with the city only on the primary hazardous materials route established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	Every operator of a motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a hazardous material placard, who does not know the primary hazardous material route of the city or the hazardous material access route to and from the location in the city from which he is coming or to which he is destined, shall request directions concerning said routes from the hazardous material coordinator before operating said vehicle in the city. 
(e)	Procedures for being assigned a hazardous materials access route: any person who uses, produces or stores hazardous materials at a location within the city, or otherwise requires a hazardous materials route within the city, shall be assigned a hazardous materials transportation route after he has submitted a request for such a route to the city hazardous materials coordinator on a form provided by the fire department. 
(f)	The hazardous materials coordinator shall review and analyze hazardous materials handling practices by all persons who handle hazardous materials to determine their potential impact on public health and the environment and may propose regulations designating approved handling practices. 
(g)	In the event of breakdown of a vehicle carrying hazardous materials within the city accompanies by the spill or escape of such material unto city streets or private property, the person, firm, or corporation transporting such material as well as the owner and consignee of the material shall be jointly and severally responsible for its physical containments, recover and removal and for any costs incurred by the city or other responsible persons or agencies acting with the same purpose of containment recovery and removal from the environment. 
(Ord. of 4-6-2015(1), § 1)
 
Secs. 18-4—18-27. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 18-28. Rules and regulations authorized.
The fire chief is empowered to draw up appropriate written rules and regulations for the conduct thereof and submit them for approval to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2007; Code 1985, § 12-23)
 
Sec. 18-29. Authority of fire chief at fires.
The fire chief or the chief's designee shall have full control over all fire apparatus and all members of the fire department in service at any fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or designee to supervise the fire department while performing such public duty in fire suppression; to give general and specific directions as to the manner of fire suppression, the use of equipment and apparatus, and the specific duties and assignments of the various members of the fire department in attendance at a fire. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2008; Code 1985, § 12-24)
 
Sec. 18-30. Scope of control at fires; police protection.
The fire chief or the chief's designee shall, in all cases of fire and fire alarms, have full control and occupy sufficient ground or space necessary for the operation of all fire companies at any fire, and for the protection of life and property, and shall be protected in the discharge of official duties by the police officers of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2009; Code 1985, § 12-25)
 
Sec. 18-31. Records of fires.
The fire chief or the chief's designee shall make and keep, immediately after the occurrence of any fire, a permanent record of the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire and the damages resulting therefrom immediately after the occurrence of any fire. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2010; Code 1985, § 12-26)
 
Sec. 18-32. Right-of-way on roads.
The fire department and its various apparatus, when responding to any incident, shall have the right-of-way over the streets, lanes, and ways of the city to the exclusion of all persons, vehicles, and railroad trains. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2014; Code 1985, § 12-27)
 
Sec. 18-33. Police powers of firefighters.
The fire chief and firefighters of the city are hereby granted the power and authority to exercise all necessary and desirable police powers in the performance of their duties as firefighters and fire chief to the same extent as if they were police officers of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2015; Code 1985, § 12-28)
 
Sec. 18-34. Fire drills.
The fire chief or his designee shall have the authority to conduct fire drills in all public buildings located within the city limits. Public buildings shall include, but not be limited to, all buildings owned by the city or county and any privately-owned structure at the request of the occupant or if the fire chief deems it necessary. The principal or the principal's designee of any school shall be notified before any drill is held. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2016; Code 1985, § 12-29)
 
Secs. 18-35—18-56. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. FIRE REGULATIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 18-57. Adopted standard codes.
In section 8-2, the city has adopted certain standard codes which adoption is made part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2005)
 
Sec. 18-58. Open burning.
Open burning shall only be permitted in certain instances as set forth in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R. 391-3-1.02, as they may be amended from time to time, and which are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Complete regulations may be found at https://epd.georgia.gov/air-protection-branch/open-burning-rules-georgia (open burning regulations). As established in the regulations, between May 1 and September 30, all open burning is prohibited. Also, and in addition to state rules, any open burn shall be extinguished no later than 6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1985, § 12-9; Ord. of 3-4-1985; Ord. of 9-7-1990; Ord. of 5-6-1996)
 
Sec. 18-59. Obstruction of or tamping with fire hydrants and apparatus.
(a)	No person shall place ashes, cinders, dirt, rubbish, building material or any other material around or in close proximity to any fire hydrant so as to cause hindrance or delay in access thereto, or prevent the free use thereof by the fire department. 
(b)	No person shall, in any way, interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant or attempt to take water therefrom without special authority from the fire chief or the person acting as such. 
(c)	Without the consent of the fire chief, no person not an active member of the fire department shall ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the fire department, nor shall any person make use of any fire apparatus, hose or other equipment of the fire department, other than for the purpose for which the same was intended. 
(Code 1985, § 12-10; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-60. Interfering with firefighting activities.
No person, except an active member of the fire department, shall, at any time, enter within the territory or vicinity of any fire, when the area is restricted or access is denied by the police, or interfere with or attempt to operate any of the apparatus or equipment of the fire department or any fire hydrant, or interfere by giving orders to any individual, unless requested so to do by the fire chief or the person acting as such. 
(Code 1985, § 12-11; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-61. Obstruction of fire chief.
(a)	No person shall, in any way, obstruct or prevent, or attempt to obstruct or prevent, the fire chief in the discharge of such chief's duties, by denying or attempting to deny such chief access to any premises owned or occupied by the person, or by failing or refusing to furnish correct information requested by the fire chief in the investigation into the cause, origin or circumstances of any fire. 
(b)	No person shall, in any way, obstruct or prevent, or attempt to obstruct or prevent, the fire chief while inspecting any construction, building or premises, to determine the existence of any possible fire hazard, nor shall any person deny access to the fire chief to any construction, building or premises for inspection thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 12-12; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-62. Explosives and blasting agents.
No persons shall store, manufacture, transport or use explosives or blasting agents without having obtained a permit from the city and from the state fire marshal's office (or its designee) pursuant to the Ga. Comp. Rules. and Regs. ch. 120-3-10, (or as the rules may be amended). In order to manufacture, store, transport, or use such materials the permit holder must also comply with the rules and regulations of the safety fire commissioner and the National Fire Protection Association (as currently enacted or subsequently amended) regarding such materials. 
(Code 1985, § 12-13; Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Sec. 18-63. Key boxes and switches required.
(a)	Key boxes shall be installed in the following locations within the city: 
(1)	All new commercial building construction. 
(2)	All new businesses. 
(3)	Structures or occupancies equipped with fire sprinkler systems. 
(4)	Structures or occupancies equipped with fire alarm systems. 
(5)	Gates that limit emergency vehicle access. 
(6)	Other locations as deemed appropriate by the fire marshal from time to time. 
(b)	For gates limiting emergency vehicle access, manual gates may use a Knox padlock but electric gates must have a Knox switch. 
 
Secs. 18-64—18-82. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 18-83. Right of entry for inspection.
(a)	The fire chief or the fire chief's designee shall have the right, but not an affirmative duty, to inspect all buildings and premises as often as may be necessary for the purpose of discovering and causing correction of any conditions which could cause fire, endanger life from fire, or any violations of the provisions of this and any other law affecting fire safety. 
(b)	The fire official may at all reasonable times have free access and right of entry to any building whether completed or under construction, or to any property, for the purpose of making inspections pursuant to this Code. 
(c)	No person, owner or occupant of any building or premises shall fail, after proper credentials are displayed, to permit entry into any building or onto any property by the fire official for the purpose of inspections pursuant to this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 12-1; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-84. Periodic inspections; investigation and abatement standards.
(a)	The fire official may periodically require the inspection of all buildings and premises, including hazards or material items, for the purpose of discovering and causing correction of any conditions which would reasonably tend to cause fire or contribute to its spread, or any violation of the purpose or provisions of this Code and of any other law or standard affecting fire safety. 
(b)	All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason or inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire, hazard, disaster damage, or abandonment, as specified in this Code or any other effective ordinance, are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal. 
(c)	When an apparent structural hazard is caused by the faulty installation, operation, or malfunction of any of the items or devices listed in section 18-85, the fire official shall immediately notify the building official who shall investigate such hazard and shall cause such hazard to be abated as required under the city's building regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 12-2; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-85. Notice to eliminate dangerous conditions.
(a)	Whenever the fire official shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials, as follows, there shall be issued such notice or orders to remove or remedy the conditions as may be necessary for the protection of life and property from fire and smoke: 
(1)	Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; 
(2)	Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials; 
(3)	Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly combustible materials; 
(4)	Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts or inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible material from hoods, grease extractors and ducts; 
(5)	Obstructions to or on fire escapes, designated access openings in exterior walls for fire department use, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, that could interfere with the operations of the fire department having jurisdiction or egress of occupants in case of fire; 
(6)	Any building or other structure which contains defects therein which increase the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lacks adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or has conditions of dilapidation, disrepairs, structural defects or uncleanliness, lacks adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment creates a hazardous condition. 
(b)	Standards and procedures. 
(1)	This article and the provisions of the standards codes adopted by the city in section 8-2 shall govern the standards and procedures for declaring and abating nuisances caused by the unsafe conditions as set forth in this division. 
(2)	The city official shall conduct a preliminary investigation of a dwelling, building or structure upon his own motion or by receipt of a request by a city department or five residents of the city, the requests charging that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use. The building official shall make a preliminary investigation, and if a basis for such charges is found, the building official shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and city council a notice as provided in the adopted standards codes. 
(3)	If the council determines at the public hearing per the procedure provided in the adopted standards codes that the dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use it shall issue an order as provided in the adopted standards codes. In addition, the council shall state whether the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure. If so, such repairs, alterations or improvements shall be made as ordered by the council. If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, the council shall order the owner or parties in interest to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure. The city council shall not require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired so as to comply with the minimum requirements of this Code. 
(c)	When the building official is notified by the fire official that the corrections needed within a building are subject to the requirements of the building code, the building official shall notify the fire official when the corrections have been completed. 
(Code 1985, § 12-3; Ord. of 3-4-1985; Ord. of 8-3-1992, §§ 1, 2)
 
Sec. 18-86. Service of orders.
(a)	The service of orders for the correction of violations of this Code shall be made upon the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a copy of the same to such person or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by sending such copy by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known post office address. 
(b)	If building or other premises are owned by one person and occupied by another under lease or otherwise, the orders issued in connection with the enforcing of this Code shall apply to the occupant thereof, except where the rules or orders require the making of additions to or changes in the premises themselves, such as would immediately become real estate and be the property of the owner of the premises; in such cases the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not the occupant unless it is otherwise agreed between the owner and the occupant. 
(Code 1985, § 12-4; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-87. Compliance.
(a)	Any person operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises, or vehicle subject to this Code who shall permit any fire hazard to exist on premises under his control or who shall fail to take immediate action to abate a fire hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the fire official or his duly authorized representative shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state and local laws. 
(b)	Any order or notice issued or served as provided in this Code shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the order or notice pertains. Every order or notice shall set forth a time limit for compliance dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or property immediate compliance shall be required. If the building or other premises is owned by one person and occupied by another, under lease or otherwise, and the order or notice requires additions or changes in the building or premises such as would immediately become real estate and be the property of the owner of the building or premises, such order or notice shall be complied with by the owner unless the owner and occupant have otherwise agreed between themselves, in which event the occupant shall comply. 
(c)	No person shall remove a notice affixed under section 18-85(b) without authority to do so. 
(d)	No person shall use a building, premises or object in violation of a notice affixed under section 18-85(b). 
(Code 1985, § 12-5; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-88. Investigation of fires.
(a)	The fire official or his duly authorized agent shall investigate promptly the cause, origin and circumstances of each fire occurring in his jurisdiction involving loss of life or injury to person or destruction or damage to property, and if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin, the fire official shall take immediate charge of all physical evidence relating to the cause of the fire and shall pursue the investigation to its conclusion. A report in writing shall be made of all facts and findings relative to each investigation. 
(b)	The police department shall assist the fire department in its investigations whenever requested to do so. 
(Code 1985, § 12-6; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-89. Liability.
Any public employee, officer or other persons responsible for the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable city in the discharge of his duties shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1985, § 12-7; Ord. of 3-4-1985)
 
Sec. 18-90. Criminal penalty for violation.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, including provisions of adopted codes, or any person who shall aid, abet or assist any other person in violation of this Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-9. Each day the offense continues shall be a new and separate offense subject to the same penalty. 
(Code 1985, § 12-8; Ord. of 3-4-1985; Ord. of 9-7-1990)
 
Chapter 20 HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE
(RESERVED) 
 
Chapter 22 HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES
(RESERVED) 
 
Chapter 26 LAW ENFORCEMENT
(RESERVED) 
 
Chapter 28 NUISANCES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 28-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
dB(A) means decibels shown in a reading mode on the dB(A) scale. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
Device means any mechanism which is intended to, or which actually does, produce noise when operated or handled. 
Noise means any sound which may cause or tend to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings. 
Noise disturbance means any unnecessary sound which annoys, disturbs, or perturbs reasonable persons with normal sensitivities; or any unnecessary sound which reasonably may be perceived to injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person, and specifically includes noises above the decibel levels herein set forth. 
Sound level meter means an instrument used for measurement of the intensity of sound and accurately calibrated in decibels. Readings shall be made on a dB(A) scale. 
Sound pressure means the average rate at which sound energy is transmitted through a unit area in a specified direction. 
Vehicular means pertaining to motor vehicles required to be registered by the state division of motor vehicles. 
Zones means the scheme of land use classification contained in the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 13-1; Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Secs. 28-2—28-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. NOISE
 
Sec. 28-21. Prohibited acts; noise restrictions; maximum permissible noise levels.
(a)	The making, creation or permitting of any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise in the city is prohibited. 
(b)	The making, creating or permitting of any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of any individual of which either steadily or intermittently annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of any individual is prohibited. 
(c)	No person shall use or operate any facility, machine or instrument or produce or cause to be produced any sound in the city, when the same shall produce noise, the sound-pressure level of which measured at the point of annoyance complained of will exceed the standard noise level of the city established for that location for that time of day. 
(d)	Maximum permissible sound pressure levels. The operating or permitting to be operated any stationary noise source in such a manner as to create a sound pressure level which exceeds the limits set forth in the table below when measured at the property boundary of the noise source or at any point within any other property affected by the noise. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one zoning district classification, the limits of the most restrictive classification shall apply: 
Receiving land use 	Sound Level Limit dB(A)
	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Residential zones 	70 	65 
Business zones 	80 	75 
Industrial zones 	90 	90 

(e)	Sound measurements shall be made within a sound-level meter. In measuring noises to determine if the standard noise level of the city has been exceeded, the measurement shall be measured on the A-weighing of an accurate sound-level meter. The background sound level is defined as the sound level present when the offending noise source is silenced. 
(Code 1985, §§ 13-2, 13-4; Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Sec. 28-22. Specific nuisances; certain conditions, sounds deemed unlawful.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud or disturbing or unnecessary noises in violation of this article even if the noises referred to do not violate the standard noise level for the city: 
(1)	Horns, signal devices and the like.
a.	The sounding of any horn or signal device of any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle: 
1.	While not in motion, except as a danger signal that another vehicle is approaching apparently dangerously; or 
2.	If in motion, except: 
(i)	After or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; 
(ii)	Before passing another vehicle as a signal of intent to so pass; 
(iii)	Where state motor vehicle statutes require the sounding of such horn or signal device; or 
(iv)	When otherwise necessary as a danger signal. 
b.	Wherever the sounding of any horn or signal device is permitted or required, such sound shall not be unreasonably loud or harsh and shall not be for an unreasonable duration of time. 
(2)	Animals. The keeping of any dog, cat, bird or other animal which by causing frequent or long-continued noise would disturb the comfort or repose of a reasonable person and in fact does disturb the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(3)	Defect in vehicle or noisy load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair or loaded in such a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(4)	Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, expect to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(5)	Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, except through a muffler or other device which meets the standards established for such devices by applicable state laws and regulations and as set forth herein. 
(6)	Mechanical devices. Mechanical devices operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(7)	Loading or unloading of vehicles; opening or destruction of boxes. The creation of a loud or excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(8)	Devices attached to buildings. The sounding of any bell, gong or device attached to any building or premises, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which disturbs the quiet or repose of any persons in the vicinity of the devices. This rule shall not apply if the bell, gong or device is sounded as a warning of danger. 
(9)	Trains, vehicles and buses. The unnecessary or prolonged blowing or sounding of any horn, whistle, bell or other device attached to any train, locomotive, motor vehicle, bus or truck while passing through the city or while loading passengers or freight within the city. 
(10)	Loudspeakers and amplifiers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles other than for use by emergency vehicles. 
(11)	Construction work. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the public works director, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. If the public works director should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the public works director may permit such work within the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(12)	Sound equipment.
a.	The playing, use or operation, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or other machine or device for reproducing sound, if it is located in or on any of the following: 
1.	Any public property, including any public street, highway, building, sidewalk, park or thoroughfare; or 
2.	Any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public space; and if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 100 feet from the device producing the sound. 
b.	Possession by a person of any of the machines or devices enumerated in subsection (12)a of this section shall be prima facie evidence that such person operates, or those persons operate, the machine or device. 
(Code 1985, § 13-3(intro. ¶), (a)—(f), (h)—(m); Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Sec. 28-23. Quiet zones.
(a)	Whenever the protection of the public health, safety and welfare so require, after a duly advertised public hearing, the city council may designate any geographical area of the city as a "quiet zone." Such designation shall include a description of the subject area, the reasons for its designation as a quiet zone and shall prescribe the level of noise which shall be permitted in such a quiet zone. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to create any noise in excess of that prescribed within any area designated as a "quiet zone" in conformance with the provisions herein, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in adjacent or contiguous streets indicating that the area is a quiet zone. 
(c)	The areas immediately surrounding schools, hospitals and courts are declared quiet zones. 
(Code 1985, § 13-3(g); Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Sec. 28-24. Vehicle noise.
(a)	No person shall operate, within the limits of the city, any vehicle which will emit noise which will exceed the standard noise level of the city established for the size vehicle when used under ordinary circumstances. For noncommercial vehicles, the standard noise level of the city is hereby established as follows: 
Type of Vehicle	Maximum Noise Level
(dB(A)'s)
Vehicles with a gross weight less than 10,000 pounds 	75 
Motorcycles 	82 
Vehicles with a gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more 	88 


(b)	Measurements shall be taken 50 feet from the source. 
(Code 1985, § 13-5)
 
Sec. 28-25. Exemptions.
Exemptions from noise level limits shall be as follows: 
(1)	Emergency construction, repair, paving, demolition or alteration of a street or building. Permission of the public works director shall be proof that such emergency exists. 
(2)	Emergency activities of municipal, county, state or federal government agencies and emergency activities of public utilities when they are seeking to provide electricity, water or other public utility services and the public health, safety or welfare are involved. 
(3)	Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles and on vehicles used for traffic safety purposes. 
(4)	Attendant on-site noise connection with the actual performance of sporting events. 
(5)	Power lawn equipment, when operated between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(6)	Air conditioners that increase the background or ambient noise level by no more than five dB(A)'s. 
(Code 1985, § 13-6; Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Sec. 28-26. Enforcement and penalties.
(a)	Injunction. Any violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this article, or other provisions of estate or federal law, the city may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and permanent injunction. 
(b)	Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined, for each offense, according to the fine structure established by the city council, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1985, § 13-7; Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Secs. 28-27—28-55. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. HEALTH NUISANCES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 28-56. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the definitions contained in section 46-136 shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 9-2001; Code 1985, § 13-20)
 
Sec. 28-57. Conditions declared as nuisances.
The following conditions, among others, are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)	Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)	Dead or decaying matter, fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)	The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)	The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewer system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)	Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)	Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)	Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including, without limitation, unusual, loud disturbances in or to multiple-family complexes, such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)	Walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)	Keeping more animals on property than can be maintained thereon without causing odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city, or without causing a health hazard resulting from insect or rodent pests drawn to the property, or from undisposed of or infrequently disposed of animal waste; 
(10)	Junk cars, trash and refuse. 
(Code 1976, § 11-2001; Code 1985, § 13-21; Ord. of 10-3-1977; Mo. of 7-13-1981)
 
Sec. 28-58. Depositing waste in an unsanitary manner.
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within this city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1976, § 9-2002; Code 1985, § 13-22)
 
Sec. 28-59. Discharge of waste into natural waters.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within this city any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this Code. Each day of discharge shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 9-2003; Code 1985, § 13-23)
 
Sec. 28-60. Wastewater from cleaning.
It is unlawful for any person to wash garbage trucks or any other vehicle or container, whether commercially or incidental to any business operation, on a recurring basis in which organic waste is discharged unless such operation is carried out on a paved lot, which pavement is sloped in such a way as to drain the waste water from such operation into a sanitary sewer without traversing any unpaved ground and without leaving the property of such person except by a sanitary sewer pipe. 
(Code 1976, § 9-2004; Code 1985, § 13-24)
 
Sec. 28-61. Unkempt property.
It is unlawful for any owner of property within the corporate limits of the city, or for any other person having the possession of property therein, to allow or permit weeds, underbrush, trash, filth, dead animals, rubbish or other debris or offensive matter or material to accumulate on any of the property so as to create a fire hazard or unsanitary condition thereon likely to introduce or spread contagious or infectious diseases within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 9-4001; Code 1985, § 13-25; Ord. of 7-31-2012, § 1; Ord. No. 05-2017-01, § 6, 5-01-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 7, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-62. Outdoor coverings.
Tarps may be used to protect cars, trucks, recreational vehicles and boats, provided that: 
(1)	The tarp is specifically manufactured for the purpose of protecting the car, truck, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or boat to be covered and used as intended by the tarp manufacturer; 
(2)	The car, truck, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or boat being covered is not inoperable, has a current registration, and is stored or parked on an approved surface. 
(Code 1976, § 9-4001; Code 1985, § 13-25; Ord. of 7-31-2012, § 1; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 7, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-63. Abandonment of appliances, vehicles and junk.
(a)	No person shall possess, maintain or abandon outside a building enclosed with walls any of the following which are inoperable: motor vehicles, automobiles, trailers, refrigerators, motors, engines, appliances, or junk of a like kind, or any part thereof upon any property within the city, except upon such property defined as a "junkyard" and as restricted in chapter 48, the zoning chapter of this Code. 
(b)	A motor vehicle shall be conclusively deemed inoperable if it cannot be driven and used for the purposes intended for a period of 60 days or longer. The term "abandonment" or "abandon," as used in this section, shall mean physically depositing any of the above or any part thereof or causing the same to be deposited upon land, irrespective of ownership of property where these articles are deposited. The term "abandonment" or "abandon" means and includes any separate act of leaving unattended any of the articles herein specified resulting from dismantling or dismemberment of any of these articles. 
(c)	Each owner of land and each person or legal entity who has the lawful right to control land shall have the duty to keep such land free and clear of the above specified articles, or parts thereof when such articles are physically accessible to any minor under the age of 14 years or where such articles in a condition or combined with other conditions present constitute a health or safety hazard or nuisance to the public, and also where the appearance of such articles substantially detracts from the appearance of the land and adjoining land. 
(Code 1976, § 9-4002; Code 1985, § 13-26; Mo. of 3-7-1983; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 1, 10-2-2017)
 
Secs. 28-64—28-84. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 28-85. Citizen complaint.
Any citizen of the city may file a complaint alleging the existence of a nuisance as set forth in this article. Upon receipt of such a complaint, an enforcement official shall investigate the complaint to determine if such a violations exists. Upon determination of the existence of a violation, the enforcement official shall follow the procedures for abatement provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017-01, § 5(31), 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 6, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-86. Persons responsible.
Each owner of land and each person or legal entity who has the lawful right to control land shall have the duty to keep such land free and clear of health nuisances described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017-01, § 2, 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 2, 10-2-2017;)
 
Sec. 28-87. Enforcement officials; notice of violation; citations.
(a)	The city police department and code enforcement shall abate all nuisances resulting from violations of this article. 
(b)	Before issuance of a citation or taking any action to abate any such nuisance, the enforcement officials shall first make demand upon and give notice of the existence of a nuisance to the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land in writing, requiring that the nuisance be abated within 30 days after service of the demand and notice. 
(c)	The notice shall be presented by both a physical posting on the property in the name of the landowner, or such persons or entities having a right to control the land, and by certified mail or statutory personal delivery to the landowner (as the owner's names and addresses are shown on the tax records of the county) or such persons or entities having a right to control the land. Notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so physically posted and personally delivered or mailed. 
(d)	The notice shall contain the following: 
(1)	Names and addresses of the owners of the property, according to the public records of the county; 
(2)	Location of the property on which the violation exists; 
(3)	A statement by the enforcement officer of enforcement officials that the property has been inspected pursuant to this section and that a violation of this section has been determined to exist on the property; 
(4)	A description of the existing nuisance; 
(5)	A requirement that the record owner of the property or such persons or entities having a right to control the land abate the nuisance within 30 days from the date of the notice. 
(e)	Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(f)	Should the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land not abate or correct the nuisance pursuant to the notice, the enforcement officials shall have the right to issue a citation for the violation of this section to the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017-01, § 3, 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 3, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-88. Emergency enforcement.
In those instances where the enforcement officials determine that a nuisance constitutes an immediate grave threat to human safety, such officer of the enforcement officials are empowered to take immediate action as is necessary to protect the public if such officer is unable to obtain immediate service and notice upon the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land. All financial expense necessary to eliminate the nuisance shall be the responsibility of the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control the land and shall act as a lien on such real property on which the nuisance occurred until such costs and expenses are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017-01, § 4, 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 4, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-89. Penalties and other remedies.
(a)	Upon conviction or plea of guilty to a citation alleging the violation of this article, the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land shall be punished as provided for in section 1-9. 
(b)	In addition, upon a finding by the court that a nuisance does exist, the court shall require the landowner, or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land, to abate the nuisance within a definite period of time having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public or, should the landowner or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land, not abate the nuisance within the prescribed period of time, then the city shall have the right to enter upon the land and abate the nuisance. 
(c)	It is an offense under this Code for any landowner, or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land, found guilty of a nuisance to fail to abate the nuisance within the time specified after an order had been entered. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)	In every case where the landowner, or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land, fails to abate the nuisance within the prescribed period of time and the city has to take action to abate the nuisance, all costs and expenses incurred by the city for the abatement of the nuisance shall be the responsibility of the landowner, or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land, and shall act as a lien upon the real property on which the nuisance occurred until the costs and expenses are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017-01, § 5(13-30), 5-1-2017; Ord. No. 10-2017-01, § 5, 10-2-2017)
 
Secs. 28-90—28-106. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. UNSAFE BUILDINGS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 28-107. Findings.
The city council finds that there exist in the city limits properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; which have other conditions that render such properties unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county; or which are vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-33), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-108. Intent and purpose; compliance with state law.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq., to establish a uniform and exclusive summary procedure for use in the abatement of unsafe building nuisances within the city. It is the further purpose and intent of this article that the procedures established hereunder shall comply with the minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-31), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-109. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means state law and city ordinances providing construction and maintenance standards and procedures for abatement of nuisances for violation of such standards. 
Closing means causing a property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq. 
Interested party means: 
(1)	Owner; 
(2)	Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)	Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)	Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. The term "interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)	Persons in possession of the property and premises. 
Owner means both the current owner of record and any current mortgagee holding legal title by virtue of a security instrument as shown by a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar. 
Property means any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate whether improved or unimproved. The term "property" includes any dwelling, building, structure, or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouse, improvement, and appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "property" shall expressly include, for means of amplification and not limitation, swimming pools and wells. Also as used in this article, the term "property" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Public authority means any member of the city council or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of city government relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning properties in the city; however, in no event shall any such public authority, who files a request for investigation under sections 28-134 through 28-147 be the public officer exercising the powers conferred upon public officers under this article. 
Public officer means either the chief of the city fire department or his designee, director of community development or his designee, the director of public works or his designee, the director of public safety or his designee, or the director of any other department of the city or his designee. 
Repair means altering or improving a property so as to bring any dwelling, building, or structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create unsanitary and unsafe conditions which are an endangerment to the public health or safety in or about any property. 
Resident means any person residing in the city limits of the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-34), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-110. Duties of property owners.
(a)	It is the duty of the owner of every property located within the city limits: 
(1)	To construct and maintain property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city limits, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any property in violation of such codes or ordinances; and 
(2)	To keep such property reasonably clean and free of any materials or conditions which create a health or safety hazard either on such property or to surrounding persons or properties. 
(b)	No owner shall allow any property located within the city limits to be used in the commission of drug crimes. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-35), 7-6-2015)
 
Secs. 28-111—28-133. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ABATEMENT
 
Sec. 28-134. Appointment and designation of public officer.
The city police chief, fire chief, community development director, and public safety director are hereby appointed and designated as public officers with the authority to carry out the powers and duties of this article. Such appointment and designation shall include the designees of such persons. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(a)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-135. Complaint and investigation.
Whenever a request is filed with a public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city limits charging that any property: 
(1)	Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)	Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)	Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer with whom the request is filed shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific property to determine if such conditions exist under applicable codes. The public officer shall have the authority to enter upon premises to conduct an inspection, provided such entry is made with the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. If such an inspection is necessary, the public officer shall endeavor to obtain the permission of the owner to conduct such inspection. If permission is withheld, the public officer may seek the assistance of the city attorney's office to obtain an inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The public officer may determine under existing ordinances that a property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use upon a finding of conditions on the property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants, occupants of neighboring properties, or other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; and uncleanliness. The public officer may determine that the property is being used in the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(b)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-136. Judicial complaint and summons.
If the public officer's investigation or inspection confirms that any property meets one or more of the three enumerated standards from section 28-135, the public officer may file in a court of competent jurisdiction a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property wherein the nuisance complained of exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure pursuant to the provisions of section 28-147. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(c)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-137. Time of hearing.
The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held no sooner than 15 days and no later than 45 days after the filing of the complaint in the proper court. However, in the event that service upon the probate judge is necessary under the provisions of section 28-147, the hearing will be held no sooner than 30 days following service upon the probate judge, though still in no event shall the hearing be held more than 45 days after the filing of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(d)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-138. Right to be heard.
The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(e)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-139. Order.
(a)	If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the property in question meets one or more of the standards enumerated in section 28-135 so as to constitute a public nuisance, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which does one of the following: 
(1)	If the repair of the property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to its present value, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time, to repair such property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to effect a closing of any structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)	If the repair of the property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value thereof, the order shall require the owner, within a specified time, to demolish and remove the noncompliant dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(b)	The determination of costs under this section shall be made in compliance with the following: 
(1)	For purposes of this section, in cases in which the nuisance complained of is a dwelling, building, or structure of any kind, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair a structure may be considered. 
(2)	Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
(3)	The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors with a current business license to do work in the county, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. 
(4)	Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(f)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-140. Remedies of public officer in the event of noncompliance with order.
(a)	The order entered under section 28-139 shall further provide that, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, demolish, or close the property within the specified time, the public officer may cause such property to be repaired, demolished, or closed. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer is also authorized to file a motion for attachment for contempt against the owner with the court which issued the order as an alternate or additional remedy. 
(b)	If the public officer chooses to have the work done as ordered on any dwelling, building or structure, he shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words, including the Spanish translation: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(g)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-141. Salvage.
If the public officer has a structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any monies received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. Neither the public officer nor the city shall have any liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(h)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-142. Lien for costs.
The order shall provide that the amount of all costs associated with the abatement action shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of demolition, reasonable attorneys' fees and all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the finance director, restoration to grade of the real property, should it be demolished, and title examination costs. Such lien shall attach to the real property, upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition, in the office of the clerk of superior court, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 28-147(b). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien for costs of abatement on the general execution docket. Such lien should cross-reference the order and include the original caption and case number from the nuisance abatement action. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior and shall continue in force until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(i)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-143. Enforcement of lien.
(a)	Upon a final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this division, the public officer shall transmit to the finance director a statement of the total amount due and secured by the lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the finance director to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which, requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The finance director shall remit the amount collected to the general fund of the city. 
(b)	Enforcement of liens may be initiated at any time following receipt by the finance director of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this division. 
(c)	The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the city and the finance director in the enforcement of the lien. Redemption of the property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(j)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-144. Waiver of lien.
The city council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property of the owner for costs incurred by the city up to the time of the entry of the order and any additional costs incurred subsequent thereto in attempting to bring the property into compliance by entering into a contract with the owner in which the owner agrees to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(k)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-145. Appellate procedure.
Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a property shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(l)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-146. Alternate remedies.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as to limit or impair the authority of public officers or other city employees under existing and future ordinances to issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and to seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. The issuance of a citation for a violation of any such codes shall not be required as a prerequisite to issuing a complaint in rem under this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-36(m)), 7-6-2015)
 
Sec. 28-147. Service and notice.
(a)	Copies of the complaint and summons shall be served in each of the following ways as applicable: 
(1)	At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)	For an interested party whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper designated as the legal organ for the city once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(b)	A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint and summons shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-07, § 1(13-37), 7-6-2015)
 
Secs. 28-148—28-153. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. JUNK, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
 
Sec. 28-154. Location restricted; permit required.
(a)	Without current license or registration. Any automobile, vehicle, mobile home, manufactured home or trailer of any kind or type, without a valid and current license or registration, shall not be parked or allowed to stand on any residentially zoned property or other zoned property unless it shall be in a completely enclosed building or on property zoned HI heavy industrial, with a land use permit issued for the operation of an automobile wrecking business or junkyard. 
(b)	In inoperable or junk condition. No automobile, vehicle, mobile home, manufactured home or trailer of any kind or type, which shall be in an inoperable or junk condition, shall be parked or allowed to stand on any residentially zoned property or other zoned property unless it is: 
(1)	In an enclosed building; 
(2)	On the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)	On property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning or remodeling of vehicles in conformance with this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(a), (b); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-156. Maintenance of a public or private nuisance not authorized.
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under other provisions of law. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(c); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-157. Applicability; inoperative or junk condition defined.
For purposes of this section, vehicles in an inoperative or junk condition shall include, but not be limited to, any automobile, vehicle, mobile home, manufactured home or trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)	Wrecked. 
(2)	Dismantled. 
(3)	Partially dismantled. 
(4)	Inoperative. 
(5)	Abandoned. 
(6)	Discarded. 
(7)	One which does not have a valid license plate attached thereto. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(d); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-158. Other applicable regulations.
This section shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or contrivances within the incorporated limits of the city and shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulations and regulatory codes, ordinances, statutes or provisions of law enacted by the city, the state or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(e); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-159. Violation constitutes nuisance.
It is found and declared that vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(f); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-160. Notice of violation.
(a)	In addition to other remedies allowed by law, including O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., if enforcement personnel find a vehicle in violation of the provisions of this section, the owner of the property shall be notified and requested to remove the vehicle. The notice shall be presented by both a physical posting on the property in the name of the property owner and by certified mail or personal delivery to the owner as his name and address is shown on the tax records of the county. Notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so physically posted and personally delivered or mailed. 
(b)	The required notice shall contain the following: 
(1)	Names and addresses of the owners of the property, according to the public records of the county; 
(2)	Location of the property on which the violation exists; 
(3)	A statement by the enforcement officer that the property has been inspected pursuant to this section and that a violation of this section has been determined to exist on the property; 
(4)	A description of the offending vehicle; 
(5)	A requirement that the landowner or such persons or entities having a right to control the land remove the offending property within 30 calendar days of the date of the notice. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(g); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, §§ 3, 5, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-161. Investigation of property reports.
The enforcement personnel shall investigate any reports of property contemplated by this section that may be in violation of this section. Before issuance of a citation or taking any action to abate any such a violation, the enforcement personnel shall issue a notice as set forth in section 28-160. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(h); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, § 6, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-162. Alternative procedure for nuisances constituting immediate threat.
In those instances where the enforcement personnel determines that a violation of this section constitutes an immediate grave threat to human safety, such enforcement personnel is empowered to take immediate action as is necessary to protect the public if such enforcement personnel is unable to obtain immediate service and notice upon the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land. All financial expense necessary to remove the property shall be the responsibility of the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control the land. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(i); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-163. Separate offense.
Each day that a violation of this section continues, shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(j); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-164. Issuance of citation.
Should the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land not remove the property or otherwise comply with the notice, the enforcement personnel shall have the right to issue a citation for the violation of this section to the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(k); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-165. Penalties and other remedies.
Upon conviction or plea of guilty to a citation alleging the violation of this section, the landowner or such persons or entities having the right to control such land shall be punished as provided for in section 1-9. 
(1)	Upon a finding by the court that a violation does exist, the court shall require the landowner or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land to remove the property within a definite period of time having consideration for the nature of the property and its effect on the public or, should the landowner or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land not remove the property within the prescribed period of time, then the city shall have the right to enter upon the land and remove the property. 
(2)	It is an offense for any landowner or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land found guilty of this section to fail to remove the property within the time specified after an order had been entered. Each day the property remains shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)	In every case where the landowner or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land fails to remove the property within the prescribed period of time and the city has to take action to remove the property, all costs and expenses incurred by the city for the removal of the property shall be the responsibility of the landowner or such other persons or entities having the right to control such land and shall act as a lien upon the real property on which the property is situated until the costs and expenses are paid in full. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(l); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Sec. 28-166. Impoundment.
The removed vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 22-177(m); Ord. No. 10-2017-02, 10-2-2017)
 
Chapter 30 OFFENSES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 30-1. Responsibility for acts of minors.
(a)	It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the custody of or control of any minor to permit, allow or encourage that minor to violate this chapter. 
(b)	It is unlawful for the proprietor, manager or other person having charge or control of any public or other place to permit, allow or encourage any minor to violate this chapter in or around such place. 
(Code 1976, §§ 11-1004, 11-1005; Code 1985, §§ 15-1, 15-2)
 
Sec. 30-2. Disorderly conduct.
It is unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)	Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)	Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)	Use fighting words directed toward another who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)	Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)	Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1001; Code 1985, § 15-3)
State law reference(s)—Joint jurisdiction with state law on disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
 
Sec. 30-3. Sleeping in vehicles or public places.
It is unlawful for any person to sleep on or at the foot of the stairway of any building, sidewalk or alley of the city or on public grounds, or on the private premises of any person without the consent of the owner or person having control thereof. It is also unlawful for any person to sleep in any parked motor vehicle in the city after 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 1976, §§ 11-1002, 11-1003; Code 1985, §§ 15-4, 15-5)
 
Sec. 30-4. Discharge of weapons.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms or other weapons, including, but not limited to, BB guns, pellet guns, pistols, hand guns of any type, shot guns, rifles, machine guns, dynamite caps or other explosives within the city unless in defense of person or habitation, by an officer engaged in the discharge of official duties, by persons engaged in military duties or with permission of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1006; Code 1985, § 15-6; Ord. of 1-5-1979)
State law reference(s)—Discharge near highway, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103. 
 
Sec. 30-5. Loitering and prowling.
(a)	A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)	Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection, if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1010(a), (b); Code 1985, § 15-7(a), (b); Ord. of 10-6-1980; Ord. of 8-3-1992, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 30-6. False alarms, automated alarm systems, orders, penalties.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to activate an alarm system, otherwise cause an alarm system to be activated, or operate or maintain an alarm system which is activated at a time when no fire, burglary or robbery is in progress at a premises but public safety officers are nevertheless dispatched to such premises. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to activate, otherwise cause to be activated or operate or maintain any alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of an alarm system to any public safety agency. 
(c)	The city police chief shall issue a cease and desist order to any person violating this section. Such order shall direct that the alarm system in question be permanently disconnected immediately upon receipt of such order. The police chief shall also issue a cease and desist order to any person who has violated this section six times within any calendar year. Such order shall direct that the alarm system in question be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until it has been inspected and serviced by a properly trained and licensed technician. 
(d)	For the first three violations at any premises in a calendar year, there shall be no penalty. For the fourth violation at any premises in a calendar year, there shall be a fine of $50.00. For the fifth violation at any premises in a calendar year, there shall be a fine of $75.00. For the sixth and subsequent violation at any premises in a calendar year, there shall be a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. 
(e)	Any violation of a cease and desist order issued pursuant to this section shall be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 15-10; Ord. of 9-11-1995, § 1)
 
Sec. 30-7. Spitting.
It is unlawful for anyone to spit upon the sidewalks or upon the floors of churches, public halls, theaters or other such public places in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1007; Code 1985, § 15-16; Ord. of 2-7-1994)
 
Secs. 30-8—30-32. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PROPERTY DAMAGE
 
Sec. 30-33. Offenses against property generally.
(a)	Damage prohibited. No person shall willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure, deface, destroy or remove any real property or improvements thereto, including movable or personal property belonging to the city or any person in the city. 
(b)	Using off-road vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle over, through or across any yard, unpaved portion of right-of-way, or public or private property which is not designed or customarily used for vehicular traffic, without the permission of the owner of such property. 
(c)	Trenching. The activity known as "trenching," whereby motor vehicle tires are spun, slid, or used to deface, destroy, dig up, or create ruts in yards, or public or private property, is hereby specifically prohibited. Any owner, operator or occupant of any vehicle used in trenching may be equally charged with a violation of this section, in allowing such vehicle to be used in trenching. 
(d)	Mailboxes. No person shall remove, injure, destroy, deface or damage any box or container designated for delivery of mail through the United States Postal Service. The activity of damaging, in any manner, such container by throwing or swinging any object from a motor vehicle is hereby specifically prohibited. Any owner, operator, or occupant of any vehicle from which such container is damaged may be equally charged with a violation of this section in allowing such vehicle to be used in such activity. 
(e)	Restitution in addition to penalties. Upon conviction of any offense within this section, in addition to any fine or other sentence imposed, the defendant shall be required to make full restitution to the owner of the property damaged, to the extent required and in the sole judgment of the court. 
(Code 1985, § 15-14; Ord. of 8-3-1987)
 
Sec. 30-34. Trespassing on or damage to city property.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and without authority enter upon the land or premises of the city or into any part of any vehicle owned by the city for an unlawful purpose; or enter upon the land or premises of the city after receiving prior to such entry, notice from the city or any employee thereof, that such entry is forbidden; or remains upon the land or premises of the city or within a vehicle of the city after receiving notice from the city or any employee thereof to depart. 
(b)	A person commits damage to city property when such person destroys, damages or defaces city property, either real or personal, and shall pay, in addition to any punishment imposed under section 1-9, the cost of replacing such property or restoring such property to its original condition. 
(Code 1976, §§ 11-1010, 11-1011; Code 1985, §§ 15-8, 15-9; Ord. of 1-5-1979)
State law reference(s)—Trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21; criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22. 
 
Sec. 30-35. Damaging property; causing, provoking or engaging in fight, brawl or other riotous conduct.
No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of another is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged or cause, provoke, or engage in any fight, brawl, or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. No person shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1010; Code 1985, § 15-7(d)—(f); Ord. of 10-6-1980; Ord. of 8-3-1992, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-1994, § 1)
 
Secs. 30-36—30-58. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. ALCOHOL AND DRUG RELATED OFFENSES
 
Sec. 30-59. Illegal use, possession or sale of controlled substances.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to loiter in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of illegally using, possessing or selling any controlled substances as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is manifested are: 
(1)	The person is a known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances, or the person is at a location frequented by persons who illegally use, possess, transfer or sell controlled substances; and 
(2)	The person repeatedly beckons to, stops, attempts to stop or engage in conversation with passersby whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, for the purposes of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substances; or 
(3)	The person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, money, objects or written material for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance. 
(b)	In order for there to be a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the person's affirmative language or conduct must be such as to demonstrate by its expressed or implied content or appearance a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to illegally possess, transfer or buy a controlled substance. 
(c)	No arrest shall be made for a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(d)	For the purpose of this section, the term "known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances" means a person, who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of illegally manufacturing, using, possessing, selling, purchasing or delivering any controlled substance. 
(e)	Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1985, § 15-15; Ord. of 6-3-1991)
 
Sec. 30-60. Marijuana possession.
Any person who is charged with unlawful possession of marijuana, which possession is of one ounce or less, and who has not previously been convicted of any offense relating to controlled substances (other than violation of this provision) shall be guilty of violating the ordinances of the city. Subsequent offenses of possession of one ounce or less of marijuana may be punished as violating this article. 
(Code 1985, § 15-28; Ord. of 1-3-1994, § 16)
 
Sec. 30-61. Public drunkenness.
A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition may be made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language, is guilty of violating the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 15-22; Ord. of 1-3-1994, § 10)
 
Sec. 30-62. Unauthorizing alcohol drinking or littering on property accessible by the public.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or deposit any garbage, refuse, rubbish or litter upon any premises to which the public has access, including, but not limited to, such places as parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1010(c); Code 1985, § 15-7(c); Ord. of 10-6-1980; Ord. of 8-3-1992, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-1994, § 1)
 
Chapter 32 PARKS AND RECREATION
(RESERVED) 
 
Chapter 34 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 34-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animated illumination or effects means illumination or effects with action, motion, moving characters or flashing lights. This may require electrical energy, but shall also include wind actuated devices. Specifically included in the term "animated illumination or effects" is any motion picture or video mechanism used in conjunction with any outdoor advertising structure in such a manner as to permit or allow the images to be visible from any public right-of-way. The term "animated illumination or effects" does not include signs which indicate only time or temperature, provided that such time or temperature signs do not change or alternate messages more than 12 times a minute or electronic message signs as permitted within. 
Awning sign means a sign, symbol, trademark or other message written on an awning attached to a wall. The term "awning sign" is included in the definition of the term "wall sign." 
Banner means a display made of a pliable material displaying a commercial or noncommercial message. 
Buildable area of lot means that area of a lot within the building setback lines as set by this chapter within which a principal building or structure may be erected. 
Building setback line means the minimum yard requirement adjacent to any public street or property line set by this chapter beyond which no part of a principal building or structure may be erected. 
Canopy sign means a sign affixed to, imposed upon or painted on any permanent roof-like structure extending over a driveway or vehicle access area. Such signs may be mounted flush or suspended. A flush canopy sign is one that is mounted in such a manner that a continuous face with the canopy is formed. A hanging canopy sign is one suspended from or beneath the canopy. 
Commercial message means any message that identifies, advertises, directs attention to or promotes a business; or any message that attempts to generate good will for a business; or any message that advertises a good, product, property or service or otherwise proposing a commercial transaction. 
Copy means the wording, designs and other advertising display on the surface of a sign. 
Directional means providing instructions for travel to or indicating the location of a place or event, whether by words, arrows or other symbols. 
Distance means the measurement in lineal feet from the closest point of the sign to the nearest property line or to the closest point of another sign, as the case may be. 
Electronic sign means a sign whose message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control, including the device known as a commercial electronic variable message sign. 
Flag means a piece of fabric or other flexible material solely containing distinctive colors, patterns, standards, words or emblems used as the symbol of an organization or entity. 
Flashing includes illumination which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. The term "flashing" excludes illuminated signs which indicate only time or temperature, provided that such time/temperature signs do not change or alternate messages more than 12 times a minute. 
Freestanding sign means a self-contained sign which is wholly independent of any building or other structure, including a portable display sign; but not including any off-premises outdoor advertising sign, any canopy sign, any residential subdivision and development sign, any sign for a nonresidential use in a residential zone, any sign designated under article III of this chapter, "temporary signs." 
Ground-based monument sign means a self-contained sign permanently attached to the ground which is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The sign must be a solid structure. No open spaces which allow a direct line of sight from one side of the sign to the other are permissible in the area located beneath the widest part of the sign face where the message is located in a direct vertical plane to the ground. By way of example and without limitation, the sign cannot be attached to, resting upon, or supported by any pillars, columns, pylons which allow for open spaces or direct line of sight from one side of the sign to the other beneath the widest area of the sign face in a direct vertical plane to the ground. Ground-based monument signs do not include any off-premises outdoor advertising sign, any canopy sign, any wall sign, or any sign designated under article III of this chapter, "temporary signs." 
Height means the measure in linear feet from the highest point on the sign to the unaltered elevation of the ground at the base of the sign or directly beneath the sign. At the election of the permit holder, the height of a sign may be measured from the highest point on the sign to the level of the nearest road from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
Inflatable advertising devices include air- or gas-filled signs and figures used for advertising purposes. The term "inflatable advertising devices" exclude latex and similar balloons of less than two feet in diameter. 
Interior sign means signs intended to be viewed from the interior of a building. 
Interstate highway means any road of the state highway system which is a portion of the national system of interstate and defense highways, as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated, or any limited access highway as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated, by the state department of transportation and approved by the federal secretary of transportation, pursuant to 23 USC 103. 
Legal lot of record means a lot which meets the legal requirements set forth for the applicable zoning district. 
Lot means contiguous parcels of land, legally platted and recorded as a legal lot of record, in single or common ownership, and not divided by a public street. 
Noncommercial message means copy that does not contain a commercial message; and specifically included in the definition of the term "noncommercial message" is copy whereby the public is to be informed regarding a political event or candidate or issue. 
Nonconforming sign means any lawfully erected sign which, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
Normal maintenance and repair includes painting and cleaning; however, normal maintenance or repair conclusively does not include any structural alteration, any modification that requires a building permit or any alteration that costs in excess of 50 percent of the value of the sign prior to such maintenance and repair. For purposes of the term "normal maintenance and repair," the value of the sign shall be the replacement cost of the sign structure. The valuation of the sign as shown on the records of the community affairs department shall be presumed to be the replacement cost. If no amount appears in the records of the community affairs department for the individual sign, then the amount stated as the value of the sign on the original sign permit application shall be presumed to be the replacement cost. These presumptions of replacement costs may be rebutted by an appraisal. 
Off-premises outdoor advertising sign means a sign with a commercial message which identifies, advertises or promotes a product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing not sold, offered or conducted on the lot where the sign is located or which may be sold, offered or conducted only incidentally, if at all, on the premises where this sign is located. The term "off-premises outdoor advertising sign" includes those signs commonly referred to as billboards. For purposes of this chapter, the term "off-premises outdoor advertising sign" shall not include any sign not requiring a permit or any sign requiring a temporary permit under this chapter. Changing the sign face on an off-premises outdoor advertising sign from a commercial message to a noncommercial message will not change the grandfathered or nonconforming status of the sign under this chapter. 
On-premises sign means a sign which identifies, advertises or promotes a product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing which is the principal product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea or any other thing sold, offered or conducted on the premises where the sign is located. The term "on-premises sign" shall be classified for the purposes of this chapter as canopy, freestanding, wall, residential subdivision and development signs and signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones. For purposes of this chapter, the term "on-premises sign" shall not include any sign not requiring a permit or any sign requiring a temporary permit under this chapter. 
Owner includes any person having possession of or control of a sign or owner of record of real property. 
Portable display sign means any sign not permanently affixed to the ground, including signs mounted or designed to be mounted on a trailer-type frame or portable wood or metal frame. Portable display signs are included in the definition of the term "freestanding signs." 
Primary highway means any road of the state highway system, which is a portion of connected main highways, as officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated by the state department of transportation and approved by the federal secretary of transportation, pursuant to 23 USC 103. 
Prohibited sign means any sign, other than a nonconforming sign, not conforming to this chapter. 
Public service information means time, temperature, notice of public meetings, special events, road/traffic directional signs, etc. 
Real estate marketing sign means a temporary real estate sign located at the entrance to a subdivision/real estate development that shows the name of the project or development, name and phone number of real estate agent or agency that is handling the listing or sales, price range and hours of sales, and not to exceed 16 square feet in area. 
Right-of-way means the real property owned and controlled by a governmental agency for maintaining public infrastructure, including streets, sidewalks, pathways, mass transit rail lines, drainage ditches and structures, shoulders, traffic control devices, and vegetative buffers. The width of the right-of-way outside the pavement of any given street or road can be determined by the city public works department. 
Roof sign means a sign erected, constructed or maintained above the roof of any building. The sign or copy area shall not extend beyond the pitch boundaries or extremities of the roof line. The sign shall be mounted flush. Square footage is to be calculated the same as wall signage. Permit applications shall be accompanied by a site plan which shall be stamped by a registered engineer or architect as to dimensions, above requirements and structural integrity. 
Sign means any name, identification, description, display, illustration, banner, string of lights or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, vehicle or land in view of the general public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. 
Soffit sign means a sign which hangs or is suspended beneath the cover of a walkway or beneath a support extending from a building. 
Streamer means strips of fabric or other flexible material combined together and used as a wind-activated device. 
Wall sign means a sign, including an awning sign, permanently attached to the exterior wall of a building. 
Window sign means a sign painted upon or affixed so as to be visible through a window. 
Zoning district means the zoning designation of parcels of land pursuant to the city zoning regulations currently in effect and as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 1)
 
Sec. 34-2. Findings; purpose.
(a)	The mayor and council finds as follows: 
(1)	The regulations set out in this chapter are necessary to the fundamental goal of protecting the health, safety and welfare of residents, visitors and businesses in the city. 
(2)	A sign by its very nature is designed to draw an individual's attention to that sign. This characteristic makes signs a valuable medium of communication; however, this same characteristic can distract motorists and pedestrians, thus creating traffic hazards. 
(3)	The clutter created by an excess in number, size and height of signs creates a distraction to travelers and negatively impacts the general appearance of an area. Signs may lessen the aesthetic qualities of an area and intrude upon the residential character of an area. 
(4)	Signs must be regulated to ensure that they are structurally safe and sound. Electrical hazards must be eliminated. 
(5)	Proper regulation is necessary to limit the negative impact of signs while encouraging the positive and constructive uses of signs. 
(b)	This chapter regulates signs by zoning district, size, height, location on a lot, number, methods of construction, maintenance, illumination and in other ways. The mayor and council finds that such controls will improve the general appearance of the city; protect the lives and health of residents and visitors; protect property values and the public investment in roads; have a positive impact upon the economy of the county; and enhance the attractiveness of the city as a place to live, recreate and do business. 
(c)	Signs are a valuable means of commercial advertising and noncommercial speech. This chapter is further intended to reasonably regulate signs in the unincorporated areas of the city while showing full deference to the right to engage in constitutionally protected speech. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 2)
 
Sec. 34-3. Applicability.
Unless specifically excluded in this chapter, this chapter shall govern any sign erected, maintained or located in the incorporated areas of the city. Signs wholly located within a structure or building and which are intended to be viewed from the interior of the building are not regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(a))
 
Sec. 34-4. Signs requiring a permit.
All signs require a permit unless specifically exempted by this chapter. By way of example and not by limitation, the following types of signs require a permit prior to erection: canopy signs, freestanding signs, wall signs, electronic signs, residential subdivision and development signs, signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones, temporary on-premises signs, semi-permanent directional signs, temporary commercial produce and agricultural product stand signs, temporary residential agricultural farm and wood products and livestock, poultry sale signs and directional signs. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(c))
 
Sec. 34-5. Application review, approval and denial.
(a)	The community development department shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the actual receipt of an application and sign permit fee. The community development department or its designee shall give notice to the applicant of its decision by hand delivery or by mailing a notice to the address on the sign permit application on or before the 30th business day after receipt of the application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. 
(b)	All applications meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be approved. All applications not meeting the requirements or failing to contain all information required in this chapter shall be denied. 
(c)	If a decision is not rendered in a timely fashion, the applicant may post the applied-for sign until such time as the community development department makes a determination that the permit application should be denied. If the permit is denied for a sign that has already been posted, the sign may remain until any valid appeals are extinguished. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 3(d))
 
Sec. 34-6. Compliance with other laws.
All signs shall comply with all federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, codes and rules. Compliance with the terms of this chapter shall not operate to relieve any individual, corporation or other entity of any other duty imposed by law. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(d))
 
Sec. 34-7. Rights arising from permits.
(a)	A permit issued under this chapter constitutes a revocable license to maintain a sign. Relocation of a permitted sign may be required in the interest of the public for such causes as road improvements. If the city or any other lawfully constituted state or federal governmental authority, agency, body or utility having the authority of eminent domain condemns property which, as a sole result of such condemnation, creates nonconformity and relocation of a sign is required, enforcement personnel may administratively approve the relocation of the sign outside of the right-of-way without the necessity of a variance. Whenever the sign owner has been fully or partially compensated for the signs during property acquisition or eminent domain proceedings, the relocation shall be treated as a new permit. In determining the point of relocation, enforcement personnel shall consider the following factors: 
(1)	Safety. 
(2)	Size of sign. 
(3)	Shape of sign. 
(4)	Height. 
(5)	Amount of remaining property. 
(6)	Amount of property acquired. 
(7)	Topography. 
(b)	A permit that is issued in violation of this chapter is void. 
(c)	A permit does not create a vested right to maintain any sign which violates any of the terms of this or any other ordinance or law. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(e))
 
Sec. 34-8. Protection of property rights.
Issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall not serve to waive any applicable protective covenants or private rights of property ownership. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(f))
 
Sec. 34-9. Compliance with zoning district regulations required.
A sign can only be erected in a zoning district that allows that type of sign. See the specific provisions for each type of sign. If a new zoning district is created after the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived without signage designation or authority, signs shall be allowed under this chapter in accordance with the next more restrictive zoning district unless specific criteria are specified within the new zoning district at the time of adoption. Signs not otherwise requiring a permit shall be allowed in any newly adopted zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(g))
 
Sec. 34-10. Size.
Size shall be governed by sign type. See specific provisions relating to each sign type. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(h))
 
Sec. 34-11. Location.
All signs must be located on private property, except signs erected on public property by any authorized governmental unit. No sign can be erected on or encroach on any public right-of-way, except as authorized by the governmental unit which controls the right-of-way. 
(1)	Unless a specific exception is stated in this chapter, no sign shall be located within the minimum yard requirement adjacent to an interstate highway, within 62 feet of the center of an arterial road right-of-way, within 52 feet of the center of a major collector road right-of-way or within 42 feet of the center of any other road right-of-way. For the purposes of this subsection, the classification of roads shall be determined by the city major thoroughfare plan as most recently approved by the mayor and city council at the time of application for a sign permit or at the time of erection of any sign not requiring a permit. 
(2)	Unless a specific exception is stated in this chapter, no sign shall be located within one foot of a public right-of-way. 
(3)	Unless a specific exception is stated in this chapter, all signs shall meet the side and rear yard setback requirements of this chapter. 
(4)	No canopy sign, freestanding sign, wall sign, sign for nonresidential use in a residential zone or off-premises outdoor advertising sign can be located upon any lot that is smaller than the minimum lot area for its zoning district. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(i))
 
Sec. 34-12. Height.
Height shall be governed by sign type. See specific provisions relating to each type. The ground elevation shall not be altered to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(j))
 
Sec. 34-13. Roadway safety; obstruction of vision at intersections.
(a)	Safety must be exercised in erecting signs near a road. No sign shall obstruct or impair the vision of any vehicle operator at the intersection of any public rights-of-way, at any entrance onto or exit from a public road or any other location where such obstruction could create a hazard to life or property. 
(b)	At a minimum, no sign or other obstruction of vision, including, but not limited to, poles or other support structures, with a height greater than three feet, shall be permitted within the mitered corner, defined as an area beginning at the intersection of any right-of-way lines of any streets, roads, highways, driveways, curb cuts or railroads and extending 20 feet along each such right-of-way, and closed by a straight line connecting the end points of the 20-foot sections of the right-of-way lines. However, a sign with a height of 15 feet or greater may be erected outside the area designated in this subsection and allowed to overhang in the designated area. In no event shall a sign or other obstruction of vision greater in height than three feet or less than 15 feet in height be permitted within the designated area or overhang within the designated area. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(k))
 
Sec. 34-14. Interference with or similarity to traffic control devices.
No sign or illumination shall be used, constructed, maintained or located at any location where it may interfere with or obstruct the view of an authorized traffic control device, nor shall any sign be used, constructed, maintained or located where it, by reason of its position, shape, wording or color, may be confused with an authorized traffic control device or emergency vehicle device or markings. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(l))
 
Sec. 34-15. Illumination.
Illuminated signs shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or from interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way and adjoining property. No flashing or animated illumination or effects shall be allowed, except as otherwise allowed in this chapter. No lighted sign shall cast light directly on streets, roads or neighboring property. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(m))
 
Sec. 34-16. Electrical and structural safety.
All electrical signs and all electrical devices that illuminate signs or otherwise operate signs are subject to approval of the city building inspections division or its successor. All such signs and electrical devices shall only be allowed if listed by an approved testing laboratory or agency and installed in conformance with that listing. All signs shall be built in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(n))
 
Sec. 34-17. Electronic signs.
(a)	Electronic signs may only be used to advertise activities actually conducted on the property on which the signs are located or to present public service information. 
(b)	No message may be displayed for less than one second. 
(c)	No message may be repeated at intervals of less than two seconds. 
(d)	No segmented message may last longer than ten seconds. 
(e)	No traveling message may travel at a rate slower than 16 light columns per second or faster than 32 light columns per second. 
(f)	Electronic signs shall meet the same installation and permitting requirements and inspections as set out for electrical signs and all other signs. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(o))
 
Sec. 34-18. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in any zoning district in the incorporated boundaries of the city: 
(1)	Banners and streamers, except as specifically allowed under this chapter. 
(2)	Signs which produce noise or sounds capable of being heard even though the sounds produced are not understandable sounds. This subsection does not prohibit radio transmissions used in conjunction with any sign. 
(3)	Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles or odors. 
(4)	Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees, utility poles or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features. 
(5)	Permanent window signs which collectively cover more than 50 percent of the window glass surface area. 
(6)	Bench, covered shelter or bus shelter advertising signs other than as authorized by Cobb Community Transit or the city. 
(7)	Signs with flashing, intermittent or animated illumination or effect except official warning or regulatory signs erected. 
(8)	Signs which advertise illegal activity or depict nudity, sexual conduct, obscene or pornographic material as defined by state law such as O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 and O.C.G.A. § 16-12-81, and relevant case law, as may be amended from time to time, or which contain fighting words as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
(9)	Roof signs, except as otherwise allowed in this chapter. 
(10)	Rotating signs. 
(11)	Wind activated devices, including flags, except as specifically allowed under this chapter. 
(12)	Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under the laws of the state, federal laws or regulations, or any city ordinance. 
(13)	Signs or advertising devices attached to any vehicle or trailer parked so as to be visible from a public right-of-way for the purpose of providing advertisements of products, services or events or directing people to a business or activity, except for a common carrier or other vehicle which is used for daily transportation with a valid license plate. Any allowable vehicle or common carrier having a sign attached thereto as a part of the operational structure of the vehicle is to be parked in a legal parking space belonging to the business or on the property to which the sign makes reference. No signs on trailers or other nonmotorized vehicles will be allowed under this subsection. 
(14)	Signs placed in parking spaces which are required to meet the minimum parking requirements. 
(15)	Signs not in good repair, specifically including any sign which is in a state of disassembly or any sign which has its internal lighting exposed to view. 
(16)	Abandoned signs, which advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted or available. 
(17)	Off-premises outdoor advertising signs as defined in this chapter. 
(18)	Laser images, except as allowed by specific actions by the mayor and city council as a temporary activity. 
(19)	Sign copy on litter receptacles, vending machines or like structures, except for copy indicating products sold, dispensed or distributed from within the structure upon which the sign copy appears, e.g., sign copy on vending machines shall be permitted if restricted to products sold, dispensed or distributed from the machine. 
(20)	Portable signs. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(p))
 
Sec. 34-19. Content of sign.
Any sign may contain commercial or noncommercial copy. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(q))
 
Sec. 34-20. Time limit for commencing and completing construction.
A sign permit for a sign shall expire 12 months after the issuance of the permit if construction of the sign has not commenced within that time. A sign permit shall expire 18 months after the issuance of the permit if construction of the sign is not completed within that time. If construction has not begun or been completed as required by this subsection, then a new application must be submitted and the permitting process commenced anew. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(r))
 
Sec. 34-21. Structural and safety requirements.
Any sign within this chapter attached to a building must meet the city building inspections safety, electrical and structural code requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(s))
 
Sec. 34-22. Cleanup.
The person or entity holding the permit shall be required to remove or have removed from the premises discarded or unusable paper, sign faces, parts and debris resulting from the changing of the advertising copy or message or maintenance of any approved sign or sign structure. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 3(t))
 
Sec. 34-23. Signs in residential zones.
(a)	Generally. All signs under this section require a permit unless specifically exempted from a permit elsewhere within this chapter. No sign in a residential zone shall contain a commercial message unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this chapter. Property having an approved land use permit may, at the discretion of the mayor and council, have a sign up to two feet by three feet. 
(b)	Signs not exempt from permit; applicable regulations. All signs not exempt from a permit and not located in areas zoned NS, GC, O&I, LI, HI, or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the regulations within this section unless specifically exempted under another section of this chapter, and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
(1)	Sign area. Total sign area per lot in residential zones shall be calculated pursuant to table 3, as follows: 
Table 3 
Lot Size
(acres)	Maximum Total Sign Area
(square feet)
Less than 5* 	32 
Greater than 5 	64 

* For the purpose of this subsection one-half acre shall mean 20,000 square feet and one acre shall mean 40,000 square feet. Any lot size above 43,560 square feet shall be calculated on its actual square footage. 
(2)	Height. Signs for use in residential zones shall not exceed a height of eight feet, except that signs for use in residential zones that are attached to a building shall be subject to the height provisions applicable to wall signs unless otherwise specifically regulated under other provisions within this chapter. 
(3)	Location. Any sign for use in residential zones shall be located at least 75 feet from any other such sign on the same lot. 
(4)	Illumination. Illuminated signs for use in residential zones located on arterials, or major or minor collectors, as determined by the city's major thoroughfare plan, may use indirect or internal lighting. On all other road classifications, only indirect lighting shall be allowed. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 5)
 
Sec. 34-24. Public or private business, tourism and recreation directional signs.
(a)	Many people travel to, from and through the city on a daily basis. During weekday rush hours when the majority of people on the roads are commuting to or from work, roads are often nearly beyond their capacity. Traffic hazards and distractions must be minimized. However, people at times need the benefit of directional signs to help them find their destinations to activities or business which offer as its primary business purpose tourism or public recreational activities. 
(b)	Properly regulated, such directional signs may actually aid the flow of traffic. The following regulations recognize the necessity of such directional signs and are intended to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents, visitors and businesses of the city. 
(c)	Any activity or business which offers as its primary business purpose tourism or public recreational activities located within the city such as Legion Park, the Austell Community Center or any public- or city-owned facilities, shall be entitled to file for a community development department approved, owned and maintained directional sign under rules and regulations to be promulgated by the city street department in accordance with DOT regulations and approval by the mayor and council. These rules and regulations shall be adopted by vote of the mayor and council. 
(d)	Factors to be considered by the community development department in establishing these rules shall be: 
(1)	Safety. 
(2)	Number of signs. 
(3)	Radius. 
(4)	Location. 
(5)	Size. 
(6)	Color. 
(7)	Height. 
(8)	Cost to manufacture, install and maintain sign. 
(9)	Other factors deemed relevant. 
(e)	All costs incurred in manufacturing, erecting or maintaining these signs shall be borne by the person or entity causing the sign to be erected. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 7)
 
Sec. 34-25. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs.
(a)	Effective on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, off-premises outdoor advertising signs are prohibited. 
(b)	Off-premises outdoor advertising signs legally existing on such date may be continued, even though such signs do not conform to this section. Such nonconforming signs shall not be expanded, relocated or replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution of interchangeable poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be allowed. 
(c)	No such nonconforming sign shall continue after the discontinuance of the nonconforming use for a period of six months. 
(d)	Unless a specific exception is stated in this chapter, no sign shall be located on or within 100 feet of a lot used for a church, school, park, cemetery or any lot zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 8)
 
Sec. 34-26. Redevelopment signage.
(a)	Purpose. The city and its staff have made certain determinations that there are blighted and underutilized properties existing within certain areas of the city and have officially targeted certain of such areas for redevelopment, and have observed that there are certain nonconforming grandfathered freestanding billboards (a.k.a. off-premises outdoor advertising signs) which may impede the redevelopment of such properties. Therefore, the city has determined that it is in the best interests of its citizens to provide that certain nonconforming grandfathered freestanding billboards be relocated on the properties for a limited time period in order to facilitate redevelopment, amortize the useful life remaining on such billboards, and provide for their removal after such time period. 
(b)	Any owner of real property located in an area which has been officially targeted by the mayor and council for redevelopment, and any permit holder to any nonconforming grandfathered freestanding billboard located thereon, may apply to the city for the purpose of temporarily relocating the billboard to another location on the property if such relocation is for the sole purpose of implementing an approved redevelopment plan on the property and if the relocation complies with all setbacks and other requirements for a structure on the parcel of real property. Any sign which is temporarily relocated on the property shall be limited to remain in the new location for no more than five years at which time the permit and any rights to the signage or permit shall expire. The property owner, permit holder, and any party holding an equity interest in the property must consent to such relocation and expiration and agree that there shall be no recovery for any alleged taking of property arising out of the relocation or expiration, and that the property owner shall be responsible for all costs of relocating the signage and removing it from the property at the end of the five-year period. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 9)
 
Secs. 34-27—34-55. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ON-PREMISES SIGNS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 34-56. Permit required; noncommercial messages permitted.
All on-premises signs under this article require a permit and may contain a noncommercial message in any zoning district where an on-premises sign is allowed as provided in this section. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(a))
 
Secs. 34-57—34-85. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. FREESTANDING SIGNS
 
Sec. 34-86. Applicability.
In addition to the other provisions of this division, and except where other specifically stated, the following regulations shall apply to freestanding signs. Freestanding signs located in areas zoned NS, GC, LI, HI, O&I, or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the following regulations and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(b)(intro. ¶))
 
Sec. 34-87. Area.
(a)	The table below provides the maximum area of signs and sign structure. It applies to freestanding signs located outside the buildable area of the lot, unless otherwise provided. 
Table 1 
Lot Size
(acres)	Maximum Total Sign Area	Maximum Sign Structure Area*
Greater Than or Equal To	But Less Than	Square feet	Square feet
	0.5** 	60 	150 
0.5 	1** 	65 	162.50 
1** 	5 	120 	300 
5 	10 	200 	500 
10 	25 	300 	750 
25+ 	no limit 	300, plus an additional ten sq. ft. for each acre over 25, up to a maximum of 700 sq. ft. of sign area*** 	250 percent of sign area 

* Sign structure area shall be computed as including the entire area of structure surrounding the actual advertising display area, including the advertising display. 
** For the purpose of this section, one-half acre shall mean 20,000 square feet and one acre shall mean 40,000 square feet. Any lot size above 43,560 square feet shall be calculated on its actual square footage. 
*** No single sign area (advertising display area) may exceed 300 square feet on any size lot. 
(b)	The sign area of a freestanding sign shall be the area within a single, continuous rectangular perimeter measured from the extreme lowest point of the sign to the extreme highest point of the sign and from the extreme left edge to the extreme right edge of the sign face and shall not include the support structure. For double-faced signs, only one display face shall be measured in computing sign area when the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less and attached to a common structure. If the two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the larger of the two faces shall be the area used for calculations. 
(c)	Within the office and industrial (O&I) district, the maximum square footage shall not exceed 32 square feet if property is contiguous to a single-family residence. For this section only, contiguous shall apply only to the properties with the same road frontage or the major side yard where the signage is to be located. In all other circumstances the square footage of the sign shall be regulated by table 1 in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)	On any lot, the sum of the sign areas of all freestanding signs, including those canopy signs outside the buildable area of the lot, shall not exceed the maximum established for the size of the lot as set forth in table 1 in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)	The official street number shall be displayed on all freestanding signs for emergency notification purposes. The maximum height of the number shall not exceed one foot in height or width. The numbers will not be counted against the maximum allowable sign area. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(b)(1))
 
Sec. 34-88. Maximum number of signs.
The maximum number of on-premises freestanding signs allowed on any lot shall be determined by road frontage. However, the total number of such signs shall be governed by the regulation most restrictive of signage. The maximum number of signs shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)	On each road frontage, one sign is allowed for each complete 200 feet of public road frontage, provided that on any frontage of less than 200 feet, one sign shall be allowed on that public road frontage. This shall not apply to residential subdivision development signs. 
(2)	No more than four freestanding signs shall be allowed on any platted, recorded or deeded lot of record. Each freestanding sign must be at least 150 feet from any other freestanding sign on the same lot. 
(3)	If the lot fronts on more than one road, the calculation shall be computed separately for each road frontage. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(b)(2))
 
Sec. 34-89. Type and design.
All signs must be ground based monument, unless within 660 feet of the nearest edge of right-of-way of an interstate highway. In the event that the original and final grade have a topographical difference of ten feet below road grade, a pole sign can be considered through the variance process. No applications for variances will be accepted for existing pole signs unless done so in accordance with the above. By way of example, and without limitation the ground based monument sign cannot be attached to, resting upon, or supported by any pillars, columns, or pylons which allow for open spaces of direct line of sight from one side of the sign to the other beneath the widest area of the sign face in a direct vertical plane to the ground. No portable signs will be allowed. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(b)(3))
 
Sec. 34-90. Location restrictions.
All signs must be located on private property, except signs erected on public property by any authorized governmental unit. No sign can be erected on or encroach on any public right-of-way. No sign shall be located within 62 feet of the center line of an arterial road right-of-way, within 52 feet of the center of a major collector road right-of-way or within 42 feet of the center of any other road right-of-way, and no closer than one foot behind the public right-of-way. All signs shall conform to the side yard setback per zoning classification. In no event shall signs be placed in the mitered corner as set out in section 34-13(b). 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(b)(4))
 
Sec. 34-91. Maximum height.
Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 20 feet, except that those freestanding signs located within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of an interstate or federal primary highway and visible from the main traveled way of the interstate or federal primary highway may be up to a height of 35 feet. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(b)(5))
 
Secs. 34-92—34-110. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. CANOPY SIGNS
 
Sec. 34-111. Applicability.
In addition to the other provisions of this division, the following regulations shall apply to canopy signs. Canopy signs located in areas zoned NS, GC, O&I, LI, HI, or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the following regulations and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(c)(intro. ¶))
 
Sec. 34-112. Sign area.
(a)	Table 1 in section 34-87 shall be applicable to canopy signs. The maximum sign area for a canopy sign shall be calculated as follows: for each one linear foot of canopy along each face of the canopy, two square feet of sign area is allowed on that face. 
(b)	If the canopy is not entirely within the buildable area of the lot as defined in this chapter and as amended from time to time, the canopy sign shall be included in the calculations of maximum total sign area under table 1 in section 34-87, which establishes a maximum total sign area for freestanding signs and canopy signs outside the buildable area of the lot, as if the canopy sign were a freestanding sign. The maximum square footage allowed per single sign shall apply. 
(c)	If the canopy is entirely within the buildable area of the lot, the square footage is not included in the calculations of the maximum total sign area under table 1 in section 34-87. 
(d)	The support structure of the canopy shall not be included in the computation of sign area, provided that it contains no commercial message. It may contain warning and public service messages. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(c)(1))
 
Sec. 34-113. Maximum height.
No canopy sign shall be less than eight feet above the ground at its lowest extremity. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(c)(2))
 
Sec. 34-114. Location restrictions.
Canopy signs shall only be located on a lot with a minimum road frontage of 50 feet, except CBD zonings that face Veterans Memorial Highway. Locations must be approved by city officials. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(c)(3))
 
Secs. 34-115—34-141. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. WALL AND AWNING SIGNS
 
Sec. 34-142. Applicability.
In addition to the other provisions of this division, the following regulations shall apply to wall signs, including awning signs. Wall signs and awning signs located in areas zoned NS, GC, O&I, LI, HI, or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the following regulations and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(d)(intro. ¶))
 
Sec. 34-143. Sign area.
(a)	Calculation. The maximum sign area for a wall sign/awning sign shall be calculated as follows: For each one linear foot of the wall or building along each face of the building, two square feet of sign area is allowed on that face. 
(b)	Wall sign. The sign area of a wall sign shall be the area within a continuous rectangular perimeter enclosing the limits of each separate writing, representation, emblem message or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate this sign from the background against which it is placed; provided, however, that any open space contained within the rectangular perimeter, such as between letters in a word, or between any component panel, strip or figure of any kind comprising the sign shall be included in the computation of the sign area, whether this open space be enclosed or not by a frame or border. For double-faced or projecting signs, only one display face shall be measured in computing sign area when the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less, provided that it is a common attached structure. If the two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the sign area shall be the area of the larger face. 
(c)	Awning sign. Awnings with no script or identification will not be counted against the maximum allowable sign area. When calculating the sign area of an awning sign, the limits of each separate writing, emblem, representation, message or similar character, including any open space between words or letters, shall be included in computing the sign area, but not any other portion of any lighted or unlighted awning. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(d)(1))
 
Sec. 34-144. Height.
No wall sign that projects more than four inches from the building surface on which it is attached shall be less than eight feet above the finished elevation at its lowest extremity. A wall sign shall not project above the vertical wall to which it is attached. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(d)(2))
 
Sec. 34-145. Maximum projection.
No wall sign shall project more than 24 inches from the building surface on which it is attached. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(d)(3))
 
Secs. 34-146—34-173. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT SIGNS
 
Sec. 34-174. Applicability; permissible zoning districts.
In addition to the other provisions of this division, the following regulations shall apply to residential subdivision and development signs. Residential subdivision and development signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(e)(intro. ¶), (1))
 
Sec. 34-175. Sign area.
The total sign area of residential subdivision and development signs, exclusive of any wall, fence or supporting structure, shall not exceed 64 square feet in area. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(e)(2))
 
Sec. 34-176. Maximum height.
The topmost portion of a residential subdivision and development sign shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet. Any supporting fence or wall shall conform to the height provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(e)(3))
 
Sec. 34-177. Location.
Residential subdivision and development signs shall be adjacent to a public road within the boundary of the property, except when such sign is a directional sign. Residential subdivision and development signs may be placed not less than one foot from any right-of-way. However, such signs shall be subject to all safety regulations. In no event will any signs be placed within the mitered corner as set out in this division. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(e)(4))
 
Sec. 34-178. Maximum number.
No more than two permanent residential subdivision and development signs are allowed per entrance. At each subdivision entrance, one additional temporary 16 square foot marketing/informational sign for the development will be allowed. Such sign shall be renewed on an annual basis, subject to the rates set out in section 34-320. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(e)(5))
 
Sec. 34-179. Illumination.
Residential subdivision and development signs shall use only indirect lighting. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(e)(6))
 
Sec. 34-180. Type and design.
All residential subdivision and development signs shall be ground based signs or attached to or a part of a supporting wall or fence. Temporary marketing informational signs may be pole mounted. Residential subdivision and development signs shall be designed as permanent signs. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(e)(7))
 
Secs. 34-181—34-198. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 6. NONRESIDENTIAL USE SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 34-199. Applicability; designation as permanent signs.
In addition to the other provisions of this division, the following regulations shall apply to signs for nonresidential uses in residential districts. Signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall be designed as permanent signs. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(intro. ¶), (7)a)
 
Sec. 34-200. Permissible zoning districts.
Signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall only be located on property zoned for residential use on which a nonresidential use is legally being conducted. Subject to this chapter, examples of such nonresidential uses may include a church, a country club, golf course, school, produce or product stands. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(1))
 
Sec. 34-201. Sign area.
Sign area for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall be calculated pursuant to table 2, as follows: 
Table 2 
Lot Size
(acres)	Maximum Total Sign Area
(square feet)
less than 1* 	16
1* to 5 	32 
greater than 5 	64 

* For the purpose of this subsection one-half acre shall mean 20,000 square feet and one acre shall mean 40,000 square feet. Any lot size above 43,560 square feet shall be calculated on its actual square footage. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(2))
 
Sec. 34-202. Maximum height.
Signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall not exceed a height of eight feet, except that signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones that are attached to a building shall be subject to the height provisions applicable to wall signs unless otherwise specifically regulated under other provisions within this division. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(3))
 
Sec. 34-203. Location restrictions.
Any sign for nonresidential uses in residential zones shall be located at least 150 feet from any other such sign on the same lot. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(4))
 
Sec. 34-204. Maximum number.
The maximum number of freestanding signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones allowed on any lot shall be determined by road frontage. The maximum number of signs shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)	One sign for each complete 200 feet of the lot's public road frontage. 
(2)	Any lot with less than 200 feet of public road frontage shall be allowed one sign. 
(3)	If the lot fronts on more than one public road, then the calculation shall be performed for each public road frontage separately. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(5))
 
Sec. 34-205. Illumination.
Illuminated signs for nonresidential uses in residential zones located on arterials, or major or minor collectors, as determined by the city major thoroughfare plan, may use indirect or internal lighting. On all other road classifications, only indirect lighting shall be allowed. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(6))
 
Sec. 34-206. Temporary use permits.
Permits to allow a temporary use sign in residential zones may be issued for a period of 30 days. A sign permitted pursuant to this article shall be removed no later than the date of expiration of the temporary use permit, or upon the discontinuance of the temporary use, or maximum time allowed under this chapter, whichever is the shortest time. Property having an approved land use permit may, at the discretion of the mayor and council, have a sign up to two feet by three feet. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 4(f)(7))
 
Secs. 34-207—34-235. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. TEMPORARY SIGNS
 
Sec. 34-236. Applicability.
(a)	Temporary on-premises signs located within areas zoned NS, GC, LI, HI, O&I, or other commercial or industrial zoning districts (inflatables permitted on no less than four lane roadways and only on properties recommended for community activity center or regional activity center on city's future land use map, as may be amended from time to time) shall be governed by the regulations within this section and any other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
(b)	Temporary signs not located within areas zoned NS, GC, LI, HI, O&I, all other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the regulations of signs under section 34-23 except that no permit shall be required. 
(c)	Temporary on-premises signs not located within areas zoned NS, GC, LI, HI, O&I, or other commercial or industrial zoning districts, shall be governed by the regulations under article II, division 6 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(a)(intro. &parap), (h), (i))
 
Sec. 34-237. Searchlights, banners and inflatable signs or advertising devices.
(a)	Searchlights, banners and inflatable signs or advertising devices may be displayed on-premises upon the issuance of a temporary permit. 
(b)	Only one temporary on-premises sign or advertising device may be displayed on a lot at a time. Each occupant or tenant of a multi-occupant building or multi-tenant lot may display one banner flush with a wall during the permit period without regard to the usage of other occupants or tenants and without regard to the prior usage of temporary on-premises signs by others on the lot. 
(c)	A temporary on-premises sign or advertising device (searchlight or banner) shall require a permit on a semiannual basis which allows two 60-day periods to utilize a temporary on-premises sign or advertising device (i.e., one 60-day period from January 1 through June 30, then a second 60-day period from July 1 through December 31). There must be at least a 30-day break between any two 60-day permitted periods. Temporary advertising devices (inflatables) shall require a permit on a semiannual basis which allows two weekends per month, to utilize the inflatable (i.e., one permit from January 1 through June 30, and a second permit, July 1 through December 31). 
(d)	It is unlawful to display any temporary sign or advertising device without a permit or outside of the term of a permit or otherwise in violation of this section or article. 
(e)	The temporary permit shall be acquired prior to the display of any temporary sign or advertising device. 
(f)	The permit shall specify the first and last day of the period in which display of the temporary sign or advertising device is permitted. Display of the temporary sign or advertising device (searchlight or banner) shall be allowed beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day specified on the permit. The permit shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on the last day specified on the permit. Display of the temporary advertising device (inflatable) shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 8:00 a.m. on Monday. Violations of this section would authorize staff to terminate the permit. 
(g)	Signs placed pursuant to temporary permits shall be removed on or before the last day or time limit of the permit. 
(h)	Top of inflatable devices cannot be any higher than 20 feet from the roofline and 35 feet from ground level. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(a)(1)—(8))
 
Sec. 34-238. Weekend directional signs (WEDS).
(a)	Definition. The term "WEDS" conveys directions through the use of words, symbols, arrows or otherwise to a specific place, wherein the sign provides direction and attention to a temporary or non-permanent event or happening, such as the sale or lease of real property, to a church or community gathering, yard sales, moving sales or estate sales. 
(b)	Purpose and intent. The following regulations are intended to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents, visitors and businesses of the city, including the aesthetics of the community. Improperly located WEDS, or prohibited WEDS advertising businesses, services or products, etc., located on private property, are determined to pose an immediate safety threat and traffic hazard to members of the public traveling city roadways. 
(c)	Zoning districts. WEDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
(d)	Time allowed. WEDS shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to remove all WEDS, including all stakes, anchoring or pole devices, etc., prior to 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. 
(e)	No permit required. WEDS do not require a permit or a permit fee. Any person or entity which installs WEDS must have a city business license and must acknowledge (via form provided by the community affairs department) that WEDS will be installed per the terms of this section. This requirement shall not apply to any person or entity which installs an exempted sign as specified in section 34-315. After acknowledgement, any person or entity which installs WEDS will be given an identification number by the community affairs department. 
(f)	Identification on sign. Each WEDS shall be legibly marked with the name and identification number provided by the community affairs department of the installer. This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint upon at least one face of the WEDS and in letters of at least one-half inch in height. 
(g)	Construction. WEDS shall not exceed four square feet of sign area and three feet in height and may be double-faced. WEDS shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. WEDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, other signs or other sign structures. WEDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be made of paper. 
(h)	Location. There shall be only one WEDS for any given place, activity or event per 300 feet of road frontage, and within a five mile radius of the ultimate location to which it provides direction. No WEDS shall be located closer than 14 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, or one foot behind the right-of-way, whichever ensures that the WEDS is not within the right-of-way. WEDS may be located along any frontage except local roads within platted subdivisions. All WEDS must be placed on private property with the property owner's permission. 
(i)	Prohibited. WEDS advertising businesses, services or products, etc., are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(b))
 
Sec. 34-239. Semi-permanent directional signs (SPDS).
(a)	Definition. The term "SPDS" means signs which convey directions to a specific place under construction or to specific real estate for sale or to a noncommercial event and are not intended to be permanent but rather are intended to provide direction to a place or event for a limited period of time. 
(b)	Zoning districts. SPDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. However, SPDS in residential zones shall only provide direction to residential real estate for sale or to a noncommercial place or event. 
(c)	Permit required. SPDS require a permit on an annual basis. 
(d)	Sign area. SPDS may have one face on each side of the sign. Each face may be up to 16 square feet. 
(e)	Height. SPDS shall not exceed ten feet in height above the elevation of the nearest rights-of-way. In the event of multiple road frontages, the highest elevation shall be used for measuring height. 
(f)	Construction. SPDS shall be mounted on single or double poles of sufficient strength to safely support the sign. SPDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, federal, state or city signs or poles or other permanent sign structures. SPDS shall be made of a durable and waterproof material. 
(g)	Location. No SPDS shall be located closer than 26 feet from the back of curb or edge of pavement, or 12 feet behind the right-of-way, whichever ensures that the WEDS is not within the right-of-way. All SPDS must be placed on private property with the property owner's written permission. SPDS shall be located at intersections and at other places along roads to provide directional information. No SPDS shall obstruct or interfere with the sight visibility requirements or violate any safety provisions of this article. 
(h)	Number. A maximum of five SPDS are allowed in an intersection area, and each SPDS must be at least 150 feet from any other SPDS. An intersection area includes the areas on all corners of an intersection bounded by the right-of-way lines and within 200 feet of the intersection of right-of-way lines at the intersection, but no closer than 20 feet from such intersection of right-of-way lines. Only one SPDS advertising for any given place, activity or event shall be allowed within any intersection area. Outside of an intersection area, one SPDS is allowed per lot. 
(i)	Removal. SPDS used to convey directions to a noncommercial event or a specific place under construction shall be removed within ten days after the event is over or the project is completed. SPDS providing direction to a subdivision or other real estate for sale shall be removed within ten days after the closing of the sale of that property or the closing of the last lot of the subdivision. SPDS providing direction to multifamily rental property shall be removed within one year of the issuance of a permit under this article, or renewed with approval by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(c))
 
Sec. 34-240. Temporary-local directional signs (T-LDS).
(a)	Definition. The term "T-LDS" means short-term signs which convey directions to a specific place or event. 
(b)	Zoning districts. T-LDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. However, T-LDS in residential zones shall only provide direction to residential real estate for sale or to a noncommercial place or event. 
(c)	No permit required. T-LDS do not require a permit or a permit fee. 
(d)	Sign area. T-LDS may be single or double faced. Each face may be up to four square feet. 
(e)	Height. T-LDS shall not exceed three feet in height. 
(f)	Construction. T-LDS shall be mounted on an independent single or double pole device. T-LDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, federal, state or city signs or poles, or other permanent signs or sign structures. T-LDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No such sign shall be made of paper. 
(g)	Location. No T-LDS shall be located closer than one foot from the right-of-way. T-LDS must be on private property with permission of the owner. No T-LDS shall be located beyond a one-mile radius of the ultimate location to which it provides direction. 
(h)	Number. A maximum of four T-LDS are allowed for any location to which the T-LDS provide direction. A maximum of one T-LDS per event or property for sale may be located upon any one lot. 
(i)	Identification on sign. Each T-LDS shall be legibly marked with the name and telephone number of the sign owner. This information must be written in weatherproof ink or paint upon at least one face of the T-LDS and in letters of at least one-half inch in height. All T-LDS shall display legibly the date and address of the activity or event. Any T-LDS which does not contain the above information shall be subject to immediate removal by code enforcement personnel or other such remedies provided by this article. 
(j)	Removal. A T-LDS shall be removed within ten days after the event to which it provided direction is over. It shall be the sign owner's responsibility to remove the sign. This provision shall require removal of any real estate T-LDS providing direction to a subdivision or other real estate for sale within ten days of the closing of the sale of that property, or the last lot of the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(d))
 
Sec. 34-241. Temporary commercial produce and agricultural product stands signs.
Temporary commercial produce and agricultural product stand signs shall be allowed in NS, GC, LI and HI or any other district where such stands or businesses are allowed as specifically permitted in this chapter. One permitted sign shall be allowed per temporary vendor. Signs shall be no greater than 32 square feet, and no manufactured portable signs shall be allowed. All signage requires a sign permit. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(e))
 
Sec. 34-242. Temporary residential agricultural, farm and wood products and livestock and poultry sales signs.
(a)	Temporary residential agricultural, farm and wood product sales and livestock and poultry sales signs shall be allowed in single-family residential districts. Only one permitted sign is allowed per property, and no manufactured portable signs shall be allowed. Signs shall be no greater than 32 square feet and shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(b)	All signage requires a sign permit. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(f))
 
Sec. 34-243. Olympic signs.
Signs for Olympic or like events are permitted within a two-year period prior to and running through the conclusion of the event. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. A, § 6(g))
 
Secs. 34-244—34-264. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 34-265. Compliance with other laws; conflicting provisions.
In addition to the provisions of this article, the provisions of all other applicable city, state and federal laws shall apply. This article shall not be construed to create a right to maintain a sign in violation of any other law, in violation of any protective covenant or in violation of the property rights or other rights of any person or entity. If any provision of this article regulates the same activity, conduct or any aspect of signage that is also regulated by city, state or federal law, then the provision most restrictive of signage shall govern. If any provision of this article is in genuine conflict with any state or federal law or requirement, the conflict shall be resolved in accordance with law. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 1)
 
Sec. 34-266. Enforcement personnel.
Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the mayor and council, the enforcement of this article shall be within the jurisdiction of the city's community affairs department, including the zoning division manager, the zoning division manager's designees and all law and code enforcement personnel of the city. The enforcement personnel shall have such powers as are to enforce and give effect to this article. With regard to any provision of this article relating to traffic safety or public rights-of-way, the city street department shall also be deemed to be enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(a))
 
Sec. 34-267. Violation deemed public nuisance.
Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(b))
 
Sec. 34-268. Removal of signs in violation.
(a)	The enforcement personnel may order the removal of any sign in violation of this article by written notice, registered mail return receipt requested, to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign, or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and property owner or any other party that procured the erection of the sign. The removal order shall be issued only after the appropriate party fails to comply with the terms of this article within five days after the receipt of written notice of noncompliance by the city or within ten days from the mailing of such notice if no receipt indicating acceptance is returned. 
(b)	An aggrieved party may appeal the removal order within ten days from the date that the notice was received. Such appeal shall be as provided in section 34-318 or any successor provisions. If the sign is not removed within 30 days after the order of removal or 30 days after the date any appeal becomes final, the enforcement personnel are authorized to remove or cause to be removed the sign and to collect the costs thereof as provided in this section. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(c))
 
Sec. 34-269. Removal without notice.
The enforcement personnel or any other agent of the city having jurisdiction under the circumstances may remove or direct the removal of any sign in violation of this article, without giving notice to any party, if such sign: 
(1)	Is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
(2)	Poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. Improperly located WEDS, or prohibited WEDS advertising businesses, services or products, etc., located on private property, are hereby determined to pose an immediate safety threat and traffic hazard to members of the public traveling within the city on city, county or state roadways. Following such removal or repair, the city may collect the costs as provided in section 34-270. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(d))
 
Sec. 34-270. Costs of removal.
Removal of any sign as provided for in this section shall be without liability to the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees. The permit holder shall be primarily responsible for the costs of removal. If there is no permit holder, then the sign owner shall be responsible. If the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then the costs of removal shall be the responsibility of the sign erector or property owner or any other party that procured the erection of the sign. If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within 60 days after the receipt of such statement, the code enforcement personnel shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(e))
 
Sec. 34-271. Invalid permits.
The enforcement personnel may issue a removal order when it has been determined that a permit was improperly issued, that the permit was issued on the basis of misstatement of fact or fraud, that the sign has not been constructed in compliance with this article or with the specifications of the application or site plans, that the sign permit has expired or that the sign is otherwise not in compliance with this article. If a sign is not removed after receipt of a removal order by the owner of such sign or property, enforcement personnel may institute legal proceedings pursuant to this article against the property owner, sign owner, lessee, sign erector or a combination thereof. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(f))
 
Sec. 34-272. Civil actions.
The enforcement personnel or any individual or entity whose property interests are directly affected may bring a civil action to seek injunctive and other relief to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(g))
 
Sec. 34-273. Citations.
Any violation of this article may be tried upon citations issued by the enforcement personnel pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and any successor statute. Without limitation, sign erectors, sign owners and such other parties responsible for the violation may be cited for violation of any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(h))
 
Sec. 34-274. Penalties.
Any person who violates any section or provision of this chapter, after the conviction upon a citation issued to the city court, for the first violation, shall be incarcerated for a period not to exceed 60 days or fined $200.00, and not to exceed the maximum penalty prescribed by O.C.G.A. 36-1-20, as amended from time to time. If any person is found to be guilty of more than one violation of this chapter in any 12-month period the following fines are established: 
(1)	$300.00 for the second violation of this chapter in any 12-month period. 
(2)	$650.00 for the third violation of this chapter in any 12-month period. 
(3)	$1,000.00 for the fourth violation and each successive violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(i))
 
Sec. 34-275. Prosecutor.
The city may provide by separate resolution that a county attorney shall prosecute all citations issued for the violation of this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-66, and any successor statute. Until such time, the prosecuting attorney for the city court and his assistants shall prosecute all citations issued for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(j))
 
Sec. 34-276. Remedies cumulative.
All remedies and penalties specified in this article are cumulative. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 2(k))
 
Sec. 34-277. Bonds and insurance.
All persons engaged in the business of erecting, installing, altering, relocating, constructing or maintaining signs for compensation must show proof of a code compliance bond in the amount of $10,000.00 and possess a current business license at the time any sign permit is obtained. Such bond shall cover compliance with the city's ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 3)
 
Sec. 34-278. Indemnification of city.
By accepting any permit or other permission to erect and maintain a sign or by acting in the erection or maintenance of a sign pursuant to such permit or other permission pursuant to this article, the permit holder, property owner, lessee (if any), sign erector, their agents, servants, employees and assigns agree to hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees from any and all claims for damages, including death; including, but not limited to, those resulting from the erection, alteration, relocation, construction or maintenance of a sign permitted or authorized under this article, to the extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 4)
 
Sec. 34-279. Variances.
(a)	There shall be no deviation from the terms of this article unless a variance has been granted by the mayor and council. For a variance to be granted from this article, each of the following must be shown: 
(1)	No characteristics contrary to the public interest will be promoted. No resulting variance shall create an effect or condition contrary to the public safety and welfare. Relief shall not impair the purposes of this article. 
(2)	A unique hardship is existing because of an extraordinary and exceptional condition pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of a characteristic of its size, shape, topography or like characteristic. In the absence of the factors listed in the preceding sentence, economic or financial hardship alone may not be sufficient to support the grant of a variance. 
(3)	The condition causing the hardship is unique and is not common to the region in general. 
(b)	Request for variances regarding any part of this article or enforcement thereof shall specifically include reasons why the application should be granted. 
(c)	Variance procedures shall apply both to signs which are nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and to new signs erected thereafter. 
(d)	Decisions of the mayor and council shall be final, subject to such legal remedies an aggrieved party may have. Any appeal from a decision of the mayor and council must be filed within 30 days of the decision. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 5)
 
Sec. 34-280. Nonconforming signs.
(a)	Signs lawfully existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived which do not conform to the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be nonconforming signs and may remain, except as otherwise specifically qualified in this article. Such signs shall not be enlarged, extended, structurally reconstructed, replaced or altered in any manner; except a sign face may be changed so long as the new sign face does not increase either height or sign area. This provision shall not have the effect of excusing any violation of any other ordinance, nor shall this provision have the effect of permitting the continued existence of any unsafe sign or any sign that is not in a good state of repair. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign. No repairs other than normal maintenance and upkeep of nonconforming signs shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. For any sign that is declared to be unsafe due to changed conditions beyond the control of the sign owner, such sign shall be promptly repaired, rebuilt or restored to the same dimensions, type and size of the original nonconforming sign. The failure to promptly repair, rebuild or restore such a sign within six months of the city declaring, in writing, the sign to be unsafe shall be deemed abandonment of the sign and any re-erection of such sign shall conform in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(c)	A nonconforming sign shall not be moved for any distance on the same lot or to another lot unless such change in location will make the sign conform to the provisions of this article and meet permit requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a nonconforming sign is removed or discontinued for any period of time, the subsequent erection of a sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)	A nonconforming sign which is changed to or replaced by a conforming sign shall no longer be deemed nonconforming, and thereafter such sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(f)	All nonconforming temporary signs shall be brought into compliance with this article or removed within 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this article, the city may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the property owner, sign owner, permit holder or sign erector. The city shall have the right to maintain an action at law for the recovery of the costs of such removal. If the owner is unknown and cannot be found upon reasonable investigation, the city may cause the removal of such sign without liability. 
(g)	Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, all signs which were illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior sign ordinances shall be removed by the owner of the sign within 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this article, the city may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the property owner, sign owner, permit holder or sign erector. The city shall have the right to maintain an action at law for the recovery of the costs of such removal. If the owner is unknown and cannot be found upon reasonable investigation, the city may cause the removal of such sign without liability. 
(h)	The purpose of this article's nonconforming treatment is to mitigate detrimental impact of new ordinances on existing previously legally conforming signage. Over time, it is anticipated that nonconforming usages shall eventually be eliminated. As a consequence, when a nonconforming sign is damaged by nature or an act of God, such sign may be promptly repaired, rebuilt or restored to the same dimensions, type, shape, location, and size and at the same height as the original nonconforming sign. The failure to repair, rebuild or restore such a sign within six months of the date of damage shall be deemed to be abandonment of the sign and any re-erection of such sign shall conform in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(i)	Except for the condition that renders a sign nonconforming, nonconforming signs must otherwise comply with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 6)
 
Sec. 34-281. Inspections.
(a)	The enforcement personnel are hereby empowered to enter into or inspect any building, structure or premises upon which a sign subject to this article is located for the purpose of inspecting the sign, its structural and electrical connections and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances. Inspections shall be carried out during reasonable business hours, unless an emergency exists. 
(b)	This provision is in addition to and without prejudice to the rights of other inspectors and regulators to enter into and inspect premises. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. I, § 7)
 
Sec. 34-282. Service of notices and other communications.
All notices and communications regarding notification of sign permit renewals or violations shall be sufficiently given for all purposes of this article if mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to the permit holder at the address given in the application or any subsequent notification of change of address. A change in return address on an envelope or on a letterhead shall not be deemed as notification of change of address unless correspondence clearly calls this change to the addressee's attention. Notice shall be effective at the time of receipt or ten days from the date of mailing if no receipt indicating acceptance is returned. All other general notices and communication may be made by depositing the same in the United States mail with sufficient postage affixed thereto. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 3(b))
 
Secs. 34-283—34-312. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
 
Sec. 34-313. Required.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this division, no sign shall be used, constructed, maintained, located, replaced, expanded or relocated unless a sign permit has been issued by the city. A new sign permit shall be required for any structural alterations, other than normal maintenance and repair as defined in this division. 
(b)	No permit issued for a sign under the provisions of this division shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain any sign that violates any provision of this division, any other ordinance, state law or federal law. 
(c)	Any sign requiring a permit for which a permit has not been secured shall be removed immediately. Removal shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the sign owner, the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 1)
 
Sec. 34-314. Conditions for issuance; application form.
(a)	Permits for off-premises outdoor advertising signs are transferable upon proper application to the city under the following conditions: 
(1)	Application must be made within 30 days of the change in ownership of the sign or of assignment of any lease; 
(2)	Renewal fees, if any, are current; and 
(3)	The application must be on forms prescribed by the city. 
(b)	Application forms shall require that the transferee agree to the terms and conditions of the permit and any variance, stipulation, special use permit or zoning decision associated with such sign. Such forms shall include a statement of the date of sale attested to by both seller and purchaser. Failure to timely and properly comply with this subsection shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 1)
 
Sec. 34-315. Exemptions.
(a)	Operations not creating a sign or requiring a permit. The following operations shall not be considered as creating a new sign, and therefore shall not require a sign permit: 
(1)	The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved painted or printed sign, billboard, theater marquee or similar approved sign which is specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. 
(2)	The changing of the tenant panels on a freestanding, multiuse tenant board. 
(3)	Normal maintenance or repair of an approved sign or sign structure. 
(b)	Display of sign in zone district. No sign permit shall be required for any of the following signs to be displayed in any zoning district; provided, however, that all other applicable regulations shall apply to such signs and that no such sign in a residential zoning district shall be illuminated. Certain temporary signs not listed here and that do not require a permit are included in article III of this chapter. 
(1)	Official governmental signs. Signs of a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority or entity in its exercise of power of eminent domain, including, but not limited to, traffic signs, signals or similar regulatory devices or warnings, official flags, emblems, official public notices, official instruments, signs of historical interest or other similar signs or devices. 
(2)	Identification signs. Identification signs indicating the name and street number of the owner or occupant, provided that no such sign shall exceed three square feet in sign area or contain any advertising display. Signs may be wall or building mounted or freestanding, provided that if freestanding, the sign shall not exceed a height of three feet. One sign shall be allowed per road frontage. 
(3)	Parking area signs. Signs identifying parking areas in commercial lots, so long as the primary purpose of the signs is to facilitate parking. No commercial message of any kind, except the name of a center, may be displayed and no sign shall exceed 21 square feet per structure. These signs may be permanent or temporary and banners are allowed. All signs must be securely attached to the structure, be in good condition and not discolored, have no tears, rips or frays and must comply with safety standards of this and other ordinances and laws. This subsection has enhanced the ability to erect signs identifying parking areas. As a result, it is not contemplated that variances as to size or number shall be granted without specific extenuating circumstances. These may include number of parking spaces, height of structure, whether increased size would obscure visibility to motorists and the size of the tract, etc. 
(4)	Entrance/exit signs. Signs erected for the purpose of giving directions or instructions into and from the property; provided, however, no such sign shall exceed three feet in height above the pavement and no such sign shall exceed two square feet in sign area. No such sign shall be located closer than one foot from the public right-of-way and no such sign shall contain advertising displays. Location of the sign shall not obstruct sight distance from driveways or intersections. 
(5)	Construction-related signs. Signs placed upon a site under construction, alteration or removal denoting the name of the project under construction, the bank, the architect, engineer or contractor involved; provided, however, that such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in sign area in residential districts or 32 square feet in sign area in other zoning districts and shall not exceed ten feet in height. All signs shall be removed from the site within seven days after final inspection or completion or abandonment of the project. 
(6)	Noncommercial signs. Signs bearing a noncommercial message are allowed without a permit. Such signs shall be located a minimum of one foot from any publicly maintained right-of-way or easement, shall not be located in any medians and must be with proper authorization of the property owners. Such signs shall be limited to a copy area not to exceed 32 square feet each, except that a rider/add-on not exceeding 12 inches high to the bottom or top of a 32 square foot sign and running the entire width of the sign is allowed; further except that, on a residential lot larger than five acres, oversized signs (signs exceeding 32 square feet each) are allowed so long as the total of oversized signs on the lot do not exceed 64 square feet total copy area; and further except that, in areas zoned for commercial or industrial usage, noncommercial signs are subject to the size limitations as set forth in section 34-56 for commercial signs. Nothing herein shall be deemed to disallow the use of grandfathered off-premise outdoor advertising signs to display noncommercial messages. All noncommercial signs are subject to sections 34-8, and 34-13 through 34-15 and subject to sections 34-266 through 34-276. 
(7)	Special event or seasonal signs. Sign displays that include any message, insignia or depiction traditionally associated with the holiday or event celebrated or observed, including state, national or international events. It is envisioned that depictions traditionally associated with a holiday be allowed. These include, by way of example and not by limitation, Santa Claus, Nativity scenes, menorahs, Easter bunnies, pumpkins, Happy New Year flags and July 4th celebrations. However, no commercial message or copy shall be permitted in conjunction with an allowed seasonal or special event sign or display. Each allowed special event or seasonal display may continue for a 15-day period in any one year, except: 
a.	Thanksgiving through New Year's season, when a 40-day period of display will be allowed; and 
b.	Seasonal displays may include signs, banners and ornamental objects which would not ordinarily be allowed under this division. 
(8)	Official flags or insignias. Flags or insignias of the United States, the state or any other nation, state or government. Such flags or insignias shall be flown in compliance with the standards applicable under state and federal law. Flags or insignias of the United States, the state or any other nation, state or government shall not be used for the purpose of advertising, selling or promoting the sale of any good or service. 
(9)	Other flags or insignias. Flags or insignias other than the flag or insignia of the United States, the state or any other nation, state or government, shall be limited to one per lot and shall not exceed 15 square feet in area, and shall be displayed from a flag staff not to exceed 30 feet in height. 
(10)	Occupational and professional signs. Wall mounted or soffit-type nameplates or signs denoting only name, address, telephone number and occupation or profession. Such signs shall be attached to buildings, shall be limited to one per tenant or subdivided occupant, and shall not exceed three square feet in sign area. 
(11)	Architecture. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings and structures. 
(12)	Memorials. Memorial signs or tablets, including, but not limited to, building cornerstones and other similar signs which indicate the names of buildings, dates of erection or other historical data. 
(13)	Temporary window displays. Temporary window displays of merchandise sold on-premises. 
(14)	Scoreboards. Scoreboards on athletic fields, including advertising on school athletic fields, fences or walls. 
(15)	Real estate signs. Signs advertising the lease or sale of the property on which the sign is located are allowed without a permit subject to the following restrictions: 
a.	Residential. In residential zoning districts signs shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
b.	Nonresidential. In all other zoning districts signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
One sign is allowed for each complete 200 feet of the lot's frontage along any one public road. All real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days of the sale or lease of the last property advertised. 
(16)	No trespassing signs. Signs of less than two square feet in sign area, placed near property lines, identifying private property or instructing the public not to enter. 
(17)	Warning or regulatory signs. Signs such as danger, no hunting, no smoking, no dumping, etc. 
(18)	Gas pumps/vending machines. Signs forming an integral part of a gasoline pump, service appliance or vending machine. 
(19)	State emission station signs. Pursuant to Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-20-.09(e), each official station shall be required to display an "authorized station" sign, approved by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, that indicates the facility is a state-certified emission inspection station and shows the fee charged for performing the emission inspection. The station owner shall erect the sign in a location visible to the motoring public. A sign that is illegible or damaged or that contains unapproved modifications shall be replaced with an approved sign. 
(20)	Interior signs. Signs intended to be viewed from the interior of the building. 
(21)	Political signs. Political signs, whereby the public is to be informed regarding a specific political event or candidate or issue, are treated the same as other noncommercial signs. 
a.	Political signs shall be located a minimum of one foot from any publicly maintained right-of-way or easement, shall not be located in any medians and must be with proper authorization of the property owners. 
b.	Political signs shall be limited to a copy area not to exceed 32 square feet; however, this shall not be deemed to disallow the use of general outdoor advertising signs. Candidates may place a rider/add-on not exceeding 12 inches high to the bottom or top of a 32 square foot sign and running the entire width of the sign. 
c.	Political signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
d.	Political signs shall further be subject to sections 34-8, 34-13, 34-14 and 34-15 and sections 34-266 through 34-276. 
e.	Prior to removal of signs in violation, except for signs on the right-of-way or those signs creating a traffic or safety hazard, violators, whether erector or user, shall be given at least 48 hours' notice to remedy their violation. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 2)
 
Sec. 34-316. Person who may apply.
(a)	Permits shall be issued only to: 
(1)	The owner of the real property where the sign is to be located; 
(2)	A lessee who has the right to install or maintain a sign on the real property where the sign is to be located; or 
(3)	The erector of the sign. 
(b)	The application for a permit may be made by the owner, lessee or agent of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 3(a))
 
Sec. 34-317. Application and supporting documentation.
(a)	Application for a sign permit shall be filed with the city on forms furnished by the city. 
(b)	The application for a permit shall contain the identification and address of the property on which the sign is to be erected; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the sign owner, sign erector, property owner, lessee, if applicable, and the agent making the application, if applicable; the type of sign as classified by this division; and such other pertinent information as the city may require to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(c)	The city may require that the application be accompanied by two copies of the following: site plans showing location of structures upon the property on which the sign is to be located and the location of the sign in relation to the structures, property lines, public rights-of-way and other signs; plans, specifications and structural details showing the type and manner of construction, attachment to buildings or in ground erection; and a visual representation of the completed sign. 
(d)	The city may require such plans to bear the signature and seal of a registered land surveyor, professional engineer, architect or land planner. 
(e)	Each application shall include a signed statement from the landowner or possessor of the property giving consent to entry into the property for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of this division. 
(f)	If classification of the road on which the property fronts is of importance to the permit process, the city may require the applicant to submit certified documents from the state department of transportation or the United States Department of Transportation or their successors regarding the classification of the road. 
(g)	The application for a permit shall be accompanied by the appropriate permit fee as established by the mayor and council from time to time. The mayor and council may by amendment to this division establish any other fees, or amend fees set by this division. 
(h)	An applicant who is a lessee shall produce a copy of the lease or a written statement from the owner of the real property that the applicant has the right to maintain a sign on the property. A sign erector shall produce a copy of a current business license and proof of a code compliance bond as required by section 34-277. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, §§ 3(a), 3(c))
 
Sec. 34-318. Procedure upon denial.
Upon denial of the application of a permit, the applicant shall be given written notice stating the reason for the denial within 15 days of the decision to deny the permit. Upon denial of the application for a permit, the applicant may appeal to the mayor and council within 30 days of the receipt of notice of the final decision of the administrative officer. The hearing before the mayor and council shall take place within 45 days of the filing of the appeal with the council rendering a decision on the appeal no longer than ten days after the hearing date. Except for the time limits for an appeal and decision on appeal as prescribed in this subsection, all appeals shall be governed by the mayor and council hearing procedures. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 3(e))
 
Sec. 34-319. Expiration.
Any permit which is required to be renewed or transferred and is not renewed or transferred within 12 months will be deemed expired and cannot be renewed or reinstated. If the permit expires the sign may be removed as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 3(f))
 
Sec. 34-320. Renewal of off-premises outdoor advertising sign permit.
A sign permit for an off-premises outdoor advertising sign shall be renewed annually. The fee for off-premises outdoor advertising signs annual renewal shall be as set by the mayor and council from time to time. Renewal fees shall be due January 1 of each year, and fees not received by April 1 shall be subject to a monthly penalty equal to the amount of the renewal fee each month the renewal is delinquent. Should a renewal fee remain delinquent in excess of one year, the permit shall thereafter expire. If a sign is erected and the permit expires under the provisions of this section, sign enforcement personnel shall be authorized to institute proceedings to remove such sign. 
(Ord. of 2-6-2006, div. B, subd. II, § 20)
 
Chapter 36 SOLID WASTE 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 36-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved city garbage bags means plastic bags bearing the logo of the city available at retail businesses and from city offices and facilities as designated by the city from time to time. 
Approved receptacle means a waterproof galvanized metal or durable plastic container of a capacity of not less than 20 gallons or more than 35 gallons, having two handles on the side thereof or a bail by which it may be lifted, with a tightfitting metal or plastic top with a handle or so constructed as to permit the free discharge of its contents, weighing not more than 50 pounds when full. The term "approved receptacle" does not include oil or grease drums, paint cans, and similar salvaged containers. 
Building material scraps means scrap building materials from the construction, reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, walkway, driveway, sign and other structure, including, but not limited to, excavated earth, tree stumps, rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber or any other similar material used in construction or the containers or wrappings therefor. 
Collectingvehicle means an engine-powered cab and chassis upon which mobile equipment is mounted for the loading, compacting, transporting, and unloading of refuse or for the receiving, transporting, and unloading of containers. 
Collector means an entity or person other than the city who is permitted by the city to engage in the business of collection or transportation of waste, with or without compensation, from residences, industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, apartments or similar locations; provided, however, that the term "collector" shall not include an individual collecting or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit or a party transporting materials for recycling purposes under agreement with the city. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Garbage means all putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable matter, animal offal and carcasses, and recognizable industrial byproducts, but excluding sewage and human wastes. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals not subject to O.C.G.A. § 4-5-4, and intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description . 
Plasticbag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standards of at least 1.5 mils and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist tie; provided, however, that an untied plastic bag shall not be an "approved container" as that term is defined in this section. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
Receptacles means recycling bins, moveable cans, bags, boxes and any other such containers containing solid waste. 
Refuse means all nonputrescible wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solidwaste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. The term "solid waste" means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Solid waste facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Treetrimmings means tree limbs, leaves, shrubbery trimmings and cuttings and all other trimmings from the natural growth of trees, shrubbery, weeds, plants or grass. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-3001, 9-1001; Code 1985, § 14-60; Ord. of 6-3-1991; Ord. of 2-3-1992; Ord. of 10-7-1996, §§ I, II; Ord. of 2-1-1999, § 1(8.a); Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), § 14-100)
 
Sec. 36-2. Prohibited solid waste accumulation.
No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth herein or under the express prior approval of the superintendent of streets and sanitation. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby prohibited. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of a written notice from the city to do so shall be deemed a violation of this Code and subject to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1002; Code 1985, § 14-61)
 
Sec. 36-3. Scavenging.
No person other than the owner thereof shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste recycling materials or building material scraps pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof except for city authorized collection purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1003; Code 1985, § 14-62; Ord. of 7-1-1991, § 1)
 
Secs. 36-4—36-24. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
 
Sec. 36-25. Applicability.
This article does not include yard trimmings, including limbs, brush, leaves, pine straw or items which cannot be manually removed without the aid of hydraulic or other heavy-duty equipment. This article does not apply to the city-wide bi-annual cleanup from April 1 to April 30 and from October 1 to October 31. 
(Code 1985, § 14-77; Ord. of 4-5-1999, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 14-77)
 
Sec. 36-26. Authority of director to establish rules and regulations; fee schedule.
(a)	The public works director, subject to approval of the city, shall have the authority to establish written rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of this Code, governing the collection and disposal of solid wastes by the city. Copies of these rules and regulations shall be available to the public through the public works director and shall include a schedule of fees for collection and disposal of various solid wastes. 
(b)	Subject to city regulation, residential garbage and refuse service will be available to residences within the city limits. The city shall only collect residential garbage and refuse which is placed on the curb in city approved and identified garbage bags. No curbside placement shall be required for persons who have provided documented evidence of a disability to the city clerk. 
(c)	Residents may not contract for private residential garbage and refuse collection with collectors. 
(d)	All city residents are encouraged to participate in the recycling program offered by the city. All city residents shall be charged a recycling fee as established by the city council. The recycling fee shall be combined with water and sewer fees to each utility customer account and charged as one combined financial undertaking for purposes of revenue collection and the continuation of city services. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3002; Code 1985, § 14-65; Ord. of 1-5-1987; Ord. of 4-7-1987; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 2)
 
Sec. 36-27. Private collection service.
No person other than employees of the city shall engage in collection of solid wastes as a business without first applying for and receiving a business license. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1004; Code 1985, § 14-63)
 
Sec. 36-28. Solid waste disposal to comply with state law and rules.
All disposal of solid wastes shall be at such locations as are in compliance with state law and the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources, and at no other place. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1005; Code 1985, § 14-64)
 
Sec. 36-29. Responsibility for residential unit waste extends to all adult residents.
This article may be enforced against any adult resident of the residential unit failing to abide by its terms. 
(Code 1985, § 14-77; Ord. of 4-5-1999, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 14-77)
 
Sec. 36-30. Preparation, storage and placement of waste for collection.
(a)	It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to prepare, store and place waste for collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)	Each owner shall prevent or otherwise be held responsible for, unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property occupied by him or public thoroughfares adjoining his property. 
(2)	All garbage shall be free from liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags and the tops secured and placed in an approved refuse receptacle. City personnel shall only collect refuse contained in city approved and identified garbage bags. 
(3)	No refuse, refuse containers, tree branches, heavy brush or rubbish shall be placed or piled on the curb in such location or manner as to impede passengers of commercial passenger vehicles from boarding or departing from such vehicles at places designated for such vehicles to stop to let passengers on or off. 
(4)	Noncombustible trash and liquids shall not be collected by the city and shall be disposed of by other means. 
(5)	All refuse receptacles, except single-use paper or plastic bags, single-use paper or cardboard boxes, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent nuisance. 
(6)	Garbage shall be contained in city approved and identified plastic bags at the street or curb. Disabled residents who have provided documented evidence of disability to the public works director shall be exempt from placing garbage at the curb; provided, however, that such residents must use city approved and identified garbage bags for city collection and garbage containers must be readily accessible. 
(7)	Containers shall not be placed for collection inside a garage or carport, inside a fenced area which has a gate that is locked or otherwise secured, or in a yard where a dog is loose or secured in such a manner as to represent a threat to the collector. 
(b)	It is a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(c)	Commercial waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will not be collected except on a special fee basis. 
(d)	The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt or rock from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from or generated by commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, building contractors or others as generated by construction land clearing except on a special fee basis. 
(e)	No person shall place or cause to be placed with solid wastes or refuse to be collected by the department of public works any needles, syringes, lancets, scalpel blades, or broken glass, sharp metals, and other objects that may cause punctures or cuts unless they are first placed in an appropriate container. Any appropriate container is one that is rigid, puncture and break resistant, and tightly lidded during the handling and transport of solid waste and refuse by the department of public works. 
(Code 1985, §§ 14-70, 14-71; Ord. of 2-3-1992; Ord. of 7-12-1993, §§ 4, 5)
 
Sec. 36-31. Placement time and area; storage of receptacles; effect of non-collection.
(a)	Receptacles shall not be placed or allowed at the street prior to 6:00 p.m. on the evening prior to the scheduled day of collection and no receptacle shall remain at the street after 11:00 p.m. on the day of collection. All receptacles must be moved out of view from the street or intersecting streets of any corner lot and must be placed behind the primary dwelling or privacy fence after collection. All receptacles must be out of view from any street. 
(b)	If the garbage collector fails to empty a receptacle on a regularly scheduled day of collection, the resident shall not be deemed to have violated this article for that regularly scheduled day of collection. However, in such cases, the receptacle shall not be left at the street later than 9:00 p.m. on the third day after the regularly scheduled day of collection. 
(Code 1985, §§ 14-75, 14-76; Ord. of 4-5-1999, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-2003, §§ 14-75, 14-76)
 
Sec. 36-32. Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions.
(a)	It is unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(b)	Yard trimmings shall be placed neatly at the curb for collection by the city. Collection shall be made once weekly and each collection shall be limited to one load of leaves and one load of limbs per customer. 
(c)	The city shall not collect any limbs or branches or yard trimmings transported from locations other than the point of collection. 
(d)	Limbs and branches may not exceed six feet in length or six inches in diameter. Stacks of limbs and branches may be no wider than four feet and no higher than four feet. 
(e)	Leaves and limbs shall not be mixed but must be separated into separate piles. 
(f)	Limbs and branches may not include root balls, and no tree stumps of any size will be accepted for collection. 
(g)	The city reserves the right to limit collection of yard trimmings based upon the volume and nature of the materials placed for collection. 
(h)	Collection of yard wastes pursuant to this section applies only to wastes generated by the homeowner or occupant. If the owner or occupant of the property hires a company to provide tree or brush removal, landscaping, lawn maintenance and other yard services, the company hired to provide the services is responsible for waste removal. 
(Code 1985, §§ 14-72—14-74; Ord. of 10-7-1996, § II)
 
Sec. 36-33. Collectors to provide insurance and indemnify city.
(a)	All collectors shall obtain, maintain and pay all premiums for, and file with the city certificates of insurance evidencing the following types and amounts of insurance: 
(1)	Commercial general liability insurance covering claims by any persons on accounts of injury to or death of a person occasioned by the refuse collection operation, with minimum limits as follows: 
a.	Bodily injury and personal injury/death to one person, $250,000.00; 
b.	Bodily injury and personal injury/death to two or more persons in any one occurrence, $500,000.00; 
c.	Property damage of $100,000.00 per occurrence; and 
d.	Policy aggregate limits of $500,000.00. 
(2)	Business auto liability insurance with limits of $500,000.00, combined single limits per occurrence for bodily injury and personal injury. 
(3)	Worker's compensation injury coverage as required by state law. 
(b)	All collectors shall comply with all federal environmental protection act regulations or state regulations regarding financial compliance on the handling of hazardous waste materials. 
(c)	All insurance contracts shall be in a form reasonably satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state and reasonably acceptable to the city. All such policies shall require 30 days' certified written notice to all insured parties prior to any cancellation. 
(d)	All insurance contracts must specify vehicles for trash collection. 
(e)	All collectors shall provide the city with annual proof of insurance. Failure to provide such evidence shall be grounds for revocation of the collector's business license. 
(f)	The collector shall notify the governing authority of changes, renewals or cancellation by certified written notice at least 30 days prior to any change, renewal or cancellation. 
(g)	The collector shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments and from third parties for damage which may be the result of willful, negligent parties for damage which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortious conduct or operations arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of wastes, whether or not the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article. 
(h)	The collector shall pay all expense incurred by the city, including attorneys' fees and other costs of litigation, in defending itself with regards to all claims and action mentioned above. 
(Code 1985, § 14-68; Ord. of 6-3-1991; Ord. of 2-1-1999, § 1(8.a,e))
 
Sec. 36-34. Collector vehicle and business operation requirements.
All persons collecting and disposing of waste materials for a fee shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)	Vehicle type and size. Garbage trucks shall comply with the regulations and licensing of the state department of transportation and with applicable local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets which must be traveled for pickup. 
(2)	Number of vehicles. All collectors shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. All vehicles and other equipment shall be kept in good repair, appearance, and in a sanitary condition at all times. Nothing in this article shall prohibit collectors from sharing backup vehicles with other collectors, provided that all collectors comply with the terms of this article including insurance. 
(3)	Ownership. Registration and title of the vehicles shall be in the name of the permit holder or leasing agent with duly authorized power of attorney issued in the name of the permit holder. 
(4)	Recycling exemption. Vehicles used exclusively for transporting recyclable materials shall be exempt from this entire article. 
(5)	Disposal of refuse. All collectors must dispose of all waste collected in an approved disposal facility regulated by the state department of natural resources or the county. 
(6)	Customer service. Each collector shall maintain a published telephone number and a responsible person in charge of customer service to provide to the city and to each customer the following information: 
a.	A written policy of services to be provided and the terms of its agreement with the customer; and 
b.	A system of customer service to resolve complaints. 
(Code 1985, § 14-69; Ord. of 6-3-1991)
 
Secs. 36-35—36-56. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. LITTERING 
 
Sec. 36-57. Purpose, intent and applicability.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are to provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of littering on public or private property, to prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city, and to prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), §§ 14-99.1, 14-99.2)
 
Sec. 36-58. Compatibility with other regulations.
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), § 14-99.3)
 
Sec. 36-59. Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters.
It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city jurisdiction or any waters in the jurisdiction unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)	The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), § 14-101)
State law reference(s)—Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
 
Sec. 36-60. Vehicle loads causing litter.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), § 14-102)
State law reference(s)—Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-44. 
 
Sec. 36-61. Violations and enforcement.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), § 14-103.1)
 
Sec. 36-62. Evidence of violation.
(a)	When litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)	Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property, in violation of this article, is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), § 14-103.2)
 
Sec. 36-63. Penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows by a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00. In addition: 
(1)	The violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city. 
(2)	In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(3)	In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(4)	The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(4), § 14-103.3)
 
Chapter 38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 38-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter into the municipal/county separate storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions on practices which control the quality or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
City/county separate storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, municipal/county streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, other stormwater facilities) which is: 
(1)	Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)	Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)	Not a combined sewer; and 
(4)	Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, etc. 
Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus. 
Department means the stormwater division of the public works department responsible for all stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this chapter. 
Development activity means: 
(1)	The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites, tracts, parcels or other divisions by plat or deed; 
(2)	The construction, installation, or alteration of a structure, impervious surface, or drainage facility; 
(3)	Clearing, scraping, grubbing, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site; or 
(4)	Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise disturbing the soil, vegetation mud, sand or rock of a site. 
Director means either the director of public works or the director's duly authorized representatives. 
Discharge means the release of treated or untreated water to the municipal/county separate storm sewer system. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Illicit connection means a connection to a municipal/county separate storm sewer system which results in discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the municipal/county separate storm sewer). 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this chapter and to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by the city, state, or federal government. 
Procedure means a procedure adopted by the utility, to implement a regulation adopted under this chapter, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the city or other agencies. 
Regulation means any regulation, rule or requirement prepared by the department and adopted by the city pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
Sanitary sewer system means the complete sanitary sewer system of the city which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
Site means any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management means the collection, retention, detention, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this chapter and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. Stormwater management is intended to prevent increased flooding, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facilities means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff, constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following the precipitation. 
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
(Code 1985, § 5-71; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Sec. 38-2. Scope of responsibility, powers of the department.
(a)	The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
(b)	The director or designee shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	The department shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension, and improvement of the municipal/county separate storm sewer system, including activities necessary to control stormwater runoff and activities necessary to carry out stormwater management programs included in the city's NPDES stormwater permit. 
(d)	The application of this chapter and the provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute. In addition, if site characteristics indicate that complying with these minimum requirements will not provide adequate designs or protection for local property or residents, it is the designer's responsibility to exceed the minimum requirements as necessary. 
(e)	The department shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this chapter, including the right to maintain an action or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this chapter. 
(f)	The department may: 
(1)	Administer, coordinate and oversee acquisition, design, construction, and operation and management of municipal stormwater facilities and conveyances; 
(2)	Establish or oversee establishment of development standards and guidelines for controlling stormwater runoff; 
(3)	Determine the manner in which stormwater facilities should be operated; 
(4)	Inspect private systems which discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(5)	Advise the city, and other city departments on issues related to stormwater; 
(6)	Protect facilities and properties controlled by the department and prescribe how they are used by others; 
(7)	Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to comply with the terms of this chapter; 
(8)	Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(9)	Adopt and implement the stormwater management program for the city. 
(Code 1985, § 5-72; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Sec. 38-3. Stormwater runoff quantity controls.
(a)	Water quantity controls will be provided as a part of all development pursuant to the provisions of the city soil erosion sedimentation regulations. 
(b)	The city may allow stormwater runoff that otherwise is of unacceptable quantity or which would be discharged in volumes or at rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by the soil erosion and sedimentation ordinance and other ordinances to be discharged into drainage facilities off the site of the development, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)	It is not practicable to completely manage runoff on the site in a manner that meets the design and performance standards found in the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and other ordinances; 
(2)	Off-site drainage facilities and channels leading to them are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with requirements of those ordinances; and 
(3)	Adequate provision is made for sharing of construction, maintenance and operating costs of facilities. 
(Code 1985, § 5-73)
 
Sec. 38-4. Prohibitions.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge to any component of the municipal/county separate storm sewer system or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into such system all matter of any nature excepting only such storm or surface water as herein authorized. 
(b)	The following are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)	Water line flushing performed by a government agency, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, and unpolluted groundwater infiltration. 
(2)	Unpolluted pumped groundwater. 
(3)	Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and street wash water. 
(4)	Discharges or flows from firefighting. 
(5)	Other unpolluted water. 
(c)	In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city/county separate storm sewer system of any material or substance other than stormwater runoff, the person concerned shall inform the department within three hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps to contain, treat, or take other actions to minimize effects of the discharge on the municipal separate storm sewer system and receiving streams. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. 
(d)	It is unlawful for any person, company, corporation, etc., to connect any pipe, open channel, any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water, which is approved by the director, based on the exemptions listed in subsection (b) of this section, to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(e)	Improper connections in violation of this Code must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the sanitary sewer system upon approval by the director. 
(Code 1985, § 5-74; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Sec. 38-5. Maintenance, inspection and enforcement.
(a)	Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services a single lot or commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows access for maintenance. 
(b)	All other stormwater management control facilities or BMPs shall be publicly owned or maintained only if accepted for maintenance by the city council. 
(c)	The director may require dedication of privately owned stormwater facilities which discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the city. 
(d)	The director shall determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)	The director or his designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, without hindrance, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this chapter. The director or his designee shall duly notify the owner of the property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(f)	The director or designated employee of the department bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, without hindrance, all properties for which the city holds an easement for repairs, maintenance and other purposes related to any portion of the stormwater management facilities lying within the easement. The director or his designee shall duly notify the owner of the property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(g)	Measurements, tests and analyses performed by the department or required of any discharger to the municipal/county separate storm sewer system shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 136, unless another method is approved by the director. 
(h)	If, after inspection, the condition of a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right, but not the duty, to take action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. 
(i)	Upon determination that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the director shall give written notice to the accused violator within five days. This notice shall specify the nature and evidence of violation and the potential penalty involved and the amount of time in which to correct deficiencies, if appropriate. 
(j)	Violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 or six months in the county jail. The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this chapter or to correct violations of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
(k)	Enforcement of this chapter is final unless the accused violator submits a written request for a hearing within five days of the violation notice being served. 
(Code 1985, § 5-75; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Sec. 38-6. Variances from requirements, appeals.
(a)	The director may grant a variance from requirements of this chapter if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of the section. 
(b)	A written request for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, a variance should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. 
(c)	The director will conduct a review of the request for a variance within 45 working days of receiving the request. 
(d)	Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director (including any decision with reference to the granting or denial of a variance from the terms of this chapter) may appeal same by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within five days of the issuance of the decision by the director. 
(e)	The director can then reverse his decision or send this notice to the city council. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the director is alleged to be in error, and the director shall prepare and send to the city council and appellant a written response to the notice of appeal within 45 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(f)	All appeals shall be heard by the city council. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after receipt of notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the mayor. The city council shall then make its findings within ten days of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the city council shall be based on guidelines for appeals established by the city council and amended from time to time. 
(g)	If either the appellant or director is dissatisfied with the city council decision, he can appeal the decision to the superior court. 
(Code 1985, § 5-76; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Sec. 38-7. Cooperation with other governments.
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purpose of this chapter. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative monitoring, and cooperative management of stormwater system and management programs. 
(Code 1985, § 5-77; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Sec. 38-8. Property owner liability; supplemental charges.
Any person in violation of any portion of this chapter shall pay for all costs associated with the violation, including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death, legal, or other. 
(Code 1985, § 5-78; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Secs. 38-9—38-34. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. POST-DEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT
 
Sec. 38-35. Purpose and intent.
(a)	The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment by focusing on the types of frequently occurring storm events that generate the most water quality impacts. 
(b)	Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet those purposes through the following objectives: 
(1)	Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)	Establish post-construction stormwater management and site planning and design criteria to protect natural resources from the direct impacts of the land development process, and to preserve or restore natural hydrologic conditions on development sites; 
(3)	Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management methodologies, stormwater better site design practices, peak rate or runoff reduction, and the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas by establishing minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)	Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)	Coordinate site design plans with the city's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)	Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for operation, inspection, maintenance, and repair of private structural stormwater control facilities and threat to public safety or the environment; 
(7)	Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term compliance; and 
(8)	Protect public health and safety by reducing the risk of localized flooding and reducing the amount of runoff entering public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-102, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-36. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city, other government agency, or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Demolition means the removal of an existing building, structure, or other impervious surface. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Grading means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and slopes; this includes, but is not limited to, stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and includes the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenfield means land in its natural condition. 
Green infrastructure means an interconnected natural system or engineered system that strengthens and mimics natural hydrologic functions and processes through the use of plants and soil to slow, filter, evapotranspire, and infiltrate stormwater runoff close to its source; or the capture and reuse of stormwater runoff. 
Greenspace means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a vegetated state. 
High risk operation means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater as consistent with facilities operating under a standard industrial code or requiring coverage under the state general National Pollution Discharge Elimination System stormwater permit for discharges from industrial activities or as identified as a highly visible pollutant source per the city's stormwater management plan developed in accordance with the requirements of the city's National Pollution Discharge Elimination System city separate storm sewer system permit. 
Hotspot means an area with, or having potential for a high level of pollution or contamination within a larger area of low adverse environmental impact or normal environmental quality. 
Hydrologic soil group means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural percolation of water into soil, which includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and standard concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an entity which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which, when properly recorded in the deed records of the superior court of Cobb County or Douglas County, whichever is applicable, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation, as determined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate, or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)permit means the applicable NPDES permit issued by the state environmental protection division and in effect at the time of application for a post-development stormwater plan approval. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials, and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. The term "nonpoint source pollution" means a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity or quality control or other stormwater management benefits and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (e.g., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding up to the 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgage or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of the site. 
Percolation means the process of absorption of stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city public works to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Post-development means the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development means the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the city. Where phased development or plan approval occurs, which includes, but is not limited to, demolition, preliminary grading, roads and utilities, the existing conditions at the time prior to issuance of the first project-related approval or permit shall represent pre-developed conditions, in accordance with section 38-44(4). 
Project means the portion of the proposed development in terms of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Q means the peak rate of discharge. 
Redevelopment means a land development project or addition on a previously developed site. 
Regional stormwater management facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for site-specific on-site controls may be either eliminated or reduced. 
Responsible party means the owner or owner's agent. 
Runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Runoff reduction means the interception, evapotranspiration, infiltration or capture and reuse of stormwater runoff. 
Single-family residential means the development or redevelopment of a lot containing a single one- or two-family dwelling as defined in this section. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches, practices and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means the documents describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management site plan means an engineering drawing depicting how and where stormwater management facilities and practices will be installed on the site. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-103, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-37. Applicability.
(a)	Development and redevelopment. This article shall apply to all development and redevelopment, except single-family residential development, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. The standards found in this article apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following: 
(1)	New development that involves the creation of any impervious cover; 
(2)	New development that involves land development activities of one disturbed acre or more; 
(3)	Redevelopment that involves land development activity of one disturbed acre or more; 
(4)	Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition, or demolition and replacement of 500 square feet or more of impervious cover; or 
(5)	Demolition that leaves in place more than 500 square feet of impervious cover within the area of demolition, unless building permit application for replacement structure or use which includes appropriate stormwater management is in place. 
(b)	Single-family residential. Sections 38-44(1) and (2), 38-46, and 38-47 shall apply to a single-family residential development, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. For the purposes of this article, a single-family residential development shall include the following: 
(1)	Development or redevelopment of any site involving the construction of a single-family residence; or 
(2)	Addition or modification that involves the creation, addition, or demolition and replacement of 1,000 square feet or more of impervious cover to any single-family residential site. 
A single-family residential development shall not include development or redevelopment of a site intended to be developed as a larger common plan of development or sale as defined in section 48-1 of the city's zoning regulations. 
(c)	High risk operation and hotspot. This article shall apply to any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that meets the definition of the term "hotspot" or "high risk operation," which includes, but are not limited to, fueling stations or industrial facilities with potential for runoff pollution. 
(d)	Exemptions. The following activities are exempted from subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, but shall be subject to the minimum requirements in section 38-47: 
(1)	Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within properly zoned agricultural areas resulting in less than 1,000 square feet of impervious surface; 
(2)	Regrading or reshaping existing athletic fields or public parks resulting in less than 1,000 square feet of new impervious surface; 
(3)	Installations, repairs, or modifications to storm drains, drainage structures, stormwater management facilities, or other drainage facilities to improve drainage capabilities; 
(4)	Installations, repairs, or modifications to sanitary sewer facilities to expand or improve sanitary sewer service capabilities; 
(5)	Work specifically related to the installation, repair, or maintenance of utility service connections, including, but not limited to, sewer, water, electric, telephone, and gas, to existing facilities; 
(6)	Installations of dumpster pads with drains connected to sanitary sewers; 
(7)	Installations or modifications to existing structures to accommodate the Federal Americans with Disability Act requirements, including, but not limited to, elevator shafts, handicapped access ramps and parking, and enlarged entrances or exits; 
(8)	Installations or modifications to existing structures to address health and safety issues or compliance with city requirements, including, but not limited to, fire escapes, stairways, and additional exits; 
(9)	Installations to existing structures of incidental mechanical or electrical equipment placed on areas of previously existing impervious surfaces; 
(10)	Installation of hardscape less than 5,000 square feet, such as uncovered parking, pedestrian, or patio areas, which utilize pervious pavement or other appropriate infiltration techniques; 
(11)	Incidental maintenance or repair of existing impervious paved surfaces which impact less than 1,000 square feet; 
(12)	Overlays or resurfacing of existing impervious paved surfaces; 
(13)	Any work permitted in the public rights-of-way such as the installations of sidewalks, driveway aprons, and street cuts, or projects on private property necessitated by activities in the public rights-of-way; 
(14)	Sidewalks or trails 15 feet wide or less where runoff is directed via sheet flow toward vegetated areas at least twice as wide as the paved area, provided that the potential for erosion is adequately addressed; 
(15)	Stream bank stabilization or restoration activities, or activities solely for the purpose of environmental remediation; 
(16)	Replacement of an existing driveway to access a single-family residential development; or 
(17)	Any minor work which in the professional judgment of the director, or his designee, is deemed in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-104, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-38. Designation of administrator.
The director of the city public works, or his designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-105, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-39. Stormwater design manual.
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the applicable sections of the coastal stormwater supplement and any relevant rules, regulations, or policies of the city including pertinent sections of this Code or procedures of the city public works in effect at the time of application for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. the manual may be updated and expanded periodically based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-108, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-40. Permit procedures and requirements.
(a)	No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)	Any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall obtain a building permit or other appropriate approval from the city. 
(c)	A permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)	Stormwater consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 38-41; 
(2)	Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 38-42; 
(3)	Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 38-48; 
(4)	Performance bond in accordance with section 38-49, if applicable; and 
(5)	Permit application and plan. 
(d)	The approved stormwater management plan shall obligate the responsible party to accomplish all land clearing, construction, development and drainage in accordance with the stormwater management plan. Any and all permits for development activities may be revoked at any time if the construction of stormwater management facilities is not conducted in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(e)	Applicant or responsible party shall obtain all state and federal permits required for the proposed development activity in addition to the plans and permits required by the public works department. 
(f)	The public works department shall inform the applicant or responsible party whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the public works department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. 
(g)	Upon a finding by the public works department that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement meet the requirements of this article, the public works department may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(h)	Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or responsible party shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	The applicant or responsible party shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)	The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)	The public works department shall be allowed access to the site for inspection and enforcement; and 
(4)	No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the public works department. 
(i)	Upon completion of the project, the applicant or responsible party shall submit the stormwater engineer's certification and as-built plan as required by section 38-50(b). If the as-built differs substantially from the approved plan but is still acceptable to the public works department, then the applicant or responsible party shall update the recorded inspection and maintenance agreement upon approval of the public works department. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-109, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-41. Stormwater consultation meeting.
(a)	Participation with public works. When a development, redevelopment or demolition of a site that meets at least one of the applicability criteria found in section 38-37(a) is proposed, the owner, developer, engineer, or agent shall participate in a consultation meeting with the public works department to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and ideas for stormwater management designs utilizing green infrastructure and runoff reduction techniques. The owner, developer, engineer, or agent shall receive a consultation meeting certification at the conclusion of the consultation meeting. This consultation meeting shall be held prior to approval of a preliminary plat or the submittal of an application for a permit in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)	The public works department shall schedule a consultation meeting within five business days from the date a written meeting request is received. 
(2)	Failure of the public works department to schedule a consultation meeting within the time required by this section shall waive the requirements of subsection (a) of this section and a copy of the written meeting request submitted to the public works department by the owner, developer, engineer, or agent attached to the permit application shall meet the requirement of the consultation meeting certification in section 38-40(c)(1). 
(3)	If no consultation meeting is requested or attended by the owner, developer, engineer, or agent prior to the submittal of a permit application, the public works department may delay review of the permit application until such meeting is held; provided, however, that when the land development activity involves only an application for the erection of a structure governed by the city comprehensive zoning regulations, the requirements of section 38-40(c) and subsection (a) of this section shall not apply. 
(b)	Pre-consultation meeting information. To assist the public works department' review of the land development project and to assist the applicant or responsible party with the creation of a stormwater management plan, the following information should be submitted prior to or at the time of the consultation meeting: 
(1)	Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which shall illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas, and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)	Infiltration rates. Infiltration rates shall be determined by soil surveys, on-site soil analysis, or percolation test. If a site has been previously developed or graded or contains urban soil types, a percolation test is required. 
(3)	Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources in existence prior to the commencement of the project. This inventory shall address resources both on the site and in the surrounding area that is or may be impacted by the project. This inventory shall also include a description of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks, including, but not limited to, drinking water well setbacks and septic setbacks. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that present constraints for development. 
(4)	Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system that identifies the scope and magnitude of the project and related stormwater requirements and identifies how stormwater better site design techniques will be used to reduce the need for structural stormwater controls. The plan shall also include preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-110, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-42. Submittal requirements for stormwater management plans.
(a)	The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 38-44. 
(b)	This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, and the city's submittal requirements for commercial and single-family residential development. Plans and studies shall be presented in a format that itemizes each of the requirements in subsection (c) of this section, including performance criteria set forth in section 38-44. 
(c)	The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the applicable design requirements and forms found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Coastal Stormwater Supplement, and the city's submittal requirements for commercial and single-family residential development. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)	Vicinity map; 
(3)	Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces; 
(4)	Infiltration rates. Infiltration rates shall be determined by soil surveys, on-site soil analysis, or a percolation test. If site has been previously developed or graded or contains urban soil types, a percolation test is required; 
(5)	Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources in existence prior to the commencement of the project. This inventory shall address resources both on the site and in the surrounding area that is or may be impacted by the project. This inventory shall also include a description of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks, including, but not limited to, drinking water well setbacks and septic setbacks. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that present constraints for development; 
(6)	Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, which shall include a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines in section 38-44; 
(7)	Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall be calculated in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and include a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 38-44; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For a subdivision of land or planned development, post-development runoff volumes, rates, and velocities shall be calculated based on the built out conditions of the entire parcel to be subdivided, regardless of future ownership of individual lots. Estimates of impervious surfaces shall be made based on maximum allowable lot coverage in accordance with the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance when meeting the performance criteria in section 38-44(3) through (9). The developer of the subdivided parcel may provide the runoff reduction/water quality measures in accordance with section 38-44(1) and (2) for individual lots and must be reflected accordingly on the final plat; 
(8)	Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include a map or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 38-44; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans, TMDL implementation plans, or local greenspace protection plan; 
(9)	Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(10)	Construction phase erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan. An erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan in accordance with the city soil erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control regulations, the state Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, and any NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. Prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan, the applicant or responsible party shall submit a proposed staged construction and inspection control schedule for approval; otherwise, the construction and inspection control schedule will be for the entire drainage system. No stage work related to the construction of stormwater management facilities or best management practices shall proceed until the next proceeding stage of work, according to the sequence specified in the approved staged construction and inspection control schedule, as inspected and approved. Runoff reduction and water quality measures shall be installed in the final phase of construction to prevent clogging; 
(11)	Stormwater landscaping plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved; 
(12)	Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. This plan will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include a narrative describing how the stormwater management system is designed to function, including capture, runoff control, water quality treatment, channel protection and flood protection, a narrative describing ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for all stormwater management facilities and practices as shown on the stormwater management site plan, an inspection and maintenance schedule, description of maintenance tasks, identification of responsible parties for ongoing maintenance, description of funding source, and a review of access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan; 
(13)	Maintenance access easements. The applicant or responsible party must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Such easements shall be reflected in all plats and surveys; 
(14)	Inspection and maintenance agreements. The owner must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 38-48; and 
(15)	Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant or responsible party shall certify and provide documentation to the public works department that all applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the site development and stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-111, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-43. Off-site facilities.
(a)	The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional stormwater management facility. The off-site or regional stormwater management facility, if applicable, must comply with the following: 
(1)	The off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose; 
(2)	The off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices; 
(3)	There must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility; and 
(4)	On-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)	A stormwater management plan that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be submitted to the public works department. 
(c)	To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public works department that the use of an off-site or regional stormwater management facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)	Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)	Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)	Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-112, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-44. Performance criteria for stormwater management.
For new developments, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the area of the site impacted by the proposed work. For redevelopment, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the area of the site impacted by the proposed work, provided that the impacted area does not exceed 35 percent of the previously developed area. If the impacted area exceeds 35 percent of the previously developed area, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the entire development, including the previously developed area: 
(1)	Stormwater runoff reduction. The stormwater runoff volume generated by the first 1.0 inch of rainfall shall be retained on-site in order to help maintain pre-development site hydrology and help protect the local watershed from several indirect impacts of the land development process, including decreased groundwater recharge, decreased base flow and degraded water quality. A stormwater management system is presumed to comply with these criteria if: 
a.	It includes green infrastructure practices that provide for the interception and evapotranspiration, infiltration, or capture and reuse of stormwater runoff, that have been selected, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the information presented in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; or constitutes an alternative practice responsibly designed and documented by the engineer to reproduce the intent of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and 
b.	It is designed to provide the amount of stormwater runoff reduction from the runoff generated by the first 1.0 inch of rainfall as specified in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(2)	Water quality protection. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if it satisfies the stormwater runoff reduction criteria in subsection (1) of this section. However, if any of the stormwater runoff volume generated by the first 1.0 of rainfall cannot be reduced or retained on the development site, due to site characteristics or constraints, such as, a high water table, surface bedrock, contaminated soils, low soil infiltration rates, or the presence of a high risk operation or hotspot, the remaining volume shall be increased by a multiplier of 1.2 and shall be intercepted and treated in one or more stormwater management practices that provide at least an 80 percent reduction in total suspended solids loads in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.	The practice shall be sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.	Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural management practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; or constitutes an alternative practice responsibly designed and documented by the engineer to reproduce the intent of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and 
c.	Runoff from a high risk operation or hotspot land use activity identified by the public works department is adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural management practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(3)	Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following approaches: 
a.	Preservation, restoration or reforestation with native vegetation of the applicable stream buffer pursuant to the city stream buffer ordinance. 
b.	24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and 
c.	Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, stream channel protection is not required. 
(4)	Overbank flooding protection.
a.	For new development (greenfield), overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by attenuating the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate up to the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. 
b.	For redevelopment, overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by reducing the peak discharge rate up to the 25-year, 24-hour storm event in accordance with the following formula: 
PIC = Pre-development Impervious Cover 
PDRR = Peak Discharge Rate Reduction 
c.	For sites where previous demolition has removed impervious surfaces, pre-development peak discharge rate calculations and percentage of impervious coverage shall be calculated based on pre-demolition conditions. For sites that have been demolished and have remained fallow and stabilized with vegetation for a minimum of five years, they shall be considered as having pre-development conditions of 20 percent impervious cover for purposes of calculating peak discharge rate reduction. 
d.	For land development permitted post-2004 and served by appropriate stormwater management facilities, subsequent redevelopment of the same area is not required to further reduce the peak discharge rate, provided that the site continues to meet the reduction previously achieved. 
e.	For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, overbank flooding protection is not required. 
(5)	Extreme flooding protection.
a.	Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by attenuating and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event without any increase in peak discharge rate, such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
b.	For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, extreme flooding protection is not required. 
(6)	Structural stormwater controls.
a.	All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the public works department before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the public works department may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
b.	Applicant or responsible party shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(7)	Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The applicant or responsible party may take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume and runoff reduction requirements. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(8)	Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.	Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.	All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan, pursuant to section 38-42, using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.	Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(9)	Rules for dam safety and any other applicable federal, state, or local requirement. Any land development activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-113, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-45. High risk operation and hotspot requirements.
In addition to the provisions of this article, developments and redevelopments that meet the definition of the term "high risk operation" or "hotspot" shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)	No portion of the area of risk shall bypass the stormwater management system; 
(2)	At a minimum, treatment method must be as specified in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and be designed for the specific pollutant of risk; and 
(3)	The director may, at his discretion, create additional and specific policies regarding these types of operations. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-114, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-46. Single-family residential plan requirements.
In addition to the requirements in sections 38-44(1) and (2), and 38-47, single-family residential developments not otherwise exempt from this article, under section 38-37(d), shall submit a grading plan and an erosion, sediment, and pollution control plan to the public works department identifying the following: 
(1)	Existing and proposed ground contours and elevations; 
(2)	Sanitary and storm sewers, structures and easements; 
(3)	Configuration and finished floor elevations for existing and proposed building structures; 
(4)	Location, configuration and finished elevations for existing and proposed paved areas; 
(5)	Erosion and sediment control practices in conformance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6; and 
(6)	Plan shall be signed and sealed by a state-registered architect, landscape architect, engineer or land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-115, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-47. Minimum requirements.
For all development and redevelopment activities, including single-family residential and those which are otherwise exempt from this article, the following minimum requirements shall apply: 
(1)	Lots and buildings shall be developed in a manner to ensure that stormwater exiting individual parcels or lots under post-developed conditions does not adversely impact the adjacent parcels or lots as a result of concentrated flows, flooding, erosion, or deposits of silt or sediment; 
(2)	The stormwater discharge from a downspout, cistern, or any water collection device shall be located a distance of no less than ten feet from common property line and oriented so direction of concentrated flow is not toward the adjacent property line; 
(3)	Discharge from any downspout described in subsection (1) of this section must be dissipated, infiltrated, or diverted such that flows will not be concentrated; and 
(4)	No person shall erect, construct, or otherwise permit any obstruction that prevents the natural or contained flow of water to any component of the stormwater system of the city, unless such obstruction is allowed as part of a permit approved pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-116, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-48. Stormwater management inspection and maintenance.
(a)	Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder for which the public works department requires ongoing maintenance, the owner or responsible party shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement. Such agreement shall be submitted prior to the issuance of any such permit and shall be binding on all appropriate successors in title of the site. Inspection and maintenance agreements may terminate or be amended by subsequent development approved by the public works department. Any applicant for development will be required to obtain an inspection and maintenance agreement for all proposed and existing stormwater management facilities on the property. 
(b)	The inspection and maintenance agreement must be approved by the public works department; and upon approval, recorded in the deed records of the superior court of Cobb County or Douglas County, whichever is applicable, prior to issuance of permit. 
(c)	Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor in title. If portions of the site are sold or otherwise transferred, the inspection and maintenance responsibility shall pass to the appropriate successor in title. Such transfers shall designate for each portion of the site, the responsible party to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance and shall be recorded in the deed records for the property. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. 
(d)	Where a stormwater maintenance facility exists on any property to be subdivided, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, planned developments, multifamily developments, or mixed use developments, the facility shall be owned in accordance with the following: 
(1)	If a property owners' association is created, in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq., the stormwater maintenance facility shall be treated as a common area, and the following provisions, at a minimum, shall be included in the property owners' association's bylaws or covenants: 
a.	Governance by the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq., or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations; 
b.	Automatic compulsory membership in the property owners' association of all lot purchasers and their successors in title; 
c.	A fair and uniform method of assessment and collection/payment for dues, maintenance, and related costs; 
d.	Perpetual and continued inspection and maintenance liability for the required stormwater facility; 
e.	Filing of all required covenants, declarations, and restrictions with the clerk of the superior court of Cobb County or Douglas County, whichever is applicable; and 
f.	Prior arrangements for the transfer of ownership of the stormwater maintenance facility in fair and equal parts to all lot owners in the case of the property owners' association dissolving. 
(2)	If a property owners association is not created, the stormwater maintenance facility shall be owned by all appropriate successors in title to the land in the development sold or otherwise transferred. Costs associated with the inspection and maintenance of the stormwater facility shall be assessed equitably among all of the lots in the development. 
a.	The inspection and maintenance agreement shall comply with the requirements of the public works department and include, at a minimum, a description of the property, appropriate details of the stormwater management plan, an operations and maintenance plan, and a plan for annual inspection. 
b.	In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement the public works department may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 38-51. 
c.	Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder, the owner or responsible party shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form provided by the public works department, which shall state, at a minimum, that the owner or responsible party shall indemnify and hold harmless the city or the public works department for any up-stream or down-stream damages due to structural, design, installation, maintenance or any other failure of the stormwater management facility. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-117, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-49. Performance and maintenance bonds.
Bonding requirements shall be in parallel with those included for erosion control application requirements. Prior to release of the bond, all stormwater facilities shall be intact and functioning as designed and in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-118, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-50. Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system.
(a)	Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the public works department or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the public works department. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(1)	All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.	The date and location of the inspection; 
b.	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.	Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.	Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(2)	If any violations are found, the responsible party shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)	Final inspection and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project, and prior to final inspection or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant or responsible party is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants or responsible parties are required to submit an electronic format as determined by the city, and a paper and electronic format of the actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the as-built configuration for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the public works department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-119, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-51. Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices.
(a)	Absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement. The absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement shall not relieve the owner or responsible party from performing proper maintenance and inspection of the stormwater management facility. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of this article, the public works department may correct the violation as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)	Pre-existing facilities. For facilities constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the owner or responsible party shall perform proper maintenance of the stormwater management facility as required by the indemnification agreement. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of this article, the public works department may correct the violation as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)	Maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. The following shall apply to all sites regardless of the existence of an inspection and maintenance agreement: 
(1)	Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(2)	A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the owner or responsible party. Such inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement pursuant to section 38-48, or, in the absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement, in accordance with the requirements of this article. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the public works department shall notify the party responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail, or by delivery in person of a notice of violation to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Failure of the public works department to provide such notice shall not relieve the owner or responsible party from performing proper maintenance and inspection of the stormwater management facility. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the public works department may correct the violation as provided in subsection (e) of this section; 
(3)	An annual inspection shall be performed and attested to by a qualified professional (certified Level II state soil and water conservation commission specialist) with results reported to the public works department. Any deficiencies noted in either operation or maintenance of the facility must be included in the report along with the proposed remedies required and a timetable for their implementation. If substantial deficiencies are found, a follow-up inspection to confirm correction of the deficiencies shall be performed and reported to the public works department; and 
(4)	Inspection programs by the public works department may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities, and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(d)	Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall maintain records of all maintenance and repairs and provide copies to the public works department upon request. 
(e)	Failure to maintain. If an owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement or indemnity agreement, the public works department, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The public works department may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-120, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-52. Notice of violation.
If the public works department determines that an owner or responsible party has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan, inspection and maintenance agreement, indemnity agreement, or any provision of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such owner or other responsible party. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible party in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible party; 
(2)	The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipal court by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, or where a person is taking action without a required permit, such a notice of violation must be appealed within 24 hours). 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-121, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-53. Enforcement.
(a)	Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in section 38-54 may be in addition to and shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)	All development and redevelopment activities, including single-family residential development, shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Lots and buildings shall be developed in a manner to ensure that stormwater exiting individual parcels or lots under post-developed conditions does not adversely impact the adjacent parcels or lots as a result of concentrated flows, flooding, erosion, or deposits of silt or sediment; 
(2)	The stormwater discharge from a downspout, cistern, or any water collection device shall be located a distance of no less than ten feet from common property line and oriented so direction of concentrated flow is not toward the adjacent property line; 
(3)	Discharge from any downspout described in subsection (b)(1) of this section must be dissipated, infiltrated, or diverted such that flows will not be concentrated; and 
(4)	No person shall erect, construct, or otherwise permit any obstruction that prevents the natural or contained flow of water to any component of the stormwater system of the city, unless such obstruction is allowed as part of a permit approved pursuant to this article. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be a violation of this article subject to the enforcement provisions and penalties outlined in this article. 
(c)	Right-of-entry for inspection. The public works department may enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-122, 1-15-2015)
 
Sec. 38-54. Penalties.
(a)	Generally. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed within the time provided in the notice of violation for appeal to the municipal court, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
(b)	Notice. Upon expiration of the notice, the public works department may notify the person in violation of its intent to seek penalties and of any other enforcement to be taken under this section. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the public works department shall first notify the owner or other responsible party in writing of its intended action, and shall provide not more than 72 hours (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, or taking action without a required permit, 24 hours' notice shall be provided) to cure such violation. In the event the owner or other responsible party fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the public works department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)	Stop work order. The public works department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner or other responsible party. It shall stop all activities at the site except for the work required to remedy the violation or violations. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein. 
(2)	Withhold certificate of occupancy. The public works department shall notify the city community development to refuse the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The public works department may suspend, revoke, or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. Suspension, revocation or modification of a permit shall not prohibit the responsible party from taking the necessary remedial measures to cure the violations. 
(4)	Civil penalties. In the event the owner or other responsible party fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within the time provided in the notice of violation, or such greater period as the public works department shall deem appropriate after the public works department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the public works department may issue a citation for the violation of this article and impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per violation, depending on the severity of the violation, for each day the violation remains un-remedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the public works department may issue a citation to the owner or other responsible party, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. Imposition of criminal penalties shall be a separate and distinct action from the imposition of civil penalties pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(6)	Liability. Implementation of this section does not reduce liability under any other applicable state or federal law, rule, or requirement. 
(c)	Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. Each remedy listed in this subsection may be sought and imposed for each day of violation and the public works department may seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 5-123, 1-15-2015)
 
Secs. 38-55—38-81. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. ILLICIT DISCHARGES
 
Sec. 38-82. Purpose, intent, applicability, compatibility with other regulations; administration.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the NPDES permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)	Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)	Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)	Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)	Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
(c)	Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)	Administration. The public works director or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-0301(c), § 5-80, 3-1-2004)
 
Sec. 38-83. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7 or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Degradation means a decline to a lower condition, quality, or level. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)	Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 38-84. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state environmental protection division under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)	Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)	Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)	Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 04-0301(c), § 5-81, 3-1-2004)
 
Sec. 38-84. Prohibitions.
(a)	Illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)	Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)	Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the public works director as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)	The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations and, provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)	Illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)	A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)	Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city. 
(4)	Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-0301(c), § 5-82, 3-1-2004)
 
Sec. 38-85. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 04-0301(c), § 5-83, 3-1-2004)
 
Sec. 38-86. Access and inspection of properties and facilities.
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)	If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)	The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)	The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary, in the opinion of the city, to conduct monitoring or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)	The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)	If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the city, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 04-0301(c), § 5-84, 3-1-2004)
 
Sec. 38-87. Notification of accidental discharges and spills.
(a)	Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, or state or federal waters, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)	The person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)	In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)	Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-0301(c), § 5-85, 3-1-2004)
 
Sec. 38-88. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
(a)	Violations. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)	Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)	The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.	The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.	The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.	A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.	A statement of the penalty that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)	Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.	The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.	The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.	That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.	The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.	Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.	The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)	Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city mayor and city council or his designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)	Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the city, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation or restore the property. It is unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)	Costs of abatement of the violation. Within ten days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on the appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)	Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)	Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in city court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)	Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)	Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 04-0301(c), § 5-86, 3-1-2004)
 
Secs. 38-89—38-119. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATER UTILITY
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 38-120. Purpose, intent, applicability, compatibility, and administration.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the establishment of a stormwater utility in the city. The objectives of this article are as follows: 
(1)	The professional engineering and financial analyses conducted on behalf of and submitted to the mayor and council properly assess and define the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the city. 
(2)	Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses submitted to the city, it is appropriate to authorize the establishment of a separate accounting unit which shall be dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems in the city. 
(3)	Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the city. Intense urban development in the city has radically altered the natural hydrology of the area and the hydraulics of stormwater systems, with many natural elements having been replaced or augmented by manmade facilities. As a result, the specific service, system and facility demands in the city now exceed the service capability of many of the systems. An advanced level of service is needed in the city due to its urbanization, therefor, a stormwater utility service area subject to stormwater service charges should encompass the entirety of the city to enable the city to successfully manage, operate and improve stormwater systems at an advanced level. 
(4)	It is most equitable that a portion of the needed stormwater service level continue to be funded from the city's general tax revenues, and therefore that the mayor and council may allocate general fund support to stormwater management in the future in the form of a combination of service charge payments for city-owned properties and a supplemental allocation of general fund funding. 
(5)	The stormwater needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Funding of stormwater services and facilities is therefore incidental to the fundamental regulatory function of the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(6)	Provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities renders or results in both service and benefit to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses, and the service and benefits differ among the individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents in relation to the demands they impose individually and collectively on the stormwater systems. 
(7)	The service and benefit rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater programs, systems and facilities, and risk exposure. It is not practical to allocate the cost of the city's stormwater management programs, systems and facilities in direct relationship to the services or benefits rendered to or received by individual properties or persons over a brief span of time, but it is both practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among properties and persons in proportion to the long-term demands they impose on the city's stormwater programs, systems and facilities which render or result in services and benefits. 
(8)	The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater systems and facilities in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
(9)	The mayor and council find, conclude and determine that a stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and benefits throughout the city, and the most equitable means to fund an advanced level of stormwater services in the city through stormwater service charges and other mechanisms as described in the professional engineering and financial analyses prepared for the city. 
(b)	Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of the city. 
(c)	Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article impose restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)	Responsibility for administration. The public works director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-106), 4-6-2009)
 
Sec. 38-121. Establishment of a utility and an enterprise fund.
(a)	The city has established a stormwater utility which shall be responsible for stormwater management programs throughout the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. The stormwater utility management unit shall be composed of such personnel, employees and agents of the city as the mayor and council may from time to time determine and their compensation shall be fixed and determined by the public works director, or his designee, as approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)	A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established in the city budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the mayor and council and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs, facilities, operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the mayor and council, upon recommendation by the public works director or his designee. 
(c)	The mayor and council hereby confer upon the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management programs, systems and facilities performed, provided or owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties other than roadways upon which such systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-107), 4-6-2009)
 
Sec. 38-122. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Customers of the stormwater utility means and includes all persons, properties and entities served by or benefitting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, regulation and improvement of the stormwater management programs, systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities and activities related thereto, and persons, properties and entities which will ultimately be served or benefitted as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Hydrologic response means the manner whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors, including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surfaces means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, paved areas and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development or other imposition of impervious surfaces. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-108), 4-6-2009)
 
Sec. 38-123. Scope of responsibility for the city stormwater system and facilities.
(a)	The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement of those stormwater systems and facilities which: 
(1)	Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)	Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(3)	Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance or improvement of systems and facilities. 
(b)	Operation, maintenance or improvement of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the state and the United States of America. 
(c)	It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all properties and persons in general by regulation of the stormwater system and facilities, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. 
(d)	To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation, or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-109), 4-6-2009)
 
Sec. 38-124. Requirements for on-site stormwater systems: enforcement methods and inspections.
(a)	All property owners and developers of real property to be developed within the city shall provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site stormwater systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city development regulations and state and federal law. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the municipal court. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof charged to the owner in the same manner as a stormwater service charge. 
(b)	In the event that the city shall file an action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, from the date of filing such action the city shall have lien rights in relation to any service charge assessed against the property in the same manner as a tax levied against the property, which rights may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of Cobb County for those properties in Cobb County and of Douglas County for those properties in Douglas County. In addition, the city shall have the right to pursue collection of the service charge through other legal action or judgement. 
(c)	The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private property and public property owned by other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to ensure compliance with any order or judgment entered pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-110), 4-6-2009)
 
Sec. 38-125. General funding policy.
(a)	It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility program, systems and facilities shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater program, systems and facilities by individual properties or persons or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater programs, systems and facilities. Stormwater service charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing services and facilities. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses. Service charge rates shall be structured to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management within the city, including but not limited to, general tax revenues allocated to stormwater management, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges and special assessments. 
(b)	The cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities may include operating, capital investment and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management problems, needs and requirements. 
(c)	To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater systems or facilities or to private stormwater facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater systems or facilities. 
(d)	Stormwater utility service charge rates, fees and other similar charges shall be established by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-111), 4-6-2009)
 
Secs. 38-126—38-148. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. UTILITY RATES
 
Sec. 38-149. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Credits means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service fee or other fees, rates, rentals, charges, fines and penalties to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility, or continuing provision of a service or activity that reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities. 
Developed land means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of impervious surfaces as defined in this chapter. 
Duplexes andtriplexes means developed land containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) residential dwelling units located within the same building on one or more parcels of land. 
Equivalent residential unit means 3,100 square feet of impervious surfaces. The equivalent residential unit shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service fees to single-family dwelling unit properties or classes of single-family dwelling unit properties and to other developed lands. 
Multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties means developed land whereon more than one residential dwelling unit is located, and shall include, but not be limited to, apartment houses, structures containing multiple residential condominiums located on a single parcel of property, boardinghouses, group homes, hotels and motels, personal care homes, homes for the elderly, retirement and nursing homes, and other structures in which more than one family group commonly and normally reside or could reside. In the application of stormwater service fees, multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties shall be treated as other developed lands as defined in this division. 
Other developed lands means, but is not limited to, multiple-family dwelling unit residential unit properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, railroad stations and other transportation facilities covered by impervious surfaces, parking lots and decks, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units. 
Single-family dwelling unit means developed land upon which is located one principal structure that contains one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one family, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities. Single-family dwelling units may include houses, duplexes, triplexes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land, and fee-simple ownership or condominium townhomes and attached single-family residential structures located on individual lots or parcels of land and such single units located on more than one individual lot or parcel of land. For the purposes of this division, developed land may be classified as a single-family dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental or accessory structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings, accessory dwellings or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces such as parking spaces, playgrounds or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship or similar nonresidential uses. The term "single-family dwelling units" shall not include developed land containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple-family residential units that are individually owned but are located on a single parcel of developed land, such as condominiums and cooperatively-owned apartments. 
Stormwater service fees means the periodic service fee imposed pursuant to this division by the city for the purpose of recovering or funding costs related to stormwater management systems and facilities. The use of the area of impervious surface on each property as a measure to determine the stormwater service fee rate shall not preclude the use of other measures, or of grouping of properties having similar characteristics into classes or categories, grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the city's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities is relatively consistent. The term "stormwater service fees" may also include certain special charges to individual properties or persons for stormwater management systems and facilities or services related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater service above and beyond the service levels normally provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1(14-128), 7-12-2010)
 
Sec. 38-150. Stormwater service fee rates.
(a)	Generally. Stormwater service fee rates may be determined and modified from time to time by the mayor and council of the city so that the total revenue generated by the fees and any other sources of revenues or other resources allocated to stormwater management by the mayor and council shall be sufficient to meet the cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, operating expense, capital outlays, non-operating expense, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)	Projected cost of service; derivation of fees, other revenue. Stormwater service fee revenues in any given year may exceed or be less than the cost of service in that year; provided, however, that the stormwater service fee rate shall be based on meeting the long-term projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities. All unencumbered stormwater management funds derived from service fees and other sources of revenue not expended at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the stormwater management utility enterprise fund account and balances shall be forwarded to the next fiscal year. 
(1)	Single-family dwelling units. Single-family dwelling units, as defined by this division, shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit, as defined in this division. 
(2)	Other developed lands. All developed lands not classified as single-family dwelling units, as defined by this division, shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit, as defined by this division, for each 3,100 square feet of impervious surfaces or partial increment thereof located on the property. 
(c)	Service charge rate. The stormwater service charge rate per equivalent residential unit shall be as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1(14-129), 7-12-2010)
 
Sec. 38-151. Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service fees.
Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service fees or receive a credit or offset against such service fees. No exemption, credit, offset or other reduction in stormwater service fees shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities. A stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions shall be prepared by the public works director and approved by the mayor and council specifying the design and performance standards of on-site stormwater systems, facilities and activities that qualify for application of a service fee credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. 
(1)	Properties not defined in this division as developed land shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. 
(2)	Railroad tracks shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service fees. 
(3)	Developed land other than single-family dwelling units, including, but not limited to, multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, government, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the property. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces on the subject property shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meets or exceeds the city's development and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. The amount of the stormwater utility service fee credit shall not be related to the cost incurred by the property owner for performing, constructing, providing or maintaining such programs, systems, facilities, services and activities. 
(4)	Groups of single-family dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowners' association that owns, operates and maintains on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or that provides services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the properties represented by the homeowners' association. Such service fee credit shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by groups of single-family dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowners' association shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated and maintained by the homeowners' association meets or exceeds the city's development and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. Such credits shall be proportionately allocated among all properties presented by the incorporated homeowners' association. The stormwater utility service fee credit for services and activities that reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowners' association or any person or entity providing same. 
(5)	Individual single-family dwelling units required by the city to install on-site detention or that provide services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the subject property. Such service fee credit shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by individual single-family dwelling units shall be a fixed amount and shall be subject to the requirement that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meet the city's development standards and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. The stormwater utility service fee credit for services, facilities and activities shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowner or any person or entity providing same. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1(14-130), 7-12-2010)
 
Sec. 38-152. Stormwater service fee billing, delinquencies, and collections.
(a)	A stormwater service fee bill may be sent though the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. 
(b)	The stormwater service fee bill may be billed and collected along with other fees and charges, including, but not limited to, other utility bills, assessments or property taxes, as deemed most effective and efficient by the public works director or his designee. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fees and other charges and any associated fines or penalties, including, but not limited to, interest on delinquent service fees. 
(c)	If a customer is under billed or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may back bill for a period of up to one year but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency during that back billed period. A late charge of five percent of the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service fee bill shall be charged when a bill becomes delinquent. Thereafter, an additional charge of one percent based on the unpaid bill and any applicable delinquency charge shall be charged for each month the bill remains delinquent. 
(d)	Stormwater service fee bills for commercial or multiple residential condominium properties may be delivered to the individual condominium owners apportioning the stormwater service fee for the entire property equally among all properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1(14-131), 7-12-2010)
 
Sec. 38-153. Appeals.
Any customer who believes the provisions of this division have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner and sequence: 
(1)	An appeal must be filed in writing with the public works director or his designated representative. In the case of stormwater service fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions that influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)	Using information provided by the appellant, the public works director shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days. In response to an appeal, the public works director may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to any property in conformance with the general purposes and intent of this division. 
(3)	All decisions by the public works director shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. All decisions of the public works director shall be final. 
(4)	Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have a right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Cobb County for those properties in Cobb County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1(14-132), 7-12-2010)
 
Chapter 40 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 40-1. Street names and structure numbering.
(a)	Generally. The city fire department must approve all new or reassigned street names, all new or redesignated subdivision names, and the numbering or renumbering of structures on each approved street as provided in this section. 
(b)	Form and content of requests. Requests for approval of a subdivision name, street name or structure number shall be made in writing to the city fire department. The request shall include the proposed name or number and a map showing the location of the subdivision, street or structure at issue and complete contact information for the requester and the property owner, if different. For subdivisions, the map shall also disclose the name of street within the subdivision. 
(c)	Review standards. The fire department shall compare the requested name or number with subdivision and street names in the same area. For structure numbers, the department shall apply the city's standard street numbering scheme and review existing and proposed structure numbering on similar and adjacent streets. 
(d)	Denial of request. The fire department may refuse to accept street names and subdivision names when they conflict with existing names or otherwise fail to meet city naming standards. The department may deny also requested numbering for failure to comply with city numbering standards. 
(e)	Alternative names or numbering. Upon determining that a requested name or number cannot or should not be approved, the fire department will consult with the requester or the property owner, if different, in arriving at an acceptable alternative; provided, however, that the city retains sole authority for final determination of subdivision names, street names and structure numbering within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2034; Code 1985, § 20-43)
 
Secs. 40-2—40-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. EXCAVATIONS
 
Sec. 40-21. Permits.
(a)	Required. No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purpose, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the public works director. However, a permit shall not be required where such work is performed under a contract with the city, but in the event such work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the public works director, the streets and sanitation department and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(b)	Permit application and fee. All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in this article, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose thereof and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee which may be established by the city. 
(c)	Indemnification required. Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in this article shall agree, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations, and the permit shall so provide. 
(d)	City and city gas system exempt. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any city department or to the city gas system. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-2001—5-2003, 5-2007; Code 1985, §§ 19-20—19-23)
 
Sec. 40-22. Street repair after excavation.
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn up or dug up for any purpose, the person making such excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling such excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening and such refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications issued by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2004; Code 1985, § 19-24)
 
Sec. 40-23. Leaving excavation unprotected.
It is unlawful for any person who does any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city to fail to place and maintain proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of such excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2005; Code 1985, § 19-25)
 
Sec. 40-24. Supervision and control of work.
All paving repairs of excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public ways of the city is under the general supervision and control of the superintendent of streets and sanitation, whose duty it shall be to inspect from time to time the progress thereof. Upon completion, the superintendent shall make a final inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public way is restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2006; Code 1985, § 19-26)
 
Secs. 40-25—40-51. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 40-52. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind involving ten or more persons or five or more vehicles. 
Professionally organized parade means a parade organized or produced by a person or organization that involves the expenditure of funds of that person or organization or the expenditure by that person or organization of funds of others for or on behalf of participants in the parade for expenses including, but not limited to, transportation, housing, food, provision of signs or other demonstration paraphernalia, sanitary facilities, or compensation or reimbursement of expenses in any form. 
Vehicle means and includes any device which moves on wheels or tracks whether under its own power or otherwise. 
(Code 1985, § 21-26; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 1)
 
Sec. 40-53. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)	Funeral processions, provided the police department is notified of each procession's time and route; 
(2)	Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational or school-sponsored activities; providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)	A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1985, § 21-28; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 3)
 
Secs. 40-54—40-79. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
 
Sec. 40-80. Required.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city business license department. 
(Code 1985, § 21-27; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 2)
 
Sec. 40-81. Application content; time for filing; late applications; fee.
(a)	A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the city business license department on forms provided by the city. The application shall be filed not less than ten or more than 30 days before the date on which the parade is proposed to be conducted. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade, and the applicant, if different; 
(2)	If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization; 
(3)	The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)	The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)	The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point; 
(6)	The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade; the type of animals; and description of the vehicles; 
(7)	The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
(8)	A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)	The location by streets of any assembly and dispersal areas for the parade; 
(10)	The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area, and a designation of the assembly area and the dispersal area; 
(11)	The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
(12)	If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the city business license department a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on its, his behalf; 
(13)	Any expenditure of funds by the applicant or his organization for or on behalf of participants in the parade, the amounts thereof, and the names and addresses of to whom paid; 
(14)	Any additional information which the city business license department shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(b)	The city business license department, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(c)	The permit application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in this division. 
(Code 1985, § 21-29; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 4)
 
Sec. 40-82. Standards for issuance.
The city business license department shall issue the permit upon application when, from consideration of the application and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, it finds that: 
(1)	The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)	The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)	The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)	The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to assembly areas; 
(5)	The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment in route to a fire; 
(6)	The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)	The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays in route; 
(8)	The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit; 
(9)	The parade will not unreasonably burden the streets and sidewalks of the city so as to substantially interfere with the normal use thereof by the public; and 
(10)	The parade will not interfere with another parade for which a permit has been approved. 
(Code 1985, § 21-30; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 5)
 
Sec. 40-83. Review of application; notice of denial.
The city business license department shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the city disapproves the application, then there shall be mailed to the applicant, within two days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the action, stating the reasons for the denial of the permit. 
(Code 1985, § 21-31; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 6)
 
Sec. 40-84. Appeal of denial.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within two days after notice. The council shall act upon the appeal within two days after its receipt and may grant or deny a permit by a majority vote of the members present. 
(Code 1985, § 21-32; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 7)
 
Sec. 40-85. Alternate parade permit.
The city business license department may grant the permit conditioned on the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after notice of the action, file a written notice of acceptance with the city. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit, under this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 21-33; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 8)
 
Sec. 40-86. Notice to city and other officials.
Immediately upon the application for a parade permit, the city business license department shall send a copy to the city police chief, fire chief and the public works director. 
(Code 1985, § 21-34; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 9; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 21)
 
Sec. 40-87. Contents of parade permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)	Starting time; 
(2)	Minimum speed; 
(3)	Maximum speed; 
(4)	Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)	The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)	The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)	Any other information as the city shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter; 
(8)	Number of participants. 
(Code 1985, § 21-35; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 10; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 21)
 
Sec. 40-88. Duties of permittee and parade leader.
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade leader or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1985, § 21-36; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 11)
 
Sec. 40-89. Public conduct during parades.
(a)	Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)	Driving through parades. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. Punishment for violation of this subsection shall be as provided in section 40-94. 
(c)	Parking on parade route. The police chief shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The police chief shall post signs to the effect, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 21-37; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 12)
 
Sec. 40-90. Fees and bonds.
(a)	In the event the parade is a professionally organized parade, the applicant or the organizer shall pay a fee for such permit, as provided in the fee schedule of the issuing department, per each 100 participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate. If more persons than estimated actually participate, a supplemental fee to cover such additional participants as though included in the original application shall be due and payable immediately following the parade. 
(b)	The applicant or organizer of each professionally organized parade shall post a bond of $100.00 per each 100 participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate, the excuse of which shall be conditioned upon the reimbursement of the city for the cost of additional police reasonably used during the parade and for cleanup during and immediately following the parade. The applicant and organizers shall be liable for such costs of additional police and cleanup as may be actually incurred by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 21-40; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 15)
 
Sec. 40-91. Revocation of parade permit.
The city business license department shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as provided in section 40-82. 
(Code 1985, § 21-38; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 13)
 
Sec. 40-92. Distribution of material during procession prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed from any vehicle participating in a parade or procession or other public demonstration in the public streets or public highways within the city limits any item other than materials protected by freedom of speech, either perishable or otherwise, to any bystander or onlooker. It shall also be unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle participating in a parade within the city limits to allow or permit any item, perishable or otherwise, to be distributed to any bystanders or onlookers from the vehicle. It shall also be unlawful to litter the parade route with any items including those materials which it is otherwise lawful to distribute; and this prohibition shall also apply to gratuities to items offered for sale. 
(Code 1985, § 21-39; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 14)
 
Sec. 40-93. Unlawful parade or march.
It is unlawful for any marcher, parade organizer or person, firm, corporation, or organization to parade or march without such permit in the city, validly issued by the business license department. 
(Code 1985, § 21-41; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 16)
 
Sec. 40-94. Penalty.
Any person violating any provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day of any continued violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 21-42; Ord. of 5-11-1987, § 17)
 
Secs. 40-95—40-116. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 40-117. Intent and purpose.
The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 1.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-118. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 1.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-119. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construct" also includes the act of opening or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construction" also includes the act of opening, boring or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the city public works director or his designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Facilities representatives means the specifically identified agents or employees of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agents for facilities related information. The utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives are available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
Facility means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code. 
Rights-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Services means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Street means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 1.3, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-120. Penalties.
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 8.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-121. Compliance.
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the city to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 10.3, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-122. Appeal of administrative decisions.
All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 10.4, 9-9-2019)
 
Secs. 40-123—40-142. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. UTILITY REGISTRATION
 
Sec. 40-143. Required.
Each utility (other than the city gas system) who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this division, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 2.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-144. Procedure.
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration. If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representatives. Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representatives in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to ensure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)	A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 2.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-145. Incomplete registration.
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 2.3, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-146. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way.
Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 2.4, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-147. Facilities in place without registration.
Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 2.5, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-148. Reservation of regulatory and police powers.
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this division, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the constitution and laws of the United States, state and the city Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 10.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Secs. 40-149—40-179. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
 
Sec. 40-180. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any utility, other than the city gas system, to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the public works department in accordance with the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-181. Application procedure.
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the public works department. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the utility; 
(2)	The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)	The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representatives; 
(5)	The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)	An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)	A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-182. Permit fees.
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.3, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-183. Issuance of permit.
If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit whether: 
(1)	Issuing of the approval will be consistent with this division; 
(2)	The applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)	The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance is within acceptable parameters. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.4, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-184. Emergency situations.
(a)	Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)	In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.5, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-185. Effective period of permit.
(a)	Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)	The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)	Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)	Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this division; 
(3)	Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)	Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.6, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-186. Cancellation for cause.
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)	The city shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)	If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.7, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-187. Expiration of permit.
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 3.8, 9-9-2019)
 
Secs. 40-188—40-212. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. MINIMUM STANDARDS
 
Sec. 40-213. Manual adopted.
The Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the division as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this division. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this division and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 4.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-214. Protection of traffic and roadway.
Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 4.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-215. Grading.
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 4.3, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-216. Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation.
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 4.4, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-217. Notice; locate request.
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48-hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 4.5, 9-9-2019)
 
Secs. 40-218—40-242. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. RESTORATION OF PROPERTY
 
Sec. 40-243. Cost.
Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 5.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-244. Liability.
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 5.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Secs. 40-245—40-266. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 6. INSPECTION
 
Sec. 40-267. Availability.
The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 6.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-268. Cessation of work.
At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit or this division or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 6.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-269. Notification.
When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 6.3, 9-9-2019)
 
Secs. 40-270—40-286. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 7. OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS
 
Sec. 40-287. Additional permits required.
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 7 of the Design and Construction Standards for Public Works. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 7.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Secs. 40-288—40-307. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 8. AESTHETIC STANDARDS
 
Sec. 40-308. Authority and scope.
(a)	The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92(a)(10) authorize the city to establish reasonable regulations for the installation, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal, and relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances in, on, along, over, or under the public roads of the city. Further, 47 USC 253(c) provides that the city has authority to manage its public rights-of-way. 
(b)	The city finds it is in the best interest of the city and its residents and businesses to establish aesthetic requirements and other specifications and reasonable conditions regarding placement of facilities in the public rights-of-way. These requirements, specifications and conditions are adopted in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents and businesses of the city and to reasonably manage and protect the public rights-of-way and its uses in the city. 
(c)	The objective of this division is to ensure use of the public rights-of-way: 
(1)	Is consistent with the design, appearance and other features of nearby land uses; 
(2)	Protects the integrity of historic, cultural and scenic resources; and 
(3)	Does not harm residents' quality of life. 
(d)	This division applies to all requests to locate facilities in the public rights-of-way and ongoing use of the public rights-of-way for such facilities. This division is established pursuant to the city Charter and applicable law. This division is administered by the city public works department. 
(e)	Placement or modification of facilities in the public right-of-way shall comply with this division at the time the permit for installation or modification is approved and as amended from time to time. Permittees are required to comply with this Code and applicable law and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.1, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-309. Definitions.
Unless otherwise defined in section 40-119, terms used in this division shall have the meanings given them in O.C.G.A. § 36-66C-2. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.2, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-310. Facilities standards.
(a)	Facilities must be compatible in size, mass, and color to similar facilities in the same zoning area, with a goal of minimizing the physical and visual impact on the area. 
(b)	Facilities in the residential R80, R40, R30, R20, R15, R10, RSL, RD, RA6, RM8, FST, RM12, historical and architecturally significant areas shall be visually and architecturally integrated with the residential R80, R40, R30, R20, R15, R10, RSL, RD, RA6, RM8, FST, RM12, historical/architecturally significant areas and shall not interfere with prominent vistas or significant public view corridors. 
(c)	Facilities must be located in alignment with existing trees or facilities. 
(d)	Facilities must maintain the integrity and character of the neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are located. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.4, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-311. Undergrounding.
Should such facilities be required to be installed underground by any current or future comprehensive zoning plan or ordinance, such facilities shall be installed underground in designated areas determined by the mayor and councilmembers so long as placement underground will not materially impact the provision of service, any individual requesting to locate facilities aboveground in designated areas determined by the mayor and councilmembers has the burden to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that undergrounding will effectively prohibit the provision of the service in question. 
(1)	Light poles and small wireless facilities collocated thereon may be located aboveground in areas of the city where facilities are primarily located underground. 
(2)	The city may: 
a.	Allow collocated small wireless facilities placed aboveground prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and subject to any applicable pole attachment agreement to remain aboveground; or 
b.	Allow the wireless provider to replace the pole associated with previously collocated small wireless facilities at the same location or propose an alternate location within 50 feet of the prior location, which the wireless provider shall use unless such alternate location imposes technical limits or significant additional costs. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.5, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-312. Historic district.
Facilities installed in the historic district of the city as currently defined or as may be defined in the future shall conform to the provisions of the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.6, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-313. Camouflaging.
Facilities must be designed using camouflaging techniques that make them as unobtrusive as possible if: 
(1)	It is not possible or desirable to match the design and color of facilities with the similar facilities in the same zoning area, as required under section 40-310; or 
(2)	Existing facilities in the area are out of character with a streetscape plan or other aesthetic plan that has been adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.7, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-314. Concealment.
Facilities shall incorporate specific concealment elements to minimize visual impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.8, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-315. Preferred locations.
(a)	Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, facilities shall, to the extent that is it reasonable, be placed in the following areas of the city: 
(1)	On utility poles; 
(2)	On street lights; 
These areas are identified in terms of priority, meaning utility poles are the most preferred location, followed by streetlights, etc. 
(b)	Facilities may be located outside areas identified in subsection (a) of this section if: 
(1)	Facilities must be placed outside of the areas identified in subsection (a) of this section in order to maintain existing services, improve services, or new service can only be provided if facilities are placed in areas located outside of those identified in subsection (a) of this section; or 
(2)	The proposed facilities will meet all applicable requirements for the non-preferred location and will complement the character of the zoning area. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.9, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-316. Installation and modification standards.
Installation of new facilities in, on, along, over, or under the public rights-of-way or modification of existing facilities in, on, along, over, or under the public rights-of-way shall: 
(1)	Minimize risks to public safety; 
(2)	Ensure that placement of facilities on existing structures is within the tolerance of those structures; 
(3)	Ensure that installations and modifications are subject to periodic review to minimize the intrusion on the right-of-way; 
(4)	Ensure that the city bears no risk or liability as a result of the installations or modifications; and 
(5)	Ensure that use of the public rights-of-way does not inconvenience the public, interfere with the primary uses of the public rights-of-way, or hinder the ability of the city or other government entities to improve, modify, relocate, abandon, or vacate the right-of-way or any portion thereof, or to cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation, or abandonment of facilities in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.10, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-317. Plans for use.
No facilities shall be placed in, on, along, over, or under the public rights-of-way unless: 
(1)	There are immediate plans to use the proposed facility; or 
(2)	There is a contract with another party that has immediate plans to use the proposed facility. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.11, 9-9-2019)
 
Sec. 40-318. Contact information.
Every facility placed in the public rights-of-way shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations center. 
(Ord. No. 2019-09-01, § 9.12, 9-9-2019)
 
Chapter 42 SUBDIVISIONS
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 42-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley or service drive means a public way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, other than alleys. 
Building setback line means a line across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the buildings and the street or a distance from a side or rear property line. 
Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Crosswalk means a specially paved or marked path for pedestrians crossing a street or road. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic, the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Double frontage lot means a lot other than a corner lot abutting upon two or more streets. 
Final plat means a drawing showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information of the subdivision. 
Health department means the Cobb County or Douglas County health department. 
Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot or double frontage lot. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a street or crosswalk shall be included. 
Master zoning plan means a comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto recommended by the planning and zoning commission, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities, or other similar information. The master plan shall be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other appropriate information. 
Planning and zoning commission means the city planning and zoning commission. 
Preliminary plat means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision with sufficient detail to indicate its workability. This drawing is not to be in final form for recording. 
Street means a dedicated and accepted right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as highway, thoroughfare, lane, road, boulevard, or otherwise. The following are definitions intended to distinguish between different categories of streets: 
(1)	Collector streets means those streets which are intended to carry traffic from minor streets to and from the major streets and expressways and include the principal entrance streets of a development and streets for circulation within a development. 
(2)	Expressways means high capacity streets from which access to abutting property is prohibited, and which are intersected at specific locations by major and collector streets. 
(3)	Major streets means those streets which are intended primarily for the use of fast or heavy traffic. 
(4)	Marginal access streets means minor streets parallel to and adjacent to major streets or expressways, providing access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)	Minor streets means those streets which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
Subdivider means any person creating a subdivision as defined herein, including any agent of the subdivider. 
Subdivision means any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land, regardless of how it is to be used, either by platting or by metes and bounds, into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, including all division of land involving the dedication, change, or abandonment of a street, site, easement, or other right-of-way for any public use or facility. When appropriate to the content, the term "subdivision" shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The division or sale of land by judicial decree is not defined as a subdivision for the purpose of these regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2001; Code 1985, § 20-1)
 
Sec. 42-2. Scope and applicability of chapter.
(a)	Any person proposing to subdivide land within the city shall submit to the planning and zoning commission and the administrator plats of the proposed subdivision which shall conform to all requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(b)	No subdivider shall proceed with any construction work on a proposed subdivision before obtaining preliminary plat approval from the planning and zoning commission and administrator as certified thereon. 
(c)	No subdivider shall sell or negotiate to sell any lot in a proposed subdivision by reference to or exhibition of or by any other use of a plat of such subdivision, until the final plat has been given approval by the planning and zoning commission and administrator, as certified thereon, and recorded in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)	No land dedicated as a public street shall be accepted, opened, or improved, nor shall any utilities or other facilities be installed thereon, unless such street shall have been accepted or opened as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of, a public street prior to the adoption of these regulations, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a plat approved by the planning and zoning commission or on a plat made and adopted by the planning and zoning commission; provided, however, that the city may locate and construct, or may accept, any other street, if the ordinance or other measure for such approval be first submitted to the planning and zoning commission and administrator for its review and comment. 
(e)	No building permit shall be issued for, and no building or other structure shall be erected on, any lot within the city, unless such lot has access to a street which shall have been accepted or opened as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of, a public street, or which corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a plat approved by the planning and zoning commission and administrator or a plat made and adopted by same. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2002; Code 1985, § 20-2; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 20)
 
Sec. 42-3. Administration.
(a)	This chapter shall be administered by the zoning administrator. The mayor shall, however, be the designated official to provide final review, certification and signature for all plats which are to be received by the city. The administrator shall make a recommendation to the mayor as requested prior to any required signatures by the mayor. 
(b)	The planning and zoning commission may from time to time supplement this chapter with administrative procedures, to the end that the public may be better informed and that the approval of plats may be expedited with the prior approval of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2072; Code 1985, § 20-3; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 21; Ord. of 8-2-1993, § 4; Ord. of 4-4-1994, § 1)
 
Sec. 42-4. Schedule of fees.
Fees, as provided for by the issuing department, shall be paid to the city for the following: 
(1)	Preliminary plat. 
(2)	Application for final approval. 
(3)	Extension of preliminary plat. 
(4)	Final plat. 
(5)	Certified copy of final plat. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2071; Code 1985, § 20-4)
 
Sec. 42-5. Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof may be punished as provided in section 1-9. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, or any building contractor, or agent of the owner who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2073; Code 1985, § 20-5)
 
Secs. 42-6—42-28. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURE
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 42-29. Pre-application conference and review.
Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall confer with the city manager, who shall review sketch plans and other information concerning the proposed subdivision to determine its workability, etc. The purpose of this review is to acquaint the subdivider with city plans and policies that might be significant to the proposed subdivision. No fee shall be charged for pre-application review. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2011; Code 1985, § 20-20)
 
Secs. 42-30—42-46. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PRELIMINARY PLAT
 
Sec. 42-47. Application for approval.
After the procedure described in section 42-2, the subdivider shall submit to the administrator an application for preliminary plat approval, which shall be accompanied with three copies of the preliminary plat and other information as specified in section 42-95(c) and a filing fee, as specified in section 42-4. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2012; Code 1985, § 20-21)
 
Sec. 42-48. Review procedure.
(a)	An application for preliminary plat approval shall be studied by the administrator for compliance with these regulations and other relevant city and county ordinances and regulations. The administrator shall indicate in writing, on the preliminary plat, or by letter to the planning and zoning commission, any changes that are necessary to meet the intent of this division or otherwise to serve the best interests of the community. 
(b)	The planning and zoning commission shall not act on any preliminary plat without holding a hearing thereon. No less than five days before such hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall notify the subdivider of the time and place. 
(c)	Within 30 days after the submission of an application for preliminary plat approval, the planning and zoning commission shall: 
(1)	Issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval; 
(2)	Issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval, subject to any necessary modification, the nature of which shall be indicated on the plat or attached in writing thereto; or 
(3)	Disapprove the preliminary plat, in which case the planning and zoning commission shall so notify the subdivider in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
(d)	The action of the planning and zoning commission shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary plat. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and one copy each shall be for the planning and zoning commission's records and the administrator's records. 
(e)	Failure of the planning and zoning commission to act on a preliminary plat within 30 days shall be deemed approval, and thereafter a certificate of preliminary plat approval shall be issued to the subdivider at such subdivider's request. However, if the planning and zoning commission determines that additional time is required to study the preliminary plat, it may take an additional 30 days after the subdivider has been notified. 
(f)	All preliminary plat approvals shall be limited by the following qualifications: 
(1)	Preliminary plat approval is only tentative, pending submission of a final plat; 
(2)	Preliminary plat approval shall be effective and binding upon the planning and zoning commission for a period not to exceed two years, and shall thereafter expire and be null and void except to the extent that work on the subdivision has progressed. However, the subdivider may request in writing that the planning and zoning commission grant an extension of time, and the planning and zoning commission may grant such an extension, subject to payment of fees. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2013; Code 1985, § 20-22; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 17)
 
Sec. 42-49. Waiver for small subdivision.
(a)	The provisions of sections 42-47 and 42-48 may be waived in the case of a subdivision of five lots or less, and the subdivider may submit an application for final plat approval, without submitting a preliminary plat, provided: 
(1)	Each lot in the proposed subdivision abuts an existing public street; 
(2)	The proposed subdivision will not affect any major alterations of utility installations, or other existing or proposed public facilities; and 
(3)	The application for final plat approval meets all the applicable procedural, design, and other requirements of these regulations. 
(b)	A subdivider intending to proceed in accordance with subsection (a) of this section shall first consult with the administrator, supplying sufficient information to satisfy the administrator that the specific conditions will be met. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2014; Code 1985, § 20-23; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-50. Improvements authorized by approval.
(a)	Preliminary plat approval is authorization for the subdivider to undertake preliminary subdivision improvements in accordance with the procedures set forth below. These improvements may be undertaken for the entire subdivision as represented in the preliminary plat, or for a unit division thereof, and shall consist of the clearance and rough grading of streets, installation of monuments and pins as specified in section 42-178(a) and section 42-186, respectively. 
(b)	No building permits will be issued for buildings in the subdivision until it is evident to the administrator and planning and zoning commission that the improvements in the preliminary plat are being fulfilled and will be completed in their entirety. Furthermore, the issuance of building permits will be ceased at any time that the specified improvements do not conform with the standards set forth by the administrator. 
(c)	The subdivider shall enter into a contract with the city for the installation, by the city, of all improvements required by these regulations. 
(d)	On completing the preliminary subdivision improvements prescribed above, the subdivider may submit to the administrator an application for final improvement, which shall consist of: 
(1)	A plat and other information as specified in section 42-95(e), in three copies; and 
(2)	A filing fee as specified in section 42-4. 
(e)	Upon receiving an application for final improvements, the administrator shall inspect the work completed and review the information submitted by the subdivider and shall: 
(1)	Endorse a permit for final improvements on one copy and return same to the subdivision; or 
(2)	Require the subdivider to make such changes as may be necessary to satisfy the provisions of these regulations and other applicable city specifications. 
(f)	Upon receiving a permit for final improvement by the administrator, the subdivider is authorized to proceed with installation of remaining improvements, as specified in section 42-74. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2015; Code 1985, § 20-24; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Secs. 42-51—42-73. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. FINAL PLAT
 
Sec. 42-74. Application for approval.
While the certificate of preliminary plat approval is in effect, the subdivider may submit to the administrator an application for final plat approval, which shall consist of the final plat and other documents, as specified in section 42-96, and a filing fee, as specified in section 42-4. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2016; Code 1985, § 20-25; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-75. Review procedure.
(a)	No final plat shall be acted upon by the planning and zoning commission without holding a hearing thereon. Not less than five days before such hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall notify the subdivider of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)	Within 30 days after the submission of an application for final plat approval, the planning and zoning commission shall: 
(1)	Approve the final plat; or 
(2)	Disapprove the final plat, in which case the planning and zoning commission shall so notify the subdivider in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
(c)	The planning and zoning commission shall not approve a final plat until all the requirements of these regulations have been met, and the administrator has certified in writing to the planning and zoning commission that: 
(1)	All the improvements to the subdivision required under these regulations have been completed in accordance with city specifications; or 
(2)	An improvement contract with the city has been provided by the subdivider as prescribed in section 42-50(c). 
(d)	Upon approving a final plat, the planning and zoning commission shall endorse on three copies thereof a certificate of final plat approval. The secretary of the planning and zoning commission shall have one copy recorded in the office of the city clerk. This copy shall be retained in the files of the city clerk, one copy shall be filed in the administrator's files, and one copy shall be given to the subdivider. Additional certified copies of the final plat shall be given to the subdivider at such subdivider's request upon payment of a fee, as prescribed in section 42-4. 
(e)	Failure of the planning and zoning commission to act on a final plat within 30 days shall be deemed approval, and thereafter a certificate of final plat approval shall be issued to the subdivider at such subdivider's request. However, if the planning and zoning commission determines that additional time is required to study the final plat, it may take an additional 30 days after the subdivider has been notified. 
(f)	When all improvements required by these regulations have been completed, the subdivider shall provide the administrator with one complete set of as-built plans and drawings showing the subdivision and its improvements. This set of plans and drawings shall include: 
(1)	Plans of all streets and alleys, showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines; 
(2)	As-built, centerline profiles of all streets; 
(3)	Profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines as such improvements shall have actually been installed by the subdivider; and 
(4)	A letter submitted by a registered professional engineer certifying that all sewers, storm drains, curbing and paving have been placed according to grade stages set by such engineer, or such engineer's representatives, in accordance with plans submitted to and approved by the administrator. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2017; Code 1985, § 20-26; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Secs. 42-76—42-93. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS
 
Sec. 42-94. Pre-application plat.
The pre-application plat shall represent the entire area which the subdivider contemplates developing, including possible unit divisions not scheduled for immediate development. The form of the submittal and the extent of degree of precision of same, may be determined by the subdivider. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2021; Code 1985, § 20-30)
 
Sec. 42-95. Preliminary plat specifications.
(a)	The preliminary plat shall represent the entire area which the subdivider contemplates developing including possible unit divisions not scheduled for immediate development. 
(b)	The preliminary plat shall be submitted in five copies, and shall consist of black or blue line prints on white background and such other documents as are necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
(c)	The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 by 36 inches; however, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of these dimensions. In no case shall the sheet size be less than 8.5 by 11 inches. 
(d)	The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Proposed name of subdivision. 
(2)	Name and address of the owner of record. 
(3)	Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider. 
(4)	Date of survey, date of plat drawing, north arrow and graphic scale, data and space for revision dates. 
(5)	Location (land district, land lot, county and state). 
(6)	Number of lots and typical lot sizes. 
(7)	Location map showing streets, highways, land lot lines, railroads, and other significant features within one mile of the proposed subdivision, drawn at a scale sufficient to show the required information; U.S. Geological Survey maps or city maps may be used as references. 
(8)	Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings; also, the interior angles and intersecting lines will be shown. 
(9)	Unit divisions or stage development in their numerical order, if any, proposed by the subdivider. 
(10)	Contour lines based on sea level data. These shall be drawn at intervals not greater than five feet. Contour lines will be obtained from field survey, photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs, of U.S. Geological Survey maps. (Contour lines from a field survey are strongly suggested for more accuracy in drainage, etc.) The basis for the topographic contour shall be specified, giving description, location and elevation of benchmark. 
(11)	Natural existing features within and about the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas, sudden changes in ground elevations and other significant features. The direction of flow on all watercourses shall be indicated. 
(12)	Cultural features within the proposed subdivision, including street names, right-of-way and pavement widths, easements, bridges, culverts, utility lines and structures, buildings, city and county lines, land lot lines and such other information desired by the subdivider. 
(13)	Proposed subdivision layout including street and alley lines with letter designation, right-of-way widths, lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, building setback lines with dimensions, sites to be reserved through covenants, easements, dedication or otherwise for public uses or for non-public uses exclusive of family dwellings. 
(14)	Location and results of percolation tests for any lots which will not be served by a public or community sanitary sewage system, as required by the county health department. 
(15)	Location, site plan and other information as required by the health department for all community sewage disposal plants. 
(16)	Certificates as specified in section 42-97(a). 
(e)	An application for final improvements for a subdivision (or for a unit division thereof) shall include the following information, submitted to the administrator in two copies: 
(1)	A plat, drawn to the preliminary plat specifications (subsection (c) of this section), showing the following information: 
a.	Right-of-way lines of all proposed streets, alleys, walkways, easements and other public lands and ways. 
b.	Location and size of all proposed drainage structures and lines including, catch basins, headwalls and extensions thereof. 
c.	Acreage of drainage area and constant used in determining size of structures as approved by the city manager. 
d.	Whenever the property proposed for subdivision contains a stream or drainage way and has any area susceptible to flooding once every 100 years, a grading and drainage plan prepared by a currently state registered professional engineer, shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The plan shall: 
1.	Contain provisions for erosion control measures which will prevent the deposit on private property, public property and streets, or natural drainage ways of site generated waterborne silt and debris during development, construction or use of property; 
2.	Include a complete hydrologic study to evaluate the total effects the development under review may have upon drainage facilities and systems. It shall include an analysis of stormwater runoff under existing site conditions and under proposed developed site conditions. It shall include a determination of the channel cross-section area required to carry the affected stream at the 100-year flood stage level. It shall show provisions to ensure conformance with the requirements of this section. It shall show the projected 100-year flood level after the development is completed. It shall include the details of providing and maintaining equivalent flow and storage capacity as required by section 42-185(c). 
e.	Location of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer lines and of any easements required therefor, together with sufficient dimensions to locate same on the ground, and; as installed, the location and description of all monuments and pins. 
(2)	Engineering data, as listed below, drawn to a scale not less than a horizontal scale of one inch to 100 feet and a vertical scale of one inch to ten feet. 
a.	Profile of proposed streets showing centerline elevation as existing and finished street elevations and elevations along right-of-way lines on either side of street, exposed rock to be indicated, drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, width, all curve data and drainage required; 
b.	Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed, the grate, size of pipe, and location of manholes shall be indicated on the road profiles; 
c.	Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways shall include elevations of 50 feet intervals for a minimum distance of 300 feet back of beginning point and forward of ending point, or such additional distance as required by the administrator; and 
d.	All elevations shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic datum and location and elevation of the datum shall be indicated. 
(3)	Copies of all necessary deeds and easements for the streets and other public lands and ways indicated on the plat, properly executed in such forms as shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2022; Code 1985, § 20-31; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-96. Final plat specifications.
(a)	The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat; it may, however, represent only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which subdivider proposes to develop and record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)	The submittal shall consist of the original tracing, or a reproducible copy thereof. 
(c)	Final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn, at a scale of 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed 48 by 36 inches; however, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of these dimensions. In no case shall the sheet size be less than 8.5 by 11 inches. 
(d)	Final plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name of subdivision. 
(2)	Name and address of the owner of record. 
(3)	Name and address and telephone number of subdivider. 
(4)	Date of survey, date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north arrow with reference of bearings to magnetic or true north, indicating whether bearings were calculated from angles, turned or from compass readings. 
(5)	Location of tract (land district, land lot, county and state) and acreage. 
(6)	If part or all of the tract is a portion of a former subdivision, reference shall be made to the former plat, with indication of the former lots and blocks being resubdivided. 
(7)	Index map, when more than one sheet is required to present plat. 
(8)	Courses and distance to the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments (not less than three, which shall be accurately described on the plat). 
(9)	Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minute. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field and will be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 5,000 feet. The error of closure as calculated by latitude and departures, shall be stated. Surveys shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Traverse and Triangulation Survey, where same is available. 
(10)	City, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(11)	Exact location, right-of-way widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks. 
(12)	Street center lines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basic curve data. 
(13)	Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot, bearings on all lines, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords and tangents or radii of rounded corners. 
(14)	Building setback lines with dimensions. 
(15)	When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown. 
(16)	Subdivision blocks lettered alphabetically, within each block. Lots or sites numbered in numerical order within same. 
(17)	Location dimensions, and purpose of easements, including slope easements, if required, public service utility right-of-way lines; areas (other than streets) to be reserved, donated or dedicated to public use; sites for other than residential use, with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenants for common uses of all property owners. 
(18)	Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated "future." 
(19)	Certificates, as specified in section 42-48(c). 
(e)	The final plat shall be accompanied by statements of deed restrictions and covenants which the subdivider intends to impose on the subdivision. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2023; Code 1985, § 20-32)
 
Sec. 42-97. Plat certificates.
(a)	The following certificates are required for a preliminary plat: 
(1)	Before submitting a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall have had stamped or printed thereon, and signed as follows: 
a.	Preliminary engineering or surveying certificate: 
I hereby certify that this proposed preliminary plat represents a survey completed by me, or under my supervision on ________, 20___, of the property shown and described hereon. 
___________ Registered C. E. No. 
___________ Registered L. S. No. 
b.	Request for preliminary plat approval: 
The undersigned hereby applies to the Austell Planning and zoning commission for preliminary plat approval, and certifies that no improvements is undertaken with respect to the subdivision to be represented by this plat prior to the endorsement hereon of preliminary plat approval by the Planning and zoning commission. The undersigned recognizes that all improvements otherwise made or commenced may not be approved by the administrator. 
Subdivider ___________ Date ________ 
Agent ___________ Date ________ 
(2)	Appropriate space shall be provided on the preliminary plat for the following certificate: Certificate for preliminary plat approval: 
All of the requirements of the Austell Subdivision Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a preliminary plat having been fulfilled, preliminary approval of this plat is hereby granted subject to the further provisions of the regulations. This certificate shall expire ________, 20___. 
Approved  
     Secretary of Austell 
     Planning and Zoning Commission 	

(b)	Upon approval of an application for final improvements, the administrator shall endorse thereon: 
Permit for Final Improvements 
Preliminary subdivision improvements having been made in accordance with the Austell Subdivision Regulations and city specifications, and the attached plat and drawings conforming with the regulations and specifications, permission is hereby granted for installation of final improvements. 
Administrator ___________ Date ________ 
(c)	The following certificates are required for a final plat: 
(1)	Before a final plat has been submitted to the administrator, the subdivider shall have had stamped or printed thereon, and signed, substantially as follows: 
a.	Engineering or surveying certificate: 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked "Future," and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown, and that all engineering requirements of the Austell Subdivision Regulations have been fully complied with. 
___________ Registered C. E. No 
___________ Registered L. S. No 
Date ________ 
b.	Owner's acknowledgement: 
(State of Georgia) 
(County of ) 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent dedicates to the use of the public forever, all streets, easements and other public grounds thereon shown. 
Owner ___________ Date ________ 
Agent ___________ Date ________ 
(2)	Appropriate spaces shall be provided on the final plat for the following certificates: 
a.	Certificate for final plat approval: 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Austell Subdivision Regulations, this plat was given final approval by the Austell Planning and zoning commission at the meeting held ________, 20___. All of the conditions of approval having been satisfied this plat is hereby accepted and this approval granted under authority of the regulations. 

Secretary of Austell, Planning and Zoning Commission 	

Date ________ 
b.	Certificate of recording. The form of the certificate of recording in on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2024; Code 1985, § 20-33; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Secs. 42-98—42-122. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. DESIGN PRINCIPLES
 
Sec. 42-123. Suitability of the land.
Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion or otherwise deemed by the planning and zoning commission to be topographically unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor shall such land be platted for any other uses which may continue such conditions or increase danger to health, safety, life or property, unless steps are taken to eliminate the abovementioned hazards. Such property may be dedicated to the city for use as parks, recreation areas and open spaces subject to the acceptance of the city. On subdividing land of this nature, every effort should be made to utilize these lands as a benefit to the public and property owner. Use as buffer areas, privately maintained recreation areas or public use should all be considered. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2031; Code 1985, § 20-40)
 
Sec. 42-124. Access.
(a)	Every subdivision shall be served by a publicly dedicated street. 
(b)	When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
(c)	No subdivision shall be so designed as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2032; Code 1985, § 20-41)
 
Sec. 42-125. Conformance to master plans.
(a)	All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the master zoning plan, thoroughfare plan and all other portions of the city master plan adopted at the time of plat submission to the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)	In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federal highway, the written approval of the state department of transportation shall be required by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)	Where features of the master plan other than minor streets and collector streets, such as school sites, parks, collector streets, major streets and other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision or when these features have not been anticipated by the master plan, but are considered essential by the planning and zoning commission, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider. Whenever such reserved land, or any portion thereof is not acquired, optioned or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a one-year period from the date of recording the subdivision, the subdivider may claim the original reservation, or portion thereof, and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider, subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
(d)	Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to a public use that the planning and zoning commission finds not required or suitable for public use, the planning and zoning commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the city of the reasons for such action. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2033; Code 1985, § 20-42)
 
Sec. 42-126. Non-subdivision developments.
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in the case of a plan for a development which is not to be subdivided into customary lots, blocks and streets, when in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission and the administrator, this plan will provide adequate open spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, aid and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated and which also provides such covenants and other means as will ensure conformity to and achievement of the plan. Plans for such development shall be submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning commission and administrator whether or not a plat is to be recorded, and no building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. Failure of the planning and zoning commission to act on such a plan within 30 days shall be deemed approval and thereafter a certificate of approval shall be issued to the developer at the developer's request. However, if the planning and zoning commission determines that additional time is required to study the plan, it may order an extension of time. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2035; Code 1985, § 20-44; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Secs. 42-127—42-150. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. DESIGN STANDARDS
 
Sec. 42-151. Application of article.
The design standards set forth in this article shall be observed in all plats which are required to be approved by the planning and zoning commission, except that standards for improvements shall be applicable only to those plats for which improvements or improvement plans are required as a condition of plat approval. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2041; Code 1985, § 20-50)
 
Sec. 42-152. Streets.
(a)	The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the lands to be served by such streets. 
(b)	The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)	Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum; 
(2)	Conform to a plan, approved or adopted by the planning and zoning commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or other conditions made continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
(c)	Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)	The planning and zoning commission may require the subdivider to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround within the right-of-way at the end of any dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac, when the commission finds this necessary for safe traffic circulation. 
(e)	Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning and zoning commission may require marginal access streets, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service drives, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to provide separation of through and local traffic. 
(f)	Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or expressway right-of-way, the planning and zoning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(g)	Except as otherwise specified by the planning and zoning commission, all streets shall have the following minimum right-of-way: 
(1)	Major streets: 90 to 100 feet of right-of-way, as shown on the major thoroughfare plan or as determined by the administrator. Generally, 100 feet shall be required. 
(2)	Collector streets: 60 to 90 feet of right-of-way, as shown on the major thoroughfare plan or as determined by the administrator. Generally, 60 feet will be required. 
(3)	Minor residential streets and marginal access streets, single-family and low density multiple family: 50 feet. 
(4)	Cul-de-sac (turn around radius), residential: 60 feet, commercial and industrial: 75 feet. 
(5)	Alleys and service ways: 20 feet. 
(h)	Right-of-way requirements in excess of 60 feet shall be dedicated or reserved for acquisition by the appropriate public body, subject to the provisions of section 42-125. 
(i)	Street paving widths shall be not less than as follows, measured from back of curb to back of curb, unless otherwise specified by the planning and zoning commission: 
(1)	Major streets (100-foot right-of-way): 81 feet; pavement widths for other size rights-of-way as specified by the city. 
(2)	Collector streets (60-foot right-of-way): 39 feet; pavement width for other size rights-of-way as specified by the city. 
(3)	Minor and marginal access streets (50-foot right-of-way): 30 feet. 
(4)	Cul-de-sac turn arounds: 
a.	Residential (diameter): 60 feet. 
b.	Commercial and industrial (diameter): 100 feet. 
(5)	Alleys or service drive: 20 feet. 
(j)	Grades shall be as follows: 
(1)	Major streets: As specified by state highway department, otherwise four percent maximum. 
(2)	Collector streets: Eight percent maximum. 
(3)	Minor and marginal access streets: 12 percent maximum. 
(4)	No street grade shall be less than one percent. 
(k)	Alignment. 
(1)	Vertical: 
a.	Major street profile grades, unless otherwise specified by the state department of transportation, shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equal in feet to 25 times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade expressed in feet per 100; for all other streets not less than 20 times. 
b.	In approaches to intersections, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding three percent and for a distance of not less than 50 feet from the nearest line of the intersecting street. 
(2)	Horizontal: 
a.	A minimum radii of centerline curvature will be: 
1.	Major streets: As specified by state highway department; otherwise: 1,260 feet. 
2.	Collector streets: 500 feet. 
3.	Minor residential and marginal access streets: 200 feet. 
b.	Minimum horizontal visibility measured on centerline shall be: 
1.	Major streets: As specified by state highway department; otherwise: 500 feet. 
2.	Collector streets: 300 feet. 
3.	Minor residential and marginal access streets: 200 feet. 
(l)	Street intersections. 
(1)	Intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than 60 degrees. 
(2)	Curb radius at street intersection shall be at least 15 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the planning and zoning commission may require a greater radius. 
(3)	Right-of-way lines at intersections shall assume a radius or chord compatible with curb radius. 
(4)	Intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(m)	Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed so that the maximum length shall not exceed 800 feet, nor shall the paved turn-around at the end be less than 60 feet in diameter for residential streets, or less than 100 feet for commercial and industrial streets. 
(n)	Alleys or service drives may be required at rear of all lots to be used for multiple-family, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not otherwise be provided except where the subdivider produces evidence of need satisfactory to the planning and zoning commission. 
(o)	Half streets shall be prohibited. 
(p)	Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys (or public grounds) shall not be permitted unless their control is definitely placed with the city under conditions approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(q)	Entrance and exit points. Except in districts zoned for single-family and duplex housing units, curb breaks shall not be more than 30 feet in width; less than 25 feet in width; nor shall there be less than 50 feet from the closest sides of any two driveway curb lines. Curb breaks in all zones shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest intersection of two curb lines as measured along one of the curb lines. Business establishments on contiguous lots are encouraged to consolidate entrance and exit points. Suitable provisions, including a five-foot wide planted buffer strip between the right-of-way and parking area shall be made to prevent entrance or exit from other than at designated entrance or exit points. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2042; Code 1985, § 20-51; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-153. Blocks.
(a)	The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)	Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)	Any provision of chapter 48 on requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)	Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(4)	Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)	In general, residential blocks shall not be greater than 1,200 feet in length, or less than 600 feet in length. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, the planning and zoning commission may, when existing or proposed public gathering places so justify, require public crosswalks across the block. 
(c)	Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of at least minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographic conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning and zoning commission may require or approve a single of tier of lots. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2043; Code 1985, § 20-52)
 
Sec. 42-154. Lots.
(a)	Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. Each lot shall abut upon a public street. 
(b)	The size, shape and orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the planning and zoning commission and administrator for the type of development and use contemplated. No lot shall be more than three times as deep as it is wide at the building setback line. 
(c)	Double frontage lots, unless required by the planning and zoning commission, shall be prohibited, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or other incompatible uses; or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation, and property size. A planting screen reservation at least ten feet wide, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other incompatible use. 
(d)	Corner lots shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
(e)	Lot remnants (parcels of land below minimum lot area or width left over after subdividing) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels or shall be dedicated to the city (subject to city acceptance) for public use as parks and open spaces. 
(f)	In subdividing land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake, the lot lines of lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the centerline of the lake. Such requirement may be waived upon approval by the planning and zoning commission of an alternate method for ensuring proper maintenance of the lake and any recreational operations to be provided thereon. 
(g)	In subdivisions with lots less than one acre in size or subdivisions with more than 20 lots contained within, the planning and zoning commission may require the subdivider to set aside an area within the subdivision for a recreational area. This will be dependent upon the location of the subdivision and on the location of nearby existing recreational areas. In all other subdivisions, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend to the developer the need for recreational areas in the plans for development. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2044; Code 1985, § 20-53; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Secs. 42-155—42-176. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
 
Sec. 42-177. Application of article.
Every subdivider shall be required to install or to have installed by the appropriate public agency or utility, the physical subdivision improvements specified in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2051; Code 1985, § 20-60)
 
Sec. 42-178. Street grading.
(a)	All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded at the expense of the subdivider and in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(b)	Finished grades shall be at levels approved by the administrator. 
(c)	When property adjacent to a proposed street is not owned by the subdivider, he shall obtain the necessary easements for sloping banks, before submitting application for final improvements. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2052; Code 1985, § 20-61; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-179. Street paving.
Street pavements shall be installed at the subdivider's expense and in accordance with the standards of the city and shall be paved to at least the minimum widths specified in section 42-152. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2053; Code 1985, § 20-62)
 
Sec. 42-180. Standards for new streets.
(a)	All new streets shall be curbed and guttered with two-foot by nine-inch by six-inch "el" back curbs set on proper slope and elevation to ensure drainage, set by the developer. An expansion joint of one-half-inch premolded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
(b)	Intersection radii shall be as follows: 
Street Types	Radii
(feet)	Length Storage Lane
(feet)	Taper
(feet)
Arterial 	40 	150 	50 
Major collector 	40 	150 	50 
Minor collector 	25 	100 	50 
Local 	25 	100 	50 
Alleys 	To be designated by administrator 

(c)	Special curbing design shall be individually approved by administrator. Inferior workmanship or construction methods resulting in unsightly curb and gutter will be cause of rejection of the finished work. 
(d)	When a subdivision is being developed fronting on a city street, curb and gutter on the city street shall be provided as follows: 
Street Type	Location
(feet)
Arterial 	24 
Major collector 	18 
Minor collector 	12—18 
Local street 	12 

Distance is measured from center line of street to face of curb. All curbing shall be backfilled and landscaped. 
(e)	Residential streets shall be built to the following standards: 
(1)	Base shall be eight inches of crusher run placed and compacted. After compaction, three inches of asphaltic concrete plant mix type to be installed and compacted. All streets will be bored for testing. 
(2)	Paving widths shall be built as follows: 
Street Type	Minimum R/W
(feet)	Minimum Paving Widths
Arterial 	100—200 	As may be required 
Major collector 	80—100 	12 ft. lanes and curb and gutter 
Minor collector 	60 	24 ft. and curb and gutter 
Local 	50 	22 ft. and curb and gutter* 
Rural local 	60 	24 ft. no curb 

*On local subdivision streets a minimum paving width of 20 feet, plus curb and gutter may be allowed by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1985, § 20-62.1; Mo. of 5-6-1985; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-181. Curbs and gutters.
Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets, except where noted herein. Installation shall be at the subdivider's expense and in accordance with the standards of the city. Where sidewalks are required, curbs may be of a straight or standard construction, on one or both sides of street as applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2054; Code 1985, § 20-63)
 
Sec. 42-182. Sidewalks.
(a)	Sidewalks will be required: 
(1)	Adjoining all major streets; 
(2)	On at least one side of all collector streets; 
(3)	Adjoining any street providing access to and within 1,000 feet of a school; 
(4)	In all areas zoned commercially (to be built as part of the commercial structure); and 
(5)	Whenever the planning and zoning commission determines the public safety necessitates their construction. When sidewalks are installed, they shall be at the expense of the subdivider, with a minimum width of five feet and in accordance with the standards of the city. In commercial areas, sidewalks shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, unless determined otherwise by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)	Driveway aprons over sidewalks shall be paved in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2055; Code 1985, § 20-64)
 
Sec. 42-183. Water supply.
(a)	The installation of water mains and of a connection to each lot shall be accomplished prior to the paving of the street. 
(b)	The installation of water mains, including all materials, shall be performed by the subdivider under city standards. 
(c)	The standard meter charge for each house will be at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2056; Code 1985, § 20-65)
 
Sec. 42-184. Sanitary sewage disposal.
(a)	When, in the written opinion of the administrator, access is available to the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot therein, in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(b)	When, in the written opinion of the administrator, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, community sewage disposal system may be provided, when in compliance with the standards of the city and the appropriate health department. 
(c)	Whenever a sanitary sewer is required to be installed within the right-of-way of a street, the street shall not be paved without such sewer first being installed. 
(d)	Whenever the installation of a sanitary sewer will require an easement, no building permit shall be issued for any lot affected by such easement until that portion of the sanitary sewer has been installed. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2057; Code 1985, § 20-66; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-185. Storm drainage.
(a)	Every subdivision shall be served by appropriate storm drainage facilities, these facilities shall be designed in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(b)	All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to serve the entire drainage area in which they are located. 
(c)	In those cases where a hydrologic study is required and if the required hydrologic study reveals that filling or grading within a floodplain drainage easement would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, preliminary plat approval shall be denied, unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the floodplain drainage easement. In addition, if the required hydrologic study reveals that development or building would generate an increase of stormwater runoff in excess of one cubic foot per second during a 100-year frequency storm, preliminary plat approval shall be denied unless improvements are made to provide storage on the site of the increased runoff and a method for regulating the flow in order that the rate of runoff from the site will not be increased. 
(d)	Storm drainage facilities shall be so arranged as to transport water to existing storm drains, or other facilities, as approved by the administrator. 
(e)	When drainage facilities must parallel streets or are located within the front or side setbacks, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, and manholes shall be required. Whenever drainage facilities are located a minimum of 30 feet to the rear of a building, drainage ditches may be used. Such ditches shall be designed so as to retain natural design characteristics, and so as not to present a hazard to life or property. All ditches must be in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(f)	Whenever it is necessary for a storm drain to be crossed by a street or driveway, the subdivider shall provide and install the pipe and any other structures necessary in accordance with the standards of the city. 
(g)	Whenever a storm drain is to be extended through lots proposed to be platted for development, the subdivider shall provide and install drains designed in accordance with the standards of the city, such drains to extend from the street drains to a point 30 feet to the rear of the building. 
(h)	Whenever a storm drain is to be extended through land that is not proposed for development, a drainage ditch may be provided. However, in such case the plat shall be so marked and an easement shown thereon indicating that no building or driveway shall be built over or within ten feet of such ditch. 
(i)	Improvements, such as widening, deepening, relocating, clearing, protecting or otherwise improving existing lakes and shore lines, stream beds and other watercourses, for the control of mosquitoes and public health nuisances, shall be carried out by the developer in accordance with standards and requirements of the appropriate health department. 
(j)	Any water impoundment structure shall be constructed so as to minimize the mosquito breeding and other nuisance hazards and shall be built in accordance with the standards of the city and with approval of the administrator and the appropriate health department. 
(k)	No land subject to flooding as determined by the administrator shall be improved for residential or other use which may be endangered by floods, unless such land shall be raised above the potential flood level to the extent specified by the administrator and health department, and in accordance with the required hydrologic study including any federal floodplains study or requirements for federal flood insurance. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2058; Code 1985, § 20-67; Ord. of 7-12-1993, § 19)
 
Sec. 42-186. Monuments and pins.
Iron pins at least one-half inch by 24 inches shall be placed at all property corners and driven so as to set four inches above the finished grade. Iron pins shall also be set at the intersection of any property line with a land lot line, and, if not already set, land lot corners shall be set in a like manner. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2059; Code 1985, § 20-68)
 
Sec. 42-187. Fire hydrants.
(a)	Fire hydrants in the city in all new developments shall be located on city rights-of-way every 500 feet. 
(b)	On all existing streets, fire hydrants shall be added as necessary from time to time so that they shall be located every 500 feet on city rights-of-way as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2060; Code 1985, § 20-69; Ord. of 1-7-1985)
 
Sec. 42-188. Street trees.
Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall be retained or planted so as not to obstruct required visibility utility along the street. Any trees or shrubs planted within the right-of-way must be approved by the public works director. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2061; Code 1985, § 20-70)
 
Chapter 44 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 44-1. Adoption of state uniform rules of the road.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, the provisions of O.C.G.A. ch. 40-6, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, to the extent applicable within municipalities, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of such rules shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1001; Code 1985, § 21-1; Ord. of 9-10-1979, § 2)
 
Sec. 44-2. Temporary traffic regulations.
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and it is unlawful for any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, to violate them. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1002; Code 1985, § 21-3)
 
Sec. 44-3. Traffic signs, signals and markings.
(a)	Upon written approval of the city, the police department is authorized: 
(1)	To designate and maintain, by appropriate traffic-control signs and devices, including speed breakers, marks or lines erected at intersections or upon the surface of roadways, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as deemed necessary; 
(2)	To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians; 
(3)	To mark lanes for traffic; 
(4)	To designate and maintain by appropriate traffic-control signs and devices, speed, parking or other traffic-control zones in the city. 
(b)	All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state department of transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1003; Code 1985, § 21-4)
 
Sec. 44-4. U-turns prohibited.
No operator of any vehicle shall make a U-turn upon any of the streets of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1005; Code 1985, § 21-5)
 
Sec. 44-5. Vehicle load cover required.
(a)	It shall be a violation of this Code to operate any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed or loaded or covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city, provided that this shall not prohibit the necessary spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or construction operation. 
(b)	No person shall operate or load for operation on any public road or street of this city any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from coming loose, detached or in any manner becoming a hazard to other users of the public road or street, or littering the public roads or streets. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1008; Code 1985, § 21-6)
 
Sec. 44-6. Obstructing street crossings by railroad train.
It is unlawful for any railroad conductor or other person in charge of a railroad engine, train or car to cause any public crossing to be blocked or otherwise obstruct travel at the crossing by such engine, train or car longer than ten minutes. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3051; Code 1985, § 21-7)
 
Secs. 44-7—44-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PARKING
 
Sec. 44-31. Prohibition of parking.
(a)	No vehicle shall remain parked on any street within the city for a longer period than 12 hours. This shall not conflict with time limit parking in restricted zones, as approved by the city. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the above, no vehicle shall be allowed to park at any time on the following streets in the area indicated: 
Street Name	From	To
Millstone Court 	East cul-de-sac 	West cul-de-sac 
Venesa Circle 	City limits 	Lisa Lane 
Lisa Lane 	Venesa Circle 	Venesa Circle 
Matt Drive 	Venesa Circle 	Lisa Lane 
Pontiac Circle 	Maxham Road 	Maxham Road 
Cochise Circle 	Hiwatha Lane 	Hiwatha Lane 
Hiwatha Lane 	Pontiac Circle 	Pontiac Circle 
Miller Road 	Humphries Hill Road 	Dead-end 

(Code 1976, § 8-1006; Code 1985, § 21-12; Ord. of 3-6-1989)
 
Sec. 44-32. Parking of business vehicles.
(a)	Business vehicles shall be defined as school, commercial and church buses, trailers, tandem rigs and any other vehicles driven for hire, or utilized in conducting business affairs, such as transportation of equipment, freight, goods, or individuals. As used in this section, vehicles include any trailer, boat, or other device or vehicle being towed by the vehicle. 
(b)	Business vehicles under 10,000 pounds gross volume weight shall be allowed to park on property zoned residential in a carport or garage or in a side or rear yard but not closer than 20 feet to a side or rear yard line of the property, but may not park in the front yard thereof. Business vehicles weighing or exceeding 10,000 pounds gross volume weight shall be allowed to park on property zoned residential during daylight hours on weekdays, but not overnight or on Saturdays or Sundays, in a carport or garage or in a side or rear yard, but not closer than 20 feet to a side or rear yard line of the property and not at all in the front yard. Daylight hours shall mean 30 minutes after dawn to 30 minutes before sunset. 
(c)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, school buses may be parked in any school property parking lot at any time, and church buses may be parked in any church property parking lot at any time. 
(d)	It shall further be unlawful for any person, to park any of the vehicles described in this section on the streets within the business section of the city between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on any week day, and it is unlawful to park same during any other time on the streets within the business section of the city in such a way as to obstruct the normal flow of traffic over such streets or to otherwise create a hazard. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-2001, 8-2002; Code 1985, §§ 21-13, 21-14; Ord. of 9-14-1987)
 
Sec. 44-33. Temporary parking for deliveries.
There is excluded from the prohibitions contained within this chapter, the temporary parking of any vehicle on the business or residential streets of the city for the purpose of making deliveries therefrom to business houses or residences within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2003; Code 1985, § 21-15)
 
Sec. 44-34. Parking on state highway right-of-way.
It is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on the right-of-way of any state highway within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2005; Code 1985, § 21-16)
 
Sec. 44-35. Parking on the city rights-of-way.
It is unlawful for any vehicle to park on any right-of-way within the city boundaries, except as follows: 
(1)	Business district. If a vehicle becomes inoperative due to an accident or mechanical problems, the owner may have 24 hours to remove the vehicle from the right-of-way. 
(2)	Residential areas. It is unlawful to park on the right-of-way of any residential area without a special parking permit issued by the city for social occasions except that parking may be permitted for a period not to exceed four hours for social functions (i.e., parties, reunions, funerals, etc.) but such permits shall limit parking to one side of the right-of-way only. 
(3)	Opposite sides of right-of-way. At no time shall multiple cars park opposite from one another on opposite rights-of-way. 
(Code 1985, § 18-7.7)
 
Secs. 44-36—44-49. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT CONTROL DEVICES
 
Sec. 44-50. Automated traffic enforcement control devices.
(a)	Adoption by reference. O.C.G.A. § 40-14-18 is hereby adopted into the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)	Violations. Drivers exceeding school zone speeds in excess of ten miles per hour over the posted speed during applicable time periods may cited utilizing automated traffic enforcement safety devices under and according to this section as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-18. Printed notice and/or citations shall notify drivers that they have been cited under this section as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-18. Late fees shall refer to subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)	Penalties. A civil monetary penalty will be assessed against drivers as set forth in this section as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-18, currently $75.00 for the first violation and $125.00 for additional violations, plus late fees as described in this article. 
(d)	Late fees. Pursuant to this section as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-18(i)(3), the following late fees shall be added to any civil monetary penalty not timely paid: 
(1)	30 days after the due date printed on the second notice$25.00
(2)	90 days after the due date printed on the second notice 25.00
Total late fees shall not exceed $50.00 per violation and shall be printed on all notices. 
(e)	Court. Contested notices of violation shall be referred to the municipal court for adjudication in accordance with this section as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-18. 
(f)	Out of state drivers. Service on out of state drivers who fail to pay upon standard notices may be affected as set forth by O.C.G.A. § 40-12-2. In the case of nonresident drivers beyond the reach of registration holds as set forth in § 40-14-18, the city may designate a private collection company or companies to assist in the recovery of civil monetary penalties and late fees. 
(g)	Repeal and severability. Existing ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. In the event any provision of this article is found to be unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction it shall be severed, and the remainder shall remain in force. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2021, § 21-43)
 
Chapter 46 UTILITIES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 46-1. Public works director to administer chapter.
This chapter shall be administered by the public works director, who is the director of both the water and sewer and street and sanitation departments. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1001; Code 1985, § 14-1; Ord. of 11-7-1988; Ord. of 7-12-1993)
 
Sec. 46-2. Patron conduct in utility administrative offices restricted.
Persons visiting the administrative office of any city utility shall refrain from shouting, cursing or otherwise exhibiting disorderly conduct. Persons who violate this section will be immediately removed by city law enforcement personnel and may be charged with disorderly conduct and such other violations of this Code as may be applicable in the circumstances. 
 
Sec. 46-3. Connection fees.
(a)	Upon the application by any customer for new water tap and service connection, the applicant shall pay the fee in an amount determined by the issuing department as specified for the size of the water tap as required by the building code. All one-inch and larger meters will be considered commercial. The contractor will supply the meter, lines, valves and other fitting for installation of meters over two inches. Backflow prevention units are installed on meters up to one inch. The customer is responsible for installation of backflow prevention units on installation of meters over one inch. 
(b)	In addition to the above fees, mobile home parks and apartment buildings shall pay an amount as determined by the issuing department per mobile home pad or an amount as determined by the issuing department per apartment unit. 
(c)	The charge for a residential sanitary sewer tap shall be an amount as determined by the issuing department. Commercial sanitary sewer tap fees are calculated in accordance with the Guidelines for Administering Regional System Development Fees, current edition. 
(d)	The foregoing rates shall not limit the city to charge more to cover special circumstances caused by the volume of service for special difficulties in connection and charges therefor shall reflect the cost incurred by the city for such special circumstances or difficulties in connection. 
(e)	The customer shall bear all expenses for the purchase and installation of meters, lines, valves, and other fittings from tap to structure. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2008; Code 1985, § 14-3; Ord. of 9-10-1979; Ord. of 11-5-1984(2); Ord. of 2-2-1987; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-4. Payment of utility charges; lien for city utility service costs.
(a)	Due dates and payment. All charges for natural gas, water and sewerage services, as established by the city and the gas board rendered within and outside the boundaries of the city shall be due and payable as provided in the rules and regulations of the city and the board. Failure to receive notice of the amount due shall in no way relieve the customer from making payment as therein provided. Should any customer receiving municipal utility service fail to pay any sums finally determined due, such service may be discontinued until such sums together with all penalties are paid in full; provided, nondelinquent tenants must be provided with such services as individuals upon proper application and payment for installation of meters. 
(b)	Notice of lien. If default occurs in the payment of such sums as may be due by a customer who is either the owner of the property served or the agent of such owner, then notice shall be given to the owner of such property so served, as shown on the latest available ad valorem tax digest of the county, that the property so served is subject to a lien for such utility charges in the nature of a tax lien for special assessments. 
(c)	Executions. Should a customer who is either the owner of property served or the agent of such owner not pay the municipal utility charges thereon, and the payment thereof shall be in default for a period of 90 days after the first date due, then the city shall be entitled and authorized to have an execution issue, which execution shall issue in the name of the city in rem against the property described and shown on the ad valorem tax digest, and in personam against the owner of the property and shall be for the principal amount due, plus interest at the rate of seven percent per annum from the first date due, and the sum of $1.50 cost for the issuance of the execution. Executions under this section are subject to the following: 
(1)	Subsequent costs thereon shall be the same as those now or hereafter allowed by law to the sheriff for the performance of similar services. Such execution for municipal utility charges shall be delivered to the marshal of the city, and subsequent proceedings had thereon shall be as provided by law for the enforcement of executions for taxes. 
(2)	All executions issued pursuant hereto, shall issue against the owner and the property served, and shall be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the land lies and the same shall constitute a lien against the property from the time the charge was first due, which lien shall rank on a parity with and be of equal dignity to other liens for special tax assessments. 
(d)	Exception. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, no lien is created and no execution is authorized against property where the owner or the owner's agent is not the customer, such as rental property where a tenant is the customer. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4001—6-4004; Code 1985, §§ 14-4—14-7; Ord. of 11-6-1978)
 
Secs. 46-5—46-26. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. WATER
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 46-27. Water service business hours.
All communications, transactions and duties related to commencement, reinstatement or termination of water service shall be conducted between the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday of each week during the year except on holidays. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2016; Code 1985, § 14-20)
 
Sec. 46-28. Director may establish rules and regulations.
The public works director may establish other rules and regulations consistent with this Code and approved by the city for connection procedures, water meter locations and inspections. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2017; Code 1985, § 14-21)
 
Sec. 46-29. Water service application.
Water shall not be connected to any premises without application having first been made and approved by the public works director or his designee. Every water service application made must be by the owner of the property to be benefited or by any authorized agent. The application must be made on a form prescribed by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2001; Code 1985, § 14-22; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-30. Service deposits.
(a)	Each new or reinstated residential customer must pay a deposit in an amount as determined by the issuing department prior to the connection of water service. Each new or reinstated commercial customer shall pay a deposit equal to a typical 45 day bill for that type of business, but not less than the amount as determined by the issuing department prior to the connection of water service. The deposit may be waived if the customer can provide a two year history from another utility. 
(b)	Water meter deposits shall be refundable on application any time after two years provided the account has not been billed a penalty within the past 24 months next preceding the application. 
(c)	Additional or different water accounts for existing customers with an account at least two years of age shall not require deposits when their existing account shows no penalties within the last 24 months next preceding their application for additional or different meters. 
(d)	If a customer's water service is cut off after having such customer's deposit previously refunded, or no deposit ever having been made, a new deposit will be required before water service can be reconnected. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-2002, 6-2003; Code 1985, §§ 14-23, 14-24; Ord. of 5-11-1987; Ord. of 3-6-1989; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-31. Separate meters.
Except for apartments and mobile home parks, which may have one master meter for multiple users, in no case shall more than one premises be supplied through the same meter but each separate premises (house, duplex unit, office building, garage apartment or other premises) shall have its own meter and receive water through the meter only unless otherwise specifically authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2005; Code 1985, § 14-26; Ord. of 11-5-1984(1))
 
Sec. 46-32. Water meter reading.
All water meters shall be read monthly upon such cycles as may be convenient for the water department. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2010; Code 1985, § 14-27)
 
Sec. 46-33. Water rates.
The water rates shall be as established from time to time by the city for residential customers within the city limits. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2009; Code 1985, § 14-31)
 
Sec. 46-34. Billing for water and water cutoff.
All water bills are due and payable monthly not later than the tenth of the succeeding month. The public works director may cut off water on customers who shall have failed to pay their bills by the 15th of that month. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2011; Code 1985, § 14-32)
 
Sec. 46-35. Special late payment charge.
If a customer's name appears on a cut-off list for failure to pay such person's water bill, or if a customer has water cut off for failure to pay such person's water bill, such customer must pay such customer's entire account, including an additional charge in an amount as determined by the issuing department to turn the water on following the first cut-off and in an amount as determined by the issuing department to turn the water on following the second and all subsequent cut-offs, prior to such reinstatement of service, rather than paying only the amount delinquent. If such customer's account is turned over to a collection agency or an attorney for collection, there shall be added to such account the cost of collection. A penalty of an additional ten percent of any past due balance shall be added to any bill each month showing a past due balance. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2012; Code 1985, § 14-33; Ord. of 2-5-1979; Ord. of 3-19-1979; Ord. of 5-11-1987; Ord. of 3-6-1989)
 
Sec. 46-36. Landlord's liability.
Landlords and agents controlling property for domestic use or rooms for lodging purposes, or offices, shall be liable for water rents, and shall in every case give the public works directorwritten notice of the removal of the tenant or the nonuse of the water, and shall continue liable until such notice is given for any water actually used. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2013; Code 1985, § 14-34)
 
Sec. 46-37. Persons authorized to water tap.
No person but the public works director or a person authorized by such public works director shall tap any main or distributing pipe or connection. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2007; Code 1985, § 14-30)
 
Sec. 46-38. Interference or damage to equipment.
It is a misdemeanor to tamper with, interfere with, disable, bypass, damage, or destroy city equipment, meters, meter pits, pipes, or other facilities used in the operation of the gas, water and sewer system. Upon conviction the court may impose, in addition to a minimum fine of $100.00, restitution in an amount equal to the amount necessary to repair or replace the damaged equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2015; Code 1985, § 14-28; Ord. of 3-6-1989; Ord. of 7-12-1999, § 1)
State law reference(s)—Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5; damaging, etc., utility property, O.C.G.A § 16-7-25. 
 
Sec. 46-39. Unauthorized persons prohibited from turning gas or water off and on.
No person except one legally authorized will be allowed to turn city gas or water on or off at the meter. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2004; Code 1985, § 14-25)
 
Sec. 46-40. Inspection; emergencies.
The public works director and the police authorities of the city shall have the right at all hours to enter upon any premises where the city water is taken for the purpose of inspecting the pipes and fixtures, setting and repairing meters, turning water on or off, examining the sanitary conditions incident to the use of the water and enforcing these rules generally. Every denial of this right will render the offending party liable to fine or imprisonment, or both. The public works director may stop the supply of water in case of emergency, and shut off for repairs or extensions, such public works director being the sole judge of the time and necessity therefor, reasonable notice being given when practicable. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2006; Code 1985, § 14-29)
 
Sec. 46-41. Illegal use of water and sewer services.
It is a misdemeanor to make any unauthorized water or sewer connection or to obtain or attempt to obtain unauthorized water or sewer services, including unauthorized use of fire hydrants. Upon conviction, the court may impose, in addition to a minimum fine of $200.00, restitution in an amount equal to the cost of water or sewer services illegally obtained. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2014; Code 1985, § 14-35; Ord. of 7-12-1999, § 2)
 
Sec. 46-42. Fire sprinklers and suppression systems.
(a)	Fire sprinkler and suppression systems shall mean a NFPA Standard 13 or NFPA Standard 13A or modified sprinkler system standard approved by the city or Cobb County or any other fire suppression system utilizing detector check valves, hydrants, and similar equipment, when any such system receives its water directly through a tap into the city water system line. 
(b)	All structures within the city which shall be required to have a sprinkler and suppression system pursuant to the city fire prevention and protection code shall pay a deposit in an amount as determined by the issuing department prior to the connection of the system to the water system of the city. The deposit is in addition to the water service deposit required in section 46-30. 
(c)	With response to the installation and use of fire sprinkler and suppression system which requires a separate tap into a water line belonging to the city, the charges in an amount as determined by the issuing department shall apply. The customer shall also bear all expenses for the purchase and installation of the fire protection meter, detector check, valve, meters, lines, and other fittings from the tap to the fire sprinkler and suppression systems. 
(d)	All accounts which have existing fire sprinkler and suppression systems in operation prior to May 1, 1991, shall not be required to pay the deposit for any existing systems. 
(e)	No fire protection sprinkler system shall be installed, repaired, altered, modified, added to, maintained, or inspected except in compliance with this Code and other regulations and ordinances in effect. 
(Code 1985, § 14-37; Ord. of 3-4-1991; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Secs. 46-43—46-72. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. OUTDOOR WATER USE
 
Sec. 46-73. Authority of mayor to restrict; procedure.
At any time, and from time to time, the mayor is empowered to implement the following water use restrictions on water customers of the city water system, requiring compliance with the restrictions under the following levels and moving from one level to another for such periods as conditions my reasonably require. The notification by the city's water supplier or the state environmental protection division and the need to implement water use restrictions, or the loss of adequate water supply to the city, or that one or more city water tanks become empty shall be sufficient reason to implement such restrictions. The actions taken hereunder shall be reported to the next city council meeting, at which time the city council may modify the restriction if it deems it appropriate. 
(Code 1985, § 14-36(a); Ord. of 7-7-1986; Ord. of 10-6-1986; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-74. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. The term "even numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. The term "odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Code 1985, § 14-36(b); Ord. of 7-7-1986; Ord. of 10-6-1986; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-75. Applicability of rule.
These rules apply to any entity, and its customers, permitted by the state environmental protection division for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Code 1985, § 14-36(c); Ord. of 7-7-1986; Ord. of 10-6-1986; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-76. Outdoor water use schedule—During non-drought periods.
Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
(1)	Odd-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)	Even-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(3)	There shall be no outdoor water use on Fridays. 
(Code 1985, § 14-36(d); Ord. of 7-7-1986; Ord. of 10-6-1986; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-77. Outdoor water use schedule—During declared drought response levels.
During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than activities exempted in section 46-78, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(1)	Declared drought response level one. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
a.	Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
b.	Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
c.	There shall be no outdoor water use on Fridays. 
d.	Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing is prohibited. 
(2)	Declared drought response level two. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.	Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
b.	Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
c.	There shall be no outdoor water use on Fridays. 
d.	The following are prohibited: 
1.	Using hydrants for any other purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing. 
2.	Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(3)	Declared drought response level three. Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
a.	The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
b.	The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
c.	The following uses are prohibited: 
1.	Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing. 
2.	Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
3.	Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for public care or structural integrity. 
4.	Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, or golf carts. 
5.	Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
6.	Noncommercial fund raisers, such as carwashes. 
7.	Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(4)	Declared drought response level four. No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in section 46-78. 
(Code 1985, § 14-36(e); Ord. of 7-7-1986; Ord. of 10-6-1986; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Sec. 46-78. Exemptions.
(a)	Mandatory water use restrictions shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)	Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(b)	The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of mandatory water use restrictions: 
(1)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the state environmental protection division to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)	Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(c)	Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
(1)	Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
(2)	For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d)	The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from outdoor water use schedules of this division. 
(1)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the state environmental protection division to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)	Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. 
(3)	Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two, and three. 
(4)	Irrigation of greens. 
(5)	The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempted from the outdoor water use schedules of this division: 
a.	Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers; during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified for commercial exemptions to apply. 
b.	Irrigation contractors, during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
c.	Sod producers. 
d.	Ornamental growers. 
e.	Fruit and vegetable growers. 
f.	Retail garden centers. 
g.	Hydro-seeding. 
h.	Power washing. 
i.	Construction sites. 
j.	Producers of food and fiber. 
k.	Carwashes. 
l.	Other activities essential to daily business. 
m.	Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(6)	Enforcement shall be by the city police department and code enforcement personnel and authorized personnel of the city water system. Enforcement may consist of warning, fines of not less than $100.00 to not more than $250.00 for each offense, or disconnection of water service by removal of the water meter and payment of fines and reinstallation of meter charges in an amount as determined by the issuing department or any combination of the foregoing. 
(7)	This section shall apply to all city water customers regardless of whether they reside inside the city limits or their property served with city water is inside the city limits. All citations issued for violations shall be returnable to the municipal court. The city hereby delegates concurrent jurisdiction over such offenses to the county government within which the property is served with city water lays if it is outside the city limits. If a citation is issued by county personnel for a violation of this section, it may also be returnable to the magistrate's court of the county where the property lies. 
(Code 1985, § 14-36(f); Ord. of 7-7-1986; Ord. of 10-6-1986; Ord. of 7-3-2006(2))
 
Secs. 46-79—46-99. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. BACKFLOW PREVENTION
 
Sec. 46-100. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device by which water may be secured from a source other than that normally used. 
By-pass means any system of piping or other arrangement by which the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
Cross-connection means any physical connection by which the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building, in such manners that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or backpressure valves, is because of any other arrangement. 
Inter-connection means any system of piping or other arrangement by which the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device that does or may contain sewage or other waste or liquid that would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Person means any persons, natural or artificial, including any individual form or association, and any municipal or a private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
Public water supply means the waterworks' system furnishing water to the citizens of the city for general use by the state department of natural resources or the environmental protection division. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(a); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 1)
 
Sec. 46-101. Compliance with state rules.
The city public water supply shall comply with Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R. ch. 391-3-5-13 and the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 USC 300f et seq., legally adopted in accordance with this Code, which pertain to cross-connections, and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(b); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 2)
 
Sec. 46-102. Unlawful connections.
It is unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection to be made; or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(c); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 3)
 
Sec. 46-103. Nonexistent or unapproved connections.
Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the director of the water department a statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or interconnections. Such statements shall also contain an agreement that no cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection will be permitted upon the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(d); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 4)
 
Sec. 46-104. Water department inspections.
It is the duty of the water department to cause inspections to be made on all properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established by the water department. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(e); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 5)
 
Sec. 46-105. Right of entry.
The public works director or his designee shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the city public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping system thereof for cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connection. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connections. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(f); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 6)
 
Sec. 46-106. Remedy of connection violation.
Any person who is determined to have cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections violating the provisions of this division, shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to remedy the violations. The amount of time shall be determined by the public works director. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(g); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 7)
 
Sec. 46-107. Protective device.
(a)	Where nature of use of the water supplied on premises by the water department is such that it is deemed: 
(1)	Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation; 
(2)	That the owner or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his designated representatives, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety of portability of the water supply; 
(3)	That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; or 
(4)	There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered, or disconnected; 
The public works director, or his designated representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving the premises to ensure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. 
(b)	The protective device shall be a reduced pressure come type back flow preventer approved by the public works director as to manufacture, model, and size. 
(c)	The method of installation of back flow protective devices shall be approved by the director before installation. The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(d)	The department shall have the right to inspect and test the device or annually or whenever deemed necessary by the director or his designated representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
(e)	Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective device. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the director shall give written notice to the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test or repair the device. Any repairs shall be made by qualified personnel approved by the director. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(h); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 8)
 
Sec. 46-108. Protection of potable water from contamination.
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which may be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING. 
The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters one-inch high located on a red background. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(i); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 9)
 
Sec. 46-109. Penalties for violation.
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, and each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines and penalties, the water director shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or intersection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Code 1985, § 14-38(j); Ord. of 5-5-1997, § 10)
 
Sec. 46-110. Restriction on outdoor water of landscape.
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable county public health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on the property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)	Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 14-39, 1-1-2011(eff.))
 
Sec. 46-111. Enforcement.
Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the appropriate court or by any other legal means authorized under this Code. Violation of this division is punishable as provided in section 1-9, in addition to administrative and other remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 14-40, 1-1-2011(eff.))
 
Secs. 46-112—46-135. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SEWER
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 46-136. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in mg/L. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
FOG means fat, oil and grease. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or disposing of food, and from the handling, storage or sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen concentration in moles per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, or dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by this city or owned and operated by the county water system. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Storm sewer orstorm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Suspended solids meas solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3001; Code 1985, § 14-40)
 
Sec. 46-137. Prohibited acts.
(a)	Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain or cause to be constructed or maintained any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3002; Code 1985, § 14-41)
 
Sec. 46-138. Connection to public sewers required.
The owner of all houses, or other buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes within the corporate limits of this city and located within 250 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or after constructed to which such house, or other building, or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity is hereby required at such owner's own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the line of a public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3003; Code 1985, § 14-42)
 
Sec. 46-139. Private sewage disposal.
(a)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 46-138, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with applicable rules of the county health department. 
(b)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(c)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(d)	No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3004; Code 1985, § 14-43)
 
Sec. 46-140. Building sewers and connections.
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. 
(b)	There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)	For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)	For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the public works director. 
(c)	All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the municipal property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the municipal property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee as provided in section 46-3. 
(d)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that, where one building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot, and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the public works director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)	The building sewer shall be of cast iron pipe; ASTM specification A74; or plastic PVC sewer pipe, ASTM specifications 346 or greater. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the public works director where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that non-metallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the public works director. 
(g)	The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the public works director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(h)	Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(i)	In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)	All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the public works director. Pipe laying and back fill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification C12; except that no back fill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(k)	All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(l)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the public works director. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the public works director. 
(m)	The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the public works director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(n)	All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3005; Code 1985, § 14-44)
 
Sec. 46-141. Regulation of discharge into public sewers.
(a)	No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)	Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the public works director, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)	Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2)	Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 mg/L of fat, oil, or grease; 
(3)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
(5)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works; 
(6)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; 
(7)	Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plan. The fixed upper limits for the constituents listed below, in parts per million (ppm), shall be: 
a.	Cadmium0.02
b.	Chromium1.00
c.	Copper1.00
d.	Cyanide0.20
e.	Nickel1.00
f.	Silver1.00
g.	Lead0.10
h.	Zinc3.00
i.	Phenol0.05
j.	Arsenic0.05
(8)	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; 
(9)	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(d)	Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. 
(1)	Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(2)	Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas-tight and watertight. 
(e)	When installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at such owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation. 
(f)	Preliminary treatment. 
(1)	The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having: 
a.	A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 mg/L; 
b.	Containing more than 350 mg/L of suspended solids; 
c.	Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in subsection (c) of this section; or 
d.	An average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city; 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director. 
(2)	Where necessary, in the opinion of the public works director, the owner shall provide at such owner's expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
a.	Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 mg/L and the suspended solids to 350 mg/L; 
b.	Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (c) of this section; or 
c.	Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. 
(3)	Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the public works director, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approval is obtained in writing. 
(g)	Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at such owner's expense. 
(h)	When required by the public works director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at such owner's expense, and the owner at such owner's expense shall maintain the same so the manhole shall be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)	All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in subsections (c) and (f) of this section shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, at the control manhole provided for in subsection (h) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(j)	No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3006; Code 1985, § 14-45)
 
Sec. 46-142. Power and authority of inspectors.
The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3007; Code 1985, § 14-46)
 
Sec. 46-143. Penalties.
(a)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 46-138, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 46-138 or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 46-138, or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a municipal offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3008; Code 1985, § 14-47)
 
Sec. 46-144. Sewer rates.
The sewer rates shall be as provided by a written schedule of rates available to the public and approved by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3009; Code 1985, § 14-48; Mo. of 10-20-1980)
 
Sec. 46-145. Public works director may establish other rules and regulations.
The public works director may establish other rules and regulations consistent with this Code and approved by the city governing the operation of his department. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3007; Code 1985, § 14-49)
 
Secs. 46-146—46-173. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. SEWER USE STANDARDS AND RESTRICTIONS
 
Sec. 46-174. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in mg/L. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of oxygen equivalent of that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term "Environmental Protection Agency" may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user means a source of direct discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
Industrial waste surcharge means the charge made in excess of the sewer service charge for all wastewater over and above normal wastewater. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of Cobb County's NPDES permit. The term "interference" includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), 42 USC 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act, 42 USC 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substance Control Act, 15 USC 2601 et seq., or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Manager means the public works director or such other official as may be designated by the city from time to time to enforce the provisions of this article. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard orpretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit orNPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids and BOD is not more than 300 mg/L, total phosphorus is not more than 15 mg/L, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 18 mg/L; and total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment ortreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act which is owned in this instance by Cobb County or the city. The term "publicly owned treatment works" includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. 
Suspended solids mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, wastewater may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1985, § 14-50; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 1)
 
Sec. 46-175. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA 	Federal Environmental Protection Agency 
L 	Liter 
mg 	Milligrams 
mg/L 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
SIC 	Standard industrial classification 
SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
USC 	United States Code 

(Code 1985, § 14-51; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 2)
 
Sec. 46-176. Powers and authority of inspectors.
(a)	Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the sewer system in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(b)	While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to herein, the authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(c)	The duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purpose, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement involved. 
(Code 1985, § 14-52; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 3)
 
Sec. 46-177. Compliance with regulatory requirements.
(a)	General. The provisions of this division shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law 92-500, shall be considered as a part of this division upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in title 40 CFR 403. 
(b)	Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed hereunder for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed hereunder. The administrator shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(c)	Modifications of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. In the event Cobb County modifies the standards in accordance with the law in such cases provided, such modifications shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed hereunder. 
(d)	State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal or county requirements and limitations or those hereunder. 
(e)	Right to revise to more stringent limitations. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with objectives stated in the preamble hereof. 
(f)	Excessive discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by the city, county or state, unless specifically allowed in the categorical pretreatment standards established by EPA. 
(g)	Accidental discharges.
(1)	Protection. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by same before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan within four months after adoption hereof. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements hereof. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW (Cobb County, as well as the city) of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(2)	Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the POTW (Cobb County, as well as the city) a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed hereunder or other applicable law. 
(3)	Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge or accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous or accidental discharge to occur or advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1985, § 14-53; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 4)
 
Sec. 46-178. Cause for service disconnection.
The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)	Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)	A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the county as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)	The customer: 
a.	Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.	Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment systems; 
c.	Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.	Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1985, § 14-54; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 5)
 
Sec. 46-179. Unauthorized connections prohibited; penalty.
No person shall make an unauthorized water or sewer connection nor obtain unauthorized water or sewer services. Persons so obtaining unauthorized connection or service shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $250.00 and shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1985, § 14-55; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 6)
 
Sec. 46-180. Violations.
(a)	Violations a misdemeanor. Violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable under state law and this Code. 
(b)	Suspension of service. The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service or wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, causes interference to the POTW, or causes the county to violate any conditions of its NPDES permit. 
(c)	Elimination of contributions required. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including initiation of legal action and immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 calendar days of the date of occurrence. 
(d)	Permit revocation. Any user who violates the following conditions of this section or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this section: 
(1)	Failure of a user to report factually the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge. 
(2)	Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)	Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)	Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(e)	Service of notice; plan of correction. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. Each quarter, the city will publish in the local newspapers the list of violators of this division for that quarter. 
(f)	Verbal, written notice of violation. In the event of violation of this division, the authorized employees of the city may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action and the time limit for completing the corrective action. This time limit will be not less than 24 hours nor more than six months depending upon the type and severity of the violation. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The record of the mailing of the notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof, and failure of the owner to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceeding conducted pursuant to this division. 
(g)	Legal action authorized. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this division, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in the appropriate court. 
(h)	Fines.
(1)	Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this division, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(2)	Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or wastewater contribution permits, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. 
(3)	A person violating any provisions of this section authorizing action by the city shall be charged the normal and usual charges for discontinuance any disconnection of the water and sewer services and the usual charges for recommencing the water and sewer services. 
(Code 1985, § 14-56; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 7)
 
Sec. 46-181. Permit required for industrial sewer user.
Every industrial sewer user shall obtain a permit for contribution to the sewer system of the city at such fee as may be established by the city from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 14-57; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 7)
 
Sec. 46-182. Discharge of polluted waters into natural outlets prohibited; exception.
It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city's sewer service area any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this division. 
(Code 1985, § 14-58; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 8)
 
Sec. 46-183. Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewer prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 9)
 
Sec. 46-184. Waters, wastes specifically prohibited in sewers.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters to any public sewers: 
(1)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)	Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment processes, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.1; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 10)
 
Sec. 46-185. Admissible substances subject to pretreatment; restrictions.
The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The manager may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability, he will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations of restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the manager are as follows: 
(1)	Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or will cause the temperature at the influent to a treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(2)	Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/L of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)	Wastewater containing more than 100 mg/L of oils, fat or grease. 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)	Any wastewaters having in excess of (limits in ppm or mg/L): Silver 0.10; barium 5.0; tin 1.0; iron 2.0; phenol 0.2; arsenic 0.05; boron 1.0; manganese 1.0; lead 0.1; mercury 0.005; nickel 0.4; zinc 1.0; copper 0.1; cadmium 0.02; total chrome 1.8; selenium 0.02; chlorides 250; and any substance or combination thereof that reduces the BOD by ten percent will be considered as a toxic material. In addition, the limits for the following are 0.0: Antimony, beryllium, bismuth, cobalt, cyanide, molybdenum, rhenium, tellurium, uranyl ion, strontium, herbicides, fungicides, and pesticides. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the manager. 
(7)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)	Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug, which is defined as any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentrations of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
(9)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)	Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)	Wastewater containing constituents in concentration which are in excess of the concentrations set for normal wastewater (300 mg/L BOD 5 and TSS, 18 mg/L TKN, 15 mg/L phosphate). 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.2; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 11)
 
Sec. 46-186. Options of city reacceptance of restricted wastes, etc.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above, and which in the judgment of the POTW or the manager, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the POTW or the city may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, including such monitoring and pretreatment facilities as may be required to comply with the city's interjurisdictional pretreatment agreement with Cobb County, the terms and requirements of which are incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, and with EPA and EPD regulations; 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or 
(4)	Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes. When considering the above alternatives, the manager shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is permitted, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the manager. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.3; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 12)
 
Sec. 46-187. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors.
(a)	Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)	All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the manager and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material, and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the manager. 
(c)	Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.4; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 13)
 
Sec. 46-188. Maintenance of pretreatment, flow-equalizing facilities.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.5; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 14)
 
Sec. 46-189. Requirements of problem discharger, industry discharging more than 50,000 gallons per day.
Any industry discharging to the city sewer system more than 50,000 gallons per day, or any discharger so designated as a potential problem discharger by the manager, shall comply with the following: 
(1)	In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each designated discharger shall provide and maintain on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers, a large manhole or sampling chamber to be located outside or near its plant boundary line where feasible. If inside the plant fence, there shall be a gate near the sampling chamber with a key furnished to the city, or its agent. 
(2)	Each sampling chamber shall contain a partial flume, accurate weir, or similar device, with a recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity; or the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the liquid quantity where it is substantiated that the metered water supply and wastewater quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment can be made in the metered supply to determine the liquid quantity. The measuring, totalizing, and recording devices are to be supplied, installed, and maintained by the owner. 
(3)	Samples shall be taken every hour, properly refrigerated and composited in proportion to the flow for a representative 24-hour sample. Such sampling shall be repeated on as many days as necessary to ensure representative quantities for the entire reporting period. Industrial plants with wide fluctuations in quantities of wastes, will require an automatic sampler paced automatically by the flow-measuring device. Minimum requirements for representative quantities shall include reevaluation during each quarterly period. The determination of representative quantities shall include but not less than three consecutive days of 24-hour composite samplings taken during periods of normal operation, together with acceptable flow measurements. The frequency of sampling, sampling chamber, metering device, sampling methods, and analysis of samples shall be subject, at any time, to inspection and verification by the city. Sampling and measuring facilities shall be such as to provide safe access for authorized personnel of the city for making such inspection and verification. Plans for sampling chambers, with their location shown on a site plan, shall be submitted to the city. 
(4)	The owner of each facility discharging industrial wastes shall submit monthly to the city, on forms supplied by the city, a certified statement of the quantities of its wastes discharged into the sewers and sewage works of the city or into any sewer connected therewith. Copies of pertinent water bills shall be submitted with the above statement. Such documents shall be filed with the city not later than the tenth day of the following month. A separate statement shall be filed for each industrial plant. The total quantities of wastes to be measured and certified by the owner shall be: 
a.	Liquids in gallons; 
b.	Five-day BOD in pounds; 
c.	Suspended solids in pounds, on a dry solids basis; 
d.	Total phosphorus in pounds; 
e.	Total Kjeldahl nitrogen in pounds; and 
f.	COD in pounds. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.6; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 15)
 
Sec. 46-190. Discharge of sanitary wastewater into storm sewer system prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into the storm sewer system without exception. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.7; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 16)
 
Sec. 46-191. Discharge of cooling or condensing water regulated.
Cooling or condensing water may be discharged to the storm sewer system only if an NPDES permit is obtained from the state environmental protection division. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.8; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 17)
 
Sec. 46-192. Information required to determine compliance.
The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this division. These requirements may include: 
(1)	Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)	Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)	Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)	Quantity and disposition of specific liquids, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)	A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)	Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
(7)	Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.9; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 18)
 
Sec. 46-193. Agreements accepting unusual strength wastes.
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city. However, there shall be no agreements made that would violate any state or federal pretreatment standard. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.10; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 19)
 
Sec. 46-194. Compliance with standard methods.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 14-59.11; Ord. of 5-6-1986, § 20)
 
Chapter 48 ZONING
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 48-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context otherwise requires. 
Accessory building or structure means a building or structure subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot or property and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building, provided any such structure or building is built with or after the construction of the principal building. Where an accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner, as by an attachment built as enclosed heated floor space, such accessory building or structure shall be considered part of the principal building. 
Accessory retail uses means retail sales and services accessory to the operation of an office building or institutional use, motel, hotel or high-rise apartment development, conducted wholly within the building housing the use to which such activities are accessory. The floor space used or to be used for such secondary accessory retail uses shall be limited to a total of 25 square feet per dwelling unit in a high-rise apartment development or 25 square feet per room in a hotel or motel, or ten percent of the net floor area in an office building or institutional use, and provided that: 
(1)	Every public entrance to such a use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure; 
(2)	No show window, advertising or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure; and 
(3)	No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside of the primary use structure. 
However, the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this definition shall not apply to restaurants and cafeterias secondary to a hotel or motel and office building or institutional use; these secondary uses may be located in a structure other than the primary use structure. The following secondary uses are permitted: barbershops, beauty shops, laundry and dry-cleaning pickup and distribution stations and other similar personal service establishments, drugstores, bookstores, florists, convenience food stores, gift shops, cafeterias and restaurants, private clubs, laundry facilities for the convenience of residents, and newsstands. However, the total net floor space for such secondary building or structure uses shall be limited to 6,000 square feet. 
Accessory uses means uses subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building, provided any such use is built with or after the construction of the principal building. Such uses include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses, playgrounds and the like. 
Adult means any person over the age of 18 years or legally emancipated in the state. 
Adult entertainment has the meaning provided in section 10-174. 
Agricultural produce stand means a structure not greater than 1,000 square feet for the purpose of seasonal sales of products grown or produced on the premises on which it is located. 
Agriculture means land, including necessary buildings and structures, that are considered used for agriculture if not composed of subdivision lots and if the raising of crops or animals is the principal use of the property. 
Alley means a public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property. Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this chapter related to frontage on a dedicated street. 
Amusement center means any freestanding, privately-owned and -operated commercial recreational area containing an assortment of rides, games, arcades, attractions, water slides, and tracks for amusement vehicles. 
Ancillary retail sales (industrial districts) means retail sale of goods and services which is secondary in nature to the primary industrial use of the property in that the goods for sale have been produced on-site or are in storage at the site for planned distribution to other areas. The ancillary retail sale of goods shall only be conducted as part of the permitted industrial use and shall not be a freestanding business. 
Ancillary sales, golf course, means the sale of food, beverages, sports apparel and accessories, and those items traditionally sold within a pro shop or clubhouse. 
Animal hospital means any veterinary hospital or clinic, excluding open kennels on the premises, provided that all structures shall be located at least 200 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
Animal shows means exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven days. 
Antenna means an apparatus capable of receiving television, radio or other communication signals from a transmitter or a relay feed. 
Apartment means a leased residential unit in a multifamily building or development. 
Apartment operation means an individual or coordinated ownership of two or more apartments in a multifamily building or a multifamily development with coordinated use of leasing agents or other leasing services. 
Arcade means a building or part of a building in which five or more pinball machines, video games or other children's rides or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained, not including commercial recreation restaurants. 
Automobile service station, gas station and filling station mean a building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories and supplies, including installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto. Facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication of vehicles are permitted, if enclosed in a building. 
Automobile storage yard and wrecker service mean an establishment used for the short-term storage of damaged or confiscated vehicles. 
Automotive paint and body repair shop means an establishment for restoring auto bodies, painting or refinishing, with all activities carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
Automotive salvage and wrecking yard means any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition, and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise. 
Basement means a portion of a building partly underground which has more than one-half of its height, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling, above the average grade of the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be deemed a story unless the ceiling is six feet or more above the grade, or unless it is part of any permitted self-service storage facility. 
Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facility means a facility engineered and designed for the collection or transfer of biomedical waste products, such as used gauze, syringes, needles, bandages, test tubes and surgical wastes, from a collector vehicle to a larger transport vehicle to another destination for incineration or disposal. 
Block means an area of land bounded (surrounded on all sides) by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
Block width means the distance as measured along rear property lines between intersecting streets. 
Boardinghouse means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 15 persons. 
Buffer means an area which serves as a visual or physical barrier which is created by the use of planted or natural existing materials alone or in combination with berms, decorative fencing or walls. 
Buffer area means an area set aside to give additional setback from adjacent structures or types of land use or to preserve open, undisturbed space and may include a restrictive covenant in favor of the city for conservation uses. 
Building means any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building frontage means the length of any side of a building which fronts on a public street, measured in a straight line parallel with the abutting street. 
Building height (height of structure or building) means the vertical distance from the curb level, or its equivalent, to the highest point of the underside of the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean level of the underside of the rafters between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Where no curb level has been established, the height of the building may be measured from the mean elevation of the finished lot grade at the front entrance of the building. 
Building line means the perimeter of that portion of the building or structure nearest a property line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from the walls of the building or structure. For the purposes of this chapter, the foundation wall of a building, excluding brick, stucco, stone, or other siding material, shall constitute the perimeter as described in this definition, except that cantilevered portions of a building, excluding roof eaves and overhangs, chimneys, bay windows and the brick, stucco, stone or other siding material applied thereon, must be within a building line established in this chapter. 
Carwash means a building, or portion thereof, where automobiles are washed with the use of a chain conveyor and blower, automated or mechanized washers or a handheld steam cleaning device, including coin operated facilities, and money is charged or collected for the service. 
Cellar means a portion of a building partly underground which has less than one-half of its height, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling, above the average grade of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be deemed a story. 
Central Business District (CBD) means the district which encourages the intensive development of a centralized business center for the city through uses, which will benefit from close proximity to one another. The CBD boundaries are shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
Christmas tree sales means retail sales of Christmas trees between Thanksgiving and December 26. 
Church means any building whose primary function is to serve as a place of worship and within which religious education and related activities may be conducted as an accessory use. 
Circus and carnival mean provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure for a maximum of seven days. The terms "circus" and "carnival" do not include events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility. 
Clinic means a medical or dental clinic is an organization of specializing physicians or dentists, or both, who have their offices in a common building, including laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services but not including overnight stay of patients. 
Club orlodge, private, means a building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or person for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business and shall not include amenity packages and areas of subdivisions. 
Clubhouse means a structure providing ancillary uses and sales, such structure to be in proportion to the overall golf facilities, not exceeding 1,600 square feet, with annual gross revenue from golf ball rental exceeding annual gross revenue from ancillary sales. The owner or operator shall maintain accurate accounting records, which shall be available for inspection by city officials. 
Commercial filming, limited, means commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location six or fewer consecutive days per quarter of a calendar year in residential districts or fewer than 15 days per quarter of a calendar year in nonresidential districts. 
Commercial indoor recreation uses means indoor recreational uses such as bowling alleys, driving ranges, batting cages, shooting ranges and the like. 
Commercial outdoor recreation uses means outdoor recreation uses such as baseball and softball batting cages, shooting ranges, miniature golf, putt-putt golf and the like. 
Commercial recreation restaurant means any establishment which provides, as a principal use, the combination of family-oriented recreation and on-premises dining where neither the recreation nor the on-premises dining is clearly accessory or incidental to the operation of the other. For the purpose of this definition, the term "recreation" may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)	Television and motion pictures; 
(2)	Sound and sight systems; 
(3)	Mechanically or electronically operated games; 
(4)	Animated mechanical devices or rides; and 
(5)	Live entertainment. 
Commissioner means the state commissioner of community affairs. 
Community activity center means a facility that provides areas that can meet the immediate needs of several neighborhoods or communities. Typical land uses for these areas include low- to mid-rise office buildings and department stores. 
Community center means a place, structure, area or other facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. 
Community fair means a festival or fair such as the North Georgia State Fair conducted wholly within public areas owned by the city, provided that any activity is conducted at least 200 feet from any property line. No event shall exceed 21 days. 
Community retail uses means commonly found low scale and low intensity retail uses that offer basic services and frequently purchased goods to the immediate surrounding residential areas, such as the following: auto parts store, antique shop, appliance store (home use), bakery, barber shop or beauty shop, beverage shop, bookstore (but not including adult bookstores), bridal shop, camera shop, china and pottery store, clothing store, dance studio, delicatessen, dog grooming shop, draperies and interior decorating supplies, drug store, dry goods store, florist, furniture store, gifts and stationery store, hardware store, jewelry store, manicurist shop, meat market or butcher shop, millinery store, mimeograph and letter shop, music store, paint store, pedicurist shop, shoe repair shop, shoe store, sporting goods store, supermarket or grocery, tailor shop, toy store, variety shop or video store. 
Component means any assembly, subassembly or combination of parts for use as a part of a building, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health and safety. 
Condominium means individual ownership of units in a multifamily structure, together with the joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds. 
Connectivity means the level or extent to which one or more land uses and parcels within the development have direct accommodations for both vehicles and pedestrians to travel between or among those land uses, and direct vehicular and pedestrian connections with compatible land uses on abutting properties. Direct accommodations for vehicles means that there is one or more alley, road, or driveway connection between the uses on the development site and among compatible uses on abutting sites (parcels), so that a vehicle can exit one development and enter the other development (i.e., cross property lines) without exiting onto a public street that provides principal access to the developments. 
Continuing care retirement community means a community designed for and occupied by those persons age 55 and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as may be amended from time to time and those persons with disabilities as defined by the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), as may be amended from time to time, that provide a range of housing and lifestyle needs, including independent living, assisted living, and skilled nursing care in an integrated system. CCRC residents are provided housing, services, healthful activities and care through the continuing care contract. The contract sets forth the accommodations, services, amenities and care the facility is to provide, and the financial obligations of the residents. The contract must allow for movement between the lifestyle choices (levels of support) as the individual resident's needs evolve (providing the resident meets contract obligations). 
Convenience food store with self-service fuel sales means any retail establishment offering for sale automotive fuels, prepackaged food products, beverages, household items and other goods commonly associated with such establishments and having a gross floor area of no more than 3,000 square feet. There shall be no automotive repairs done on-site. 
Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under the provisions of what is commonly called the State of Georgia First Offender Act. 
Cultural facility, private, means a private building or facility such as art galleries, museums, legitimate theaters (other than motion picture or video theaters), libraries and other uses similar in character to such uses. 
Curb cut means any interruption or break in the lines of a street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Customary home occupation means those occupations, which are customarily performed in a small area of a residence due to the low intensity nature of such uses, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, including, but not limited to, any type of identifying signs. 
(2)	No article, product or service used or sold in connection with such activity shall be other than those normally found on the premises. 
(3)	No mechanical equipment shall be used for such occupation, except such equipment as is customary for purely household and hobby purposes. 
(4)	Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed in such occupation. 
(5)	No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for the operation. 
(6)	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle, used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of home occupation. 
(7)	There shall be no deliveries of supplies for use in the home occupation or pickups of the items produced by the occupant by commercial carrier. 
(8)	No clients or customers are allowed on the premises, except for one chair beauty salon and individual instruction, such as tutoring, musical lessons and the like, for the purpose of supplementing an income. 
DUA means dwelling units per acre. 
Deck means a roofless accessory attached or detached platform without exterior walls, generally constructed of wood, which adjoins a residence. Rails or safety features shall not be deemed to be exterior walls. 
Designated recycling collection location means metal or heavy-duty plastic containers, bins or dumpsters designed for short-term holding of pre-bagged recyclable items such as tin, aluminum, glass and paper (no perishable or food items allowed) for scheduled minimum monthly pickup, with no on-premises sorting. The center must be maintained in a safe, clean, neat and sanitary fashion and shall not encompass an area larger than 280 square feet. Such location: 
(1)	Shall be visually screened and maintained. 
(2)	Shall be within the building setbacks unless otherwise approved by the building official or his designee due to topography, safety, internal traffic flow, site distance or for other site-related circumstances not created by the property owner. 
(3)	Must be permitted through the zoning administrator at no charge. 
Disabled means having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, having a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. The term "disabled" does not include persons who currently use illegal controlled substances, persons who have been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution or controlled substances, sex offenders, and juvenile offenders or persons with or without disabilities who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others. 
Distance and measurement. The distance from the proposed premises of an adult entertainment establishment shall be the measurement in linear feet from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of the adult entertainment establishment to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. If the establishment is not on ground level, then the beginning point for measuring the distance shall be the point at ground level determined by measuring from the center of any door of customer entry perpendicular to the ground level. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises to the nearest property line of any church, library, school, college, public park, residence or hospital. 
Drive-in establishment means an establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked upon the premises. 
Driving range (outdoor) means a tract of land as an accessory use dedicated to driving of golf balls off tees into a designated landing area. An additional five acres, above and beyond the required acreage for the golf course, shall be required where the driving range is internal to the golf course. Buffering, netting and setbacks shall not be required when the range is internal. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for and containing three or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for and containing one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, single-family, attached, means a dwelling unit which is located on an individual lot of record and which is attached to another dwelling unit or an adjoining lot by a common party wall. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed for and containing two dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms, which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family, or two or fewer unrelated adults and their children or grandchildren or by a family and up to two persons who are not family members. 
(1)	A dwelling unit shall have an interior bathroom and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed. 
(2)	A dwelling unit shall have at least 390 square feet of total building square footage (as determined and maintained in the records of the Cobb County tax assessor) per each adult occupant. 
(3)	No more than one vehicle per 390 square feet of total building square footage may be parked regularly overnight at or within the right-of-way adjacent to a dwelling unit. The term "regularly" means a majority of nights in any seven-day period. 
Exceptions to subsections (2) and (3) of this definition may be considered as part of a land use permit. 
Executive golf course means a tract of land not less than 65 acres in size dedicated for playing an 18-hole game of golf, which is open to the general public or for private club use. The par shall not be less than 58 from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. Further, the golf course shall not measure less than 4,000 yards from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. 
Extended stay motel and hotel means one or more buildings in which lodgings or dwellings are provided for tenants, wherein the term of stay is designed for more than one night's lodging. Rental units consist of one or more rooms, plus a bath, without separate kitchen facilities common to apartments. Any atypical motel or hotel unit used as an apartment. Included, but not by way of limitation, in distinguishing extended stay facilities from apartments or hotels are: 
(1)	Weekly rental rates, as opposed to nightly charge with 24-hour check-in/check-out periods. 
(2)	Whether daily mail service is provided. 
(3)	Whether linens, towels and the like usually found in motels and hotels are furnished. 
(4)	Any other factors, which tend to demonstrate that the business depends upon extended tenant occupancy, excluding property zoned apartments. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, legal adoption, or marriage, or two or fewer unrelated adults, occupying a dwelling. Related persons are all related to each other within the fourth degree, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 53-2-1, which includes parents, children, grandparents, grandchildren, brothers and sisters. State-authorized foster children of a family member shall also be deemed a member of the family for this purpose. 
Floodplain means that area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year or as may be defined from time to time by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and its successors. 
Floor area means the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, exclusive of garages, basements, open porches and equipment and service areas, measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a building. When determining floor area or floor area ratio for self-service storage facilities, the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building shall include garages, basements, open porches and equipment and service areas, measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a building. 
Floor area ratio means a mathematical expression determined by dividing the total floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located, as follows: floor area/lot area equals floor area ratio. 
Fraternity house orsorority house means a dwelling maintained exclusively for members affiliated with an academic or professional college or university, or other recognized institution of higher learning. 
Freestanding climate controlled self-service storage facilities means climate controlled self-service storage facilities that are not complementary or accessory to an office park or building but rather on a separate, individual parcel. 
Frontage, lot, means the distance for which the front property line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Future right-of-way. means the distance required by the thoroughfare plan and shall be as follows: 
(1)	Arterial streets: 100-foot right-of-way width. 
(2)	Major collector streets: 80-foot right-of-way width. 
(3)	Minor collector streets: 60-foot right-of-way width. 
The thoroughfare plan is deemed and considered to be that plan designated "Thoroughfare Plan," prepared under the direction of the city, as amended from time to time. 
Game room shall have the meaning provided in section 10-438. 
Garage means a structure or any portion thereof in which one or more automobiles are housed, kept or repaired, not including exhibition or showrooms, or storage of cars for sale. 
Grade means an average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
Group home means a dwelling unit, operated by an affiliate of a national, regional, state or county organization with a philanthropic mission, shared by four or fewer persons, excluding resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities, under a structured and scheduled plan that must be provided to the city, for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential under the direction and guidance of a designated managing caregiver, designated as such by the affiliate organization, who must be a resident of the group home and available by telephone on a 24-hour basis in case of complaints. a copy of the home rules shall be provided to the city as well as (if applicable) evidence of active enforcement under the state association of recovery residence standards. The schedule of activities may be verified via periodic inspection by community affairs staff. The term "group home" shall not include a halfway house, a treatment center for alcoholism or drug abuse, a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, a home for the detention or rehabilitation of juveniles adjudged delinquent or unruly and placed in the custody of the state, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. The term "group home" shall also not allow the use of the dwelling as an apartment or duplex. A group home shall not allow use of the dwelling as a home for individuals on parole, probation, or convicted and released from incarceration, for any crimes including child molestation, aggravated child molestation, or child sexual abuse, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-4 or individuals required to register as sex offenders pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. A group home may include a home for the handicapped. 
Halfway house means any dwelling used as a residence by individuals on parole, probation, or serving a criminal sentence on condition of house arrest, for the purpose of rehabilitation of the individual while transitioning back into the community. Halfway houses shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any child care facility, private or public school, church, school bus stop, public or private playground and parks or swimming pools, or other areas where minors congregate as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12(a)(3). Halfway houses are not allowed in any zoning district, except by a special land use permit (SLUP) granted by the mayor and council. Applications for special land use permits for halfway houses shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(f). 
Heavy automotive repair establishment means an indoor repair establishment for performing automotive and truck repair, including engine and transmission overhauls. 
Heavy manufacturing establishment means manufacturing establishments, other than those classified as light manufacturing, including those involving the conversion of raw materials into usable finished products, provided that manufacturing that will generate liquid waste from the manufacturing process or air pollutants shall comply with antipollution standards established by the state, county, and city. 
High-rise apartment development means a building or buildings of at least four stories or 45 feet in height located on a tract of land of at least two acres and developed in accordance with other applicable city regulations. 
Home occupation. See Customary home occupation.
Hospital means a building or portion thereof designed or used for therapeutic treatment of bed patients who are physically or mentally ill. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging, or board and lodging, are provided for 15 or more transient guests, and offered to the public for compensation, and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. 
Impervious surface means a permanent improvement affixed to the earth, which does not allow water or liquid to pass through it or permeate into the earth. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "impervious surface" includes structures (principal and accessory), parking lots, driveways, walkways, non-wooden pool decks and the like. 
In-home day care means childcare provided within single-family districts subject to the following limitations: 
(1)	There shall be a maximum of six children for whom compensation is received; 
(2)	For purpose of this definition only, children who are related by direct blood kin or adoption to the child care provider shall not be included in the calculation of the six-child limitation; 
(3)	The childcare shall not create a nuisance to immediately adjacent property owners; 
(4)	Off-street parking must provide for child pickup and drop-off; 
(5)	There shall be no employees; and 
(6)	No signage allowed. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to or destruction thereof. 
Installation means the assembly of an industrialized building on-site and the process of affixing the industrialized building, component or system to land, a foundation, footings or an existing building. 
Landfill, private, means a disposal site employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of the operating day. 
Landing area means area located in front of the tee box required by this chapter to be designated and designed as a location for golf balls hit from permitted tees to travel and land safely. 
Landscape feature means any structure designed to enhance the aesthetic value of the exterior horticultural landscape such as a gazebo, statue, arbor or the like. Landscape feature also means any small body of water designed to enhance the aesthetic value of the exterior horticultural landscape such as a fountain, pond (which may house domestic or recreational fish, excluding livestock, nondomestic and wild animals and poultry), waterfall and the like. 
Light automotive repair establishment means an indoor repair establishment (no outside storage) for performing light auto and small truck repair (under one ton) such as brakes, oil changes, lubrication, transmission, belts, hoses, inspections and the like. 
Light manufacturing establishment means an establishment for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products; however, the manufacturing and production of any product which emits noxious noise, odor or fumes, bulk storage of flammable materials for resale, and other heavy manufacturing uses listed herein shall not be permitted. 
Live entertainment means music, comedy, readings, dancing, acting or other entertainment, excluding adult entertainment, performed on the site. The term "live entertainment" includes dancing by patrons to live or recorded music. 
Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry means animals, nondomestic and wild animals, and species of the avian family which are or may be raised for the purpose of providing food or transportation, or being resold or bred, excluding only dogs, cats, rabbits, fish, pet mice, hamsters, gerbils, parrots and parakeets. 
(1)	Such animals shall only be permitted on a lot containing not less than two acres. 
(2)	All buildings used for animals shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line. 
(3)	All animals shall be maintained at least 25 feet from any residential property line. 
(4)	Except in the RR district, there shall be not less than 5,000 square feet of fenced lot area not covered by the principal structure for each animal, unless the property is a bona fide farm. 
(5)	These rules are effective with respect to new construction, not existing uses. 
(6)	In the event of non-domestic or wild animals, all state and federal requirements must be met and a special land use permit is required. 
Lot means a parcel of land, whether or not platted, in single ownership, and not divided by a street. 
Lot, corner, means a lot fronting on two streets at their intersection, provided that the interior angle formed by the intersection is less than 135 degrees. When the frontage of one street exceeds the frontage of the other, the one with the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot, other than a corner lot which has frontage on two streets. 
Lot coverage means the percentage of a lot, which may be covered with permitted, or accessory buildings or structures, excluding walks, drives and other similar uses, and recreational facilities, which are accessory to a permitted use. 
Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot frontage means the distance for which the boundary line of a lot and a street right-of-way line are coincident. 
Lot of record means a lot, which is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
Lot width means the distance between the side lot lines measured along the front building line of the lot as determined by the prescribed front yard requirement. 
Maintained natural buffer means a designated area that may be enhanced with plantings ecologically compatible to the area, which may not be clear-cut, mowed or otherwise disturbed. Only dead, dying, diseased or invasive vines or plants may be removed from the buffer. No storage, or structures, or other non-growing items may be placed in the buffer. Invisible fencing (i.e., electronic underground fencing for containment of animals), is acceptable within the buffer when on individual residential lots. 
Major thoroughfare means a street or highway designated an arterial thoroughfare upon the thoroughfare plan of the city. 
Manufacture means the process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming or assembling a product from raw, unfinished or semi-finished materials. 
Manufactured home.
(1)	Class I manufactured home means a single-family dwelling unit that is constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and bears an insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), or one, if constructed prior to applicability of such standards and insignia requirements, that was constructed in conformity with the state standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
(2)	Class II manufactured home means a unit meeting the requirements of a manufactured home Class I and, in addition, bearing an insignia of the Southern Standard Building Code Congress International (SSBCCI) of Birmingham, Alabama. 
Mining means a process involving the removal or extraction of dirt, sand, soil, rock, gravel, minerals, petroleum, natural gas or other natural resources. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Minor thoroughfare means a street or highway designated as a collector thoroughfare upon the thoroughfare plan of the city. 
Mobile home means a detached, single-family dwelling designed for long-term occupancy, designed to be transported on its own wheels, arriving at the site as a complete dwelling unit, usually including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy. Removal of the wheels and placement on a foundation does not change its classification. A travel trailer is not a mobile home. 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land, which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use. 
Modular building means a factory-manufactured single-family dwelling, which is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of the term "industrialized building." 
Modular home means a factory-fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes. 
Motel means a building in which lodging, or board and lodging, are provided for transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation, in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made primarily direct from an exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby. Kitchenettes or kitchen facilities are prohibited. 
Neighborhood activity center means the category for which the purpose is to provide for areas that serve neighborhood residents and businesses. Typical land uses for these areas include small offices, limited retail uses and grocery stores. 
Neighborhood retail uses means commonly found low scale and low intensity retail uses (with square footages in accordance with the use limitations established within the individual zoning districts of this chapter) that offer basic services and frequently purchased goods to the immediate surrounding residential areas, such as, but not limited to, an auto parts store, antique shop, appliance store (home use), bakery, barbershop or beauty shop, beverage shop, bookstore (but not including adult bookstore), bridal shop, camera shop, china and pottery store, clothing store, dance studio, delicatessen, dog grooming shop, draperies and interior decorating supplies, drugstore, hardware store, dry goods store, florist, furniture store, gifts and stationery store, jewelry store, manicurist shop, meat market or butcher shop, millinery store, mimeograph and letter shop, music store, novelty shop, paint store, pedicurist shop, shoe repair shop, shoe store, sporting goods store, supermarket or grocery, tailor shop, toy store, variety shop or video store. 
Nightclub means an establishment which operates with its primary income generation from the sales of alcoholic beverages and which may offer live entertainment. 
Nonautomotive repair uses means commonly found low intensity repair shops, such as, but not limited to, shops for repair of jewelry, cameras, home appliances, televisions and videocassette recorders. 
Noncommercial club or lodge means a nonprofit club or organization as defined under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended from time to time. 
Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or the time of passage of an amendment to this chapter, which does not conform after the passage of such ordinance or amendment with the regulations of the district in which it is situated. Existing improvements which do not meet required parking and loading regulations, height regulations, area regulations and residential floor area regulations for the district in which they are located are not nonconforming uses. 
Nursing home means a home for aged or ill persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
Office service and supply establishment means wholesale and retail commercial establishments that sell, service and supply small office equipment and supplies, such as, but not limited to, stores that offer sales of copiers, facsimile machines, typewriters, ribbons, transcribers, dictation equipment, tape, staplers and other general office equipment. 
Open space means any front, side or rear yards, courts or usable open space provided about a building in order to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
Other consumer goods and services means businesses which cater to consumers, providing goods and services such as the following: awning shops and sales, burglar alarm systems, clothing (secondhand), exhibition houses, furniture, home furnishings, equipment and appliances (secondhand), glass, mirrors, lawn mowers and small motors, trading stamp redemption centers and the like. 
Other places of worship means locations such as a monastery, convent, novitiate, parish house, parsonage, rectory or manse. 
Other service establishments means businesses or locations catering to specialty services, such as an auction house or store, cabinetmaker, caterer, delivery and express service, driving school (private), fur repair and storage, gunsmith shop, locksmith shop, safe and vault repair, scientific instrument repair, taxidermist, tool sharpener and the like. 
Pain clinic andpain management clinic means any clinic, medical practitioner's office or pharmacy that is not affiliated with a hospital, hospice, or other facility for treatment of the terminally ill in the city, and that also advertises in any medium for any type of pain management services. The primary business purpose of such pain clinics and pain management clinic is to prescribe and dispense prescription pain medication and controlled substances to individuals for the treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain. 
Par 3 golf course means a tract of land not less than 40 acres in size dedicated for playing an 18-hole game of golf, which is open to the general public or for private club use. The par shall not be less than 27 for nine holes or 54 for 18 holes from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. Further, the golf course shall not measure less than 1,750 yards or greater than 3,500 yards. 
Park means any lands or facility owned, operated, controlled or managed by any county, city or federal government or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Parking for vehicles means to provide a location for on-site parking of automobiles, trucks and recreational vehicles, with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight of less than 12,500 pounds as shown on the door of the vehicle, or on the tag receipt. This restriction shall not apply to vehicles parked on church property, which are operated exclusively for church use. 
Parking lot or garage means an area or building designated and designed for the temporary storage of motor vehicles for a fee or as a service. 
Parking space means a usable hard-surfaced area enclosed within a main or accessory building, or unenclosed, and permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and connected with a public street or alley by a surfaced driveway, which affords safe and adequate ingress and egress. 
Personal property sales means sales of personal property such as estate sales, yard sales, bakery sales, garage sales, bazaars and the like, three weekends per calendar year, not to exceed three days per sale. 
Personal vehicle and equipment sales means the sale, offer to sell, or marketing for sale of any vehicle, motor vehicle, trailer, tractor, special mobile equipment, camper, motor home, motorcycle, moped, recreational vehicle, off-road vehicle, or boat where such sale, offer to sell, or marketing for sale occurs on property whose principal use is not for the sale of vehicles and equipment. No more than three personal vehicle and equipment sales shall be allowed per calendar year on any one parcel of property. 
Pervious surface means materials that permit water to enter the ground by virtue of their porous nature or by large spaces in the material. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "pervious surface" includes gravel, permeable concrete, permeable asphalt and permeable pavers or bricks. 
Planned development means a tract of land developed initially under single ownership or control, the development of which is unique and of a substantially different character than that of surrounding areas. Such development shall be based on a plan, which allows for flexibility of design not available under normal zoning district requirements. 
Planning and zoning commission means the city planning and zoning commission. 
Principal use means the primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure. 
Private golf course means a tract of land not less than 115 acres in size dedicated for playing the game of golf, which is open to the private club's membership and their guests and special events. The par shall not be less than 68 from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. Further, the golf course shall not measure less than 5,500 yards from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. 
Private park means any lands or facilities owned, operated, controlled or managed by an individual in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the property owner. 
Pro shop means an ancillary structure or area provided for sale or supply of equipment associated with the primary permitted or accessory recreational use. 
Professional office means a structure wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations such as the following: law, doctor, optician, audiologist, accounting, tax preparation, real estate, stockbroker, architect, engineer, manufacturer representative, professional counselor, dentist, investigative services, photographer, insurance, contractor, land surveyor, telephone sales, political or campaign, veterinarian, travel bureau, and the like. 
Public golf course and semipublicgolf course mean a tract of land not less than 125 acres in size dedicated for playing an 18-hole game of golf, which is open to the general public for play. The par shall not be less than 70 from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. Further, the golf course shall not measure less than 6,000 yards from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. 
Rear of the principal building means that point where the main portion of the building ends, without consideration of wings or annexes, which are not parallel to the main portion of the building. 
Recycling center means a center or location designed for sorting or collection of recyclables from designated recycling collection locations and other private entity sources. 
Regional shopping center means a group of commercial enterprises offering a range of commercial goods and services in an aggregate of 500,000 square feet or more of net floor area which: 
(1)	Are designed as a single commercial group, whether or not located on the same lot; 
(2)	Are under one common ownership or management, or have one common arrangement for the maintenance of the grounds; 
(3)	Are connected by party walls, partitions, covered canopies or other structural members to form one continuous structure; 
(4)	Share a common parking area; and 
(5)	Otherwise present the appearance of one continuous commercial area. 
Regulation public nine-hole golf course means a tract of land not less than 65 acres in size dedicated for playing a nine-hole game of golf, which is open to general public use. The par shall not be less than 34 from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. Further, the golf course shall not measure less than 3,000 yards from the men's tees as governed by the United States Golf Association. 
Religious assembly means religious services conducted on a site that is not permanently occupied by a religious assembly use for a period of not more than 30 days. 
Residence means a house, apartment, mobile home, boardinghouse or roominghouse, duplex or other multifamily housing for human dwelling, or any property zoned therefor. 
Residence hall means a house, apartment, boardinghouse or roominghouse, or other multifamily housing for human dwelling. 
Rest home means a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation. 
Retail sales, outdoor, means retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a legally established retail business, which has a direct relationship to existing businesses. 
Riding stable means a building for the shelter and feeding of domestic animals, especially horses. 
Roominghouse means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more persons, but not exceeding 15 persons. 
Satellite antenna means any apparatus, which is designed for the purpose of receiving telephone, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals, with the exception of conventional television antennas. 
School means state, county, city, church or other schools, public or private, as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state, and vocational schools, colleges, post-high-school learning centers, kindergartens and day care centers for persons of all ages. 
Self-service storage facilities means a freestanding or accessory building (including those considered as climate-controlled) constructed to accommodate the limited storage of materials as further specified and restricted per this section. For the purposes of this section, any portion of a self-service storage facility that includes a basement as defined in this section shall be deemed a story. 
Setback means the minimum required distance between the property line and the building line. 
Shelter (homeless) means charitable, nonprofit, short-term housing or room and board accommodations for poor, transient or needy individuals, which must meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)	Adequate showers and restroom facilities must be provided at the location to meet the needs of the overnight guests. 
(2)	Beds must be provided for all overnight guests, excluding staff and volunteer workers. 
(3)	No shelter shall be located closer than 750 feet to the nearest single-family residence. 
(4)	Guests of the shelter shall be required to leave the shelter premises no later than 7:00 a.m. 
(5)	All premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary fashion. 
(6)	Adequate provisions for transporting and parking guests shall be submitted to and approved by the mayor or his designee. 
While not specifically a permitted use under all districts, a shelter may be located in a church facility, which meets the minimum standards set out in this definition. 
Site (manufactured home only) means the entire tract, subdivision or parcel of land on which the industrialized building or manufactured home is installed. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over six feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior walls of such story, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes. 
Street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way, which affords primary access to abutting property. 
Street, center line of, means the line surveyed and monumented by Cobb County or Douglas County, the state department of transportation, or the city, or if a center line has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the right-of-way lines of the street. 
Street fair means provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures. 
Street right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the legal street right-of-way. 
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any structural change in the roof, or dimension of the rooms therein. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, fences, swimming pools and buildings. 
System means structural, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or fire safety elements, materials or components used separately or combined for use in a building. 
Temporary uses means, by permit from the building official or his designee only, specialized and intermittent uses of property such as animal shows, Christmas tree sales, circuses and carnivals, commercial filming (limited), live entertainment, personal property sales, religious assemblies, retail sales (outdoor), street fairs and swap meets (nonrecurring), not to exceed 30 days or the time period set forth in these definitions, whichever is lesser. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all such uses. All temporary uses may be subject to approval by the city mayor and council. 
Tent means a temporary or permanent structure having a roof or walls of fabric. 
Townhouse means an attached house in a row or group, each house separated from adjoining houses in the same row or group by architectural style, changing of facade, or offsets, and by firewalls or fire separations. Ownership is in fee simple. 
Trailer, camping, means any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel which is used or intended to be used for either living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, and which does not include all of the following facilities: a flush water closet, a lavatory, a bath or shower, and a kitchen sink, but not intended for permanent residence. 
Tutoring or learning centers means a for profit organization which provides educational assistance to children in first through twelfth grades based on a system of learning or instructional standards which supplement the child's primary school participation and attendance, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Hours of operation are to be as follows with the exception listed below: Monday through Friday 4:00 p.m. until 8:00 p.m., and Saturday and Sunday 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. The hours of operation can be extended to 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. every day of the week beginning June 1 and ending August 1 of each calendar year. 
(2)	Parking spaces in which pickup and delivery of children can take place shall be provided for a minimum of two automobiles for schools with 20 to 40 children; schools with 40 to 60 children shall be provided four spaces; thereafter, there shall be provided a space sufficient to park five automobiles, except when located within the CBD, in which case there are no minimum parking requirements. 
(3)	All spaces within the structure shall be calculated on the effective net area usable for instruction. This space shall not include kitchen areas, or any other interior space that is not used for instruction. The minimum classroom space shall be determined by multiplying the maximum proposed number of pupils for attendance at any one time by the minimum square footage of 40 square feet per pupil. 
Usable satellite signals means satellite signals from all major communications satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable television. 
Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of this chapter, which the board of variance and zoning appeals is permitted to grant when strict enforcement of such provisions would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except where encroachment and accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks are expressly permitted. When private roads are involved, the orientation and location of the building itself shall determine the front, back and side yards. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street and the front setback line and projected to the sidelines of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the rear line of the lot and the line representing the minimum rear yard requirements. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the sideline of the lot and the minimum required side yard and extending from the rear of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Code 1985, § 22-1)
 
Sec. 48-2. Penalties.
(a)	Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any person who violates this chapter, after conviction upon a citation issued to the municipal court of the city, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20 may be incarcerated or shall be fined an amount as established below for violations within any 12-month period: 
(1)	For a first violation, a fine of $150.00 or two days' incarceration. 
(2)	For a second violation, a fine of $300.00 or five days' incarceration. 
(3)	For a third violation, a fine of $700.00 or ten days' incarceration. 
(4)	For a fourth violation and each successive violation, a fine of $1,000.00 or 120 days' incarceration. 
For purposes of this subsection, a conviction for violation of this chapter is a first violation if the person has not been convicted of the same provision or any other provision of this chapter within the preceding 12 months. That person's next conviction of the same provision or any other provisions of this chapter within any 12-month period is a second violation, and so on for subsequent violations. 
(b)	Any condition or stipulation placed upon a rezoning approved by the mayor and council pursuant to this chapter or a variance approved by the board of variance and zoning appeals pursuant to this chapter shall have the force and effect of law. Any person who violates any such condition or stipulation shall, after conviction upon citation issued to the municipal court of the city, be punished as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 22-2)
 
Sec. 48-3. Exemptions from chapter.
The following are exempt from complying with the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)	Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all federal, state, county and municipal government agencies and boards of authority owned, operated and leased facilities as well as facilities owned, operated or leased by others that have received the city's permission to be located on land owned or leased by the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; however, the city shall be required to meet all of its other development codes, regulations and ordinances. 
(2)	Any entity that may be entitled to exercise the power of eminent domain shall nevertheless be limited solely to the construction of facilities that are reasonably necessary for the purposes for which the entity was granted the power of eminent domain by applicable law. Any such entity which seeks to construct (or allow others to construct) facilities that are not reasonably necessary for the purposes for which the entity was granted the power of eminent domain shall not be exempt from the provisions of this chapter with respect to such facilities, even if those facilities are placed on or connected with facilities that were originally constructed, or are to be constructed, pursuant to this exemption. 
(3)	A single antenna under 36 feet in height owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)	Flagpoles displaying the American flag, basketball goals, gaslight poles, and permanent recreational facilities (home use) such as volleyball, badminton and trampoline equipment are exempted from the requirements pertaining to accessory uses. 
(Code 1985, § 22-3)
 
Sec. 48-4. Sale, refinancing or leasing of portion of property.
The sale, refinancing or leasing of any portion of a commercial, office or industrial zoned property shall not be considered to constitute a subdivision of such property as long as all other applicable zoning guidelines, site-specific guidelines, site development guidelines, approved site plans and other imposed conditions are met and maintained. This section shall not be applicable to legal nonconforming uses as defined in this chapter. This section is limited only to those portions of the property, which are actually developed and shall not be construed as to allow expansions or modifications of existing sites. 
(Code 1985, § 22-4)
 
Sec. 48-5. Lots requiring lot size variances prior to rezoning.
Any lot which is deficient pertaining to minimum lot size, in which a rezoning is contemplated or needed, shall require filing of an application for variance to the board of variance and zoning appeals. The application for variance must be approved by the board of variance and zoning appeals and ratified by the mayor and council at least 21 days prior to the mayor and council's zoning hearing. However, if the building official or his designee is provided with documentation which demonstrates the lot size deficiency was caused by purchase or condemnation by an entity utilizing the power of eminent domain, then this section shall not be applied and the application for rezoning will be processed and decided in the usual manner despite the lot size deficiency. 
(Code 1985, § 22-5)
 
Sec. 48-6. Zoning status of annexed properties.
(a)	All property annexed from the unincorporated area of Cobb County or Douglas County to the corporate limits of the city, shall, upon annexation, be automatically zoned to the same zoning district classification, regulations, and any applicable conditions of zoning, as were applicable to such property under the zoning ordinance of the county immediately prior to annexation. 
(b)	In the event the zoning district classification is not provided for by this chapter, then such property shall assume the zoning district classification under this chapter which is most similar in terms of permitted uses and zoning district regulations held by the property under the county zoning ordinance. In such event, all conditions of zoning which were applicable to such property under the county zoning ordinance shall also continue to apply to the property upon annexation to the corporate limits to the city. 
(c)	The classification, district regulations, and conditions of zoning applicable to the property at the time of annexation shall remain in effect until reclassified by amendment to this article as provided herein. 
(Code 1985, § 22-79)
 
Secs. 48-7—48-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 48-31. Nonconforming uses.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of a zoning ordinance is to have orderly use of property. Nonconforming uses that existed legally prior to the adoption or change of a zoning ordinance create land uses that do not conform to the zoning ordinance. It is the purpose of this nonconforming use provision to allow legally existing nonconforming uses to be retained with certain limitations to protect adjacent property owners and the public from the inconsistencies created by nonconforming uses. It is the intent that, over time, all nonconforming uses will be eliminated. 
(b)	Continuance of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land that was legal prior to the enactment of an amendment or adoption of the zoning ordinance shall be allowed to legally continue even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, subject to the following: 
(1)	The nonconforming use cannot be expanded to occupy a greater area of land or building area. 
(2)	The nonconforming use may continue only in the original building structure or land area that was originally occupied by the nonconforming use. 
(3)	The nonconforming use of the building, structure or land cannot be intensified or escalated, for example, by increasing the number of deliveries, employees or customers coming to the nonconforming use, or noise, dust, fumes or other pollutants emanating from the nonconforming use. 
(4)	A nonconforming use cannot be reinstated after it has been abandoned. It shall be prima facia evidence of abandonment for the owner or operator of the nonconforming use to discontinue the nonconforming use for six months, to fail to obtain a new or renew an existing business license as required under the Code of the city for the operation of such nonconforming use, to fail to declare and remit the sales tax required by state law for the nonconforming use. 
(5)	Failure to follow any other state, federal or local administrative procedure or regulation that is required for the nonconforming use shall be prima facia evidence of abandonment. 
(6)	A nonconforming use cannot be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(7)	A nonconforming use must maintain any screening or buffering that existed prior to the use becoming a nonconforming use or that was later voluntarily added. 
(8)	A use that constitutes a nuisance as defined by state law is not and cannot become a nonconforming use. 
(c)	Continuance of nonconforming structure or building. A building or structure that is nonconforming or that contains a nonconforming use at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or at the time of enactment of an amendment to this chapter may be retained, except that it shall not be: 
(1)	Enlarged, altered or rebuilt, except for repairs necessary to maintain the structure or building in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(2)	Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage or deterioration exceeding 75 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this chapter. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow a use that is dangerous to the general public to continue to exist. This section shall also not be construed to not require changes to buildings or structures to comply with any fire code, life safety code or other safety ordinance or regulation. 
(e)	To protect the public from inconsistent zoning requirements and to make nonconforming uses as consistent with conforming uses as possible, nonconforming uses must comply with zoning requirements such as parking, landscaping, setback, outside storage, screening or buffering requirements for the zoning district or use which does not substantially impact the nonconforming use or nonconforming structure. 
(Code 1985, § 22-11)
 
Sec. 48-32. Approvals for developments fronting on state highways.
For all developments fronting on a state highway, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the state highway department has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the department. 
(Code 1985, § 22-12)
 
Sec. 48-33. Variance applications.
(a)	Submission. An applicant for a variance shall file with or submit to the city, prior to processing of the application, the following: 
(1)	A completed application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the city. 
(2)	The signature of the applicant and record titleholder shall appear upon the application. 
(3)	The application fee shall be paid. These fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of community affairs. 
(4)	The applicant shall submit a current boundary survey and plot plan, to scale, prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer. Such plans shall also include such other information thereon as may be required by the zoning or planning division of the city, including preliminary plans for development, building locations, parking areas, access points, adjacent streets, land lot lines and buffer areas. 
(5)	Private sewage disposal must be approved by the county health department, and written approval from the health department must be filed with the application. 
(6)	The applicant shall submit a statement indicating that a variation from the terms of this article will not be contrary to public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the article will be an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(b)	Nonconforming use. The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land, buildings, or structures in the same district, or of permitted or nonconforming uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of variance and zoning appeals that the following conditions exist: 
(1)	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
(2)	A literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the district in which the property is located. 
(3)	Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located. 
(4)	The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or the general welfare. 
(5)	The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant. 
(6)	The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
(7)	The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which are not permitted by right in the district involved. 
(c)	Posting of public notice. The posting shall be the same as set forth in section 48-63(b) for zoning applications. 
(d)	Reconsideration of rejected applications. Any variance request may not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months after it has been rejected by the board of variance and zoning appeals, unless by court order or pursuant to a settlement of litigation approved by the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
(e)	Amendment or withdrawal of variance request. The mayor and council, in their sole discretion, may allow an amendment to a variance request or withdrawal of a variance request to amend this article, by the applicant or applicant's agent without prejudice to the applicant's ability to resubmit such variance request on the same property notwithstanding the 12-month resubmittal limitation required in this article, provided the variance request is withdrawn or amended on or before 5:00 p.m. on the Monday of the week preceding the council meeting at which it is to be considered by the mayor and council; however, no more than one withdrawal of a variance request pertaining to a particular parcel of land shall be permitted within a 12-month period. The mayor and council may also, on their own motion, amend or withdraw a variance request upon showing of cause of their actions, without prejudice. 
(Code 1985, § 22-14)
 
Sec. 48-34. Administrative variances when property acquired under exercise of eminent domain.
If the city or any other lawfully constituted county, state or federal governmental authority, agency or body or utility having the authority of eminent domain condemns or acquires property, and, as the sole result of such condemnation or acquisition, nonconformity is created in setback lines, required lot size, density or parking regulations, the zoning division manager or his designee shall be authorized to grant such administrative variances as are necessary to bring the property into conformance upon receipt of a properly documented request. Any variance granted under this section may not exceed 25 percent of the existing requirements without application to the board of variance and zoning appeals, except for the overall density which allows the existing number of lots, units or floor area ratio (FAR) to remain as it exists at the time of condemnation or acquisition. The property must be legally conforming prior to such condemnation or acquisition in order to qualify for an administrative variance. The zoning division manager or his designee shall be required to maintain records which support the basis for granting such variance. Any variance granted under this section shall only apply to the current zoning district and use. This section shall only apply to property acquired or condemned by an authority exercising eminent domain after December 31, 1990. 
(Code 1985, § 22-15)
 
Sec. 48-35. Temporary land use permits.
(a)	The mayor and council may permit temporary land use permits for limited periods of time for uses, exceptions or professions in areas and districts where the zoning regulations would otherwise prohibit such operations. Customary home occupations do not require a temporary land use permit. 
(b)	In addition thereto, mayor and council may grant temporary land use permits for limited periods of time for occupations or businesses compatible with the neighborhood from which such business or occupation is operated and where no nuisance as defined in state law or other significant adverse effect would result to the area or district zoned. 
(c)	All applications for temporary land use permits shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as hearings on applications for rezoning are conducted. 
(d)	The mayor and council have determined that temporary land use permits are only appropriate if granted for a limited period of time. In no event shall the mayor and council grant a land use permit for a period of time in excess of 24 months, except on reapplication, readvertisement and public hearing. Land use permits for exceptions to the city's minimum square footage per adult occupant and minimum square footage per vehicle parked at a dwelling unit or mobile home will be considered upon each renewal. All new applications, (other than those for exceptions to the city's minimum square footage per adult occupant and minimum square footage per vehicle parked at a dwelling unit or mobile home) that have been approved for a temporary land use permit after the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may only be considered for one renewal up to 24 months from the date the temporary land use permit was granted. Once the period of time for which the temporary land use permit was granted has expired, the use must cease or relocate. If the property where a land use permit has been granted is sold or otherwise conveyed, or the business for which the land use permit was granted is sold or otherwise conveyed, requiring a change in the business license, the approved land use permit shall no longer be valid. In order for the use to resume operation, a new land use permit must be applied for and approved by the mayor and council. 
(e)	The applicant or operator must reside full-time at the residence where the temporary home occupation or temporary business is performed if the property is located in a platted subdivision. 
(f)	The mayor and council shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a temporary land use permit: 
(1)	Safety, health, welfare and moral concerns involving the surrounding neighborhood; 
(2)	Parking and traffic considerations; 
(3)	Number of nonrelated employees; 
(4)	Number of commercial and business deliveries; 
(5)	The governing authority's general presumption that residential neighborhoods should not allow noncompatible business uses; 
(6)	Compatibility of the business use to the neighborhood; 
(7)	Hours of operation; 
(8)	Existing business uses in the vicinity; 
(9)	Effect on property values of surrounding property; 
(10)	Circumstances surrounding neighborhood complaints; 
(11)	Intensity of the proposed business use; and 
(12)	Location of the use within the neighborhood. 
(Code 1985, § 22-16)
 
Sec. 48-36. Special land use permits.
(a)	A special land use permit shall be required for the following types of uses of property regardless of the zoning classification or district for the realty: 
(1)	Radio, television, microwave, land mobile, telephone or other communication towers or antennas, including antennas or other communications equipment or facilities to be placed on a tower that was or will be constructed pursuant to the exemption set forth in section 48-3(2). 
(2)	Communication equipment buildings. 
(3)	Noncommercial or nonprofit public community centers such as a YWCA, YMCA, Girls Club or Boys Club. 
(4)	Private, parochial or other elementary, middle, junior or high schools which are not a part of the public school system of the state, but which teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of the state. 
(5)	Colleges or universities which are institutions for higher education and are nonprofit educational institutions not owned or controlled by the state or any political subdivision, agency, instrumentality, district or city thereof, which provide a program of education beyond the high school level and which admit as regular students only individuals having a certificate of graduation from a high school, or the recognized equivalent of such a certificate, and which provide an educational program for which a bachelor's degree is awarded, or provide an educational program, admission into which is conditioned upon the prior attainment of a bachelor's degree or its equivalent, for which a postgraduate degree is awarded, or provide not less than a two-year program which is acceptable for full credit toward a bachelor's degree or its equivalent. 
(6)	Asphalt plants. 
(7)	Concrete plants. 
(8)	Adult entertainment establishments. 
(9)	Boarding, breeding or raising nondomestic or wild animals. 
(10)	Private landfills. 
(11)	Composting facilities. 
(12)	Waste transfer stations. 
(13)	Trash/garbage handling, hauling or disposal facilities or any use associated with these uses. 
(14)	Auto salvaging and wrecking yards. 
(15)	Automobile storage yards and wrecker services for damaged or confiscated vehicles. 
(16)	Used or preowned automobile and truck sales lots separate from a new car dealership. No application for a special land use permit shall be considered unless the property on which the special land use permit has been applied for consists of at least one acre of paved surface for parking of vehicles excluding any area used for, but not limited to, buildings, offices, service or sales areas, etc. 
(17)	Truck stops/refueling stations. 
(18)	Coliseums. 
(19)	Stadiums. 
(20)	Chipping, grinding or reduction of materials, stumps, trees, limbs, construction debris, glass, concrete, asphalt, rock, etc. 
(21)	Used or discarded tire storage/disposal facilities. 
(22)	Quarries or mining operations. 
(23)	Scrap metal, iron or steel collection/recovery. 
(24)	Any manufacturing or industrial use which also requires a permit from the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources of the state under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq., 12-8-1 et seq., or 12-9-1 et seq. 
(25)	Sawmills. 
(26)	Hotels (suite). 
(27)	Trade shows/expositions. 
(28)	Flea markets. 
(29)	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, and other places of worship. 
(30)	Mausoleums and other facilities for disposal of the deceased. 
(31)	Amphitheaters. 
(32)	Assembly halls. 
(33)	Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities. 
(34)	Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facilities. 
(35)	Building material storage. 
(36)	Chemical plants or storage facilities. 
(37)	Freight terminals. 
(38)	Fuel and ice dealers. 
(39)	Hazardous waste sites. 
(40)	Outdoor commercial racing of motorized vehicles. 
(41)	Parking for vehicles. 
(42)	Pawnshops. 
(43)	Petroleum or bulk storage stations. 
(44)	Rail stations, railroad car classification yards, railroad stations for freight, or any other rail-type facilities. 
(45)	Roominghouses and boardinghouses. 
(46)	Tire retreading and recapping facilities. 
(47)	Truck terminals. 
(48)	Group homes. 
(49)	Pain clinic. 
(50)	Halfway house. 
(b)	The mayor and council may grant special land use permits for the uses enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. The granting of a special land use permit is conditional upon the site plan considered by the department of community affairs. 
(c)	All applications for special land use permits shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and public hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted. 
(d)	The mayor and council may grant special land use permits for any period of time in their discretion. 
(e)	In addition to general district, the mayor and council shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a special land use permit: 
(1)	Whether or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or area in which the proposed use will be located. 
(2)	Whether the use is otherwise compatible with the neighborhood. 
(3)	Whether the use proposed will result in a nuisance as defined under state law. 
(4)	Whether quiet enjoyment of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
(5)	Whether property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
(6)	Whether adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations. 
(7)	Whether the site or intensity of the use is appropriate. 
(8)	Whether special or unique conditions overcome the mayor and council's general presumption that residential neighborhoods should not allow noncompatible business uses. 
(9)	Whether adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation. 
(10)	Whether adequate controls and limits are placed on commercial and business deliveries. 
(11)	Whether adequate landscape plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition. 
(12)	Whether the public health, safety, welfare or moral concerns of the surrounding neighborhood will be adversely affected. 
(13)	Whether the application complies with any applicable specific requirements set forth in this chapter for special land use permits for particular types of uses. 
(14)	Whether the applicant has provided sufficient information to allow a full consideration of all relevant factors. 
(15)	In all applications for a special land use permit the burden shall be on the applicant both to produce sufficient information to allow the city fully to consider all relevant factors and to demonstrate that the proposal complies with all applicable requirements and is otherwise consistent with the policies reflected in the factors enumerated in this chapter for consideration by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 22-17)
 
Sec. 48-37. Temporary mobile home occupancy and land use permit.
(a)	In all classifications there may be established a use for the temporary location of a mobile home or a temporary land use only upon issuance of a temporary land use permit, which may be issued by the mayor and council upon the following conditions, except in cases involving construction of mobile units or mobile education units which may be issued by the building official without a hearing: Application for a use permit shall be filed and shall meet all the requirements of an application for zoning as provided by this chapter. Such application shall have attached thereto a separate statement of the applicant that he recognizes that the use permit, if granted, is for a temporary time only and that the applicant shall cause the removal of the mobile home or the removal of all possessions on the termination of the use permit, or upon the applicant's failure to do so irrevocably grants the city the right to remove the mobile home or possessions from the premises at the expense of the applicant, for which the applicant agrees to pay. 
(b)	The mayor and council may permit the following: 
(1)	A mobile home may be parked and occupied in all residential or commercial districts where a building permit has been applied for and obtained from the proper department of the city for the construction of either a home or a place of business. 
(2)	A mobile home may be parked and occupied in any residential area where a medical hardship exists. For purposes of this section, the term "medical hardship" means a person whose health or mental condition necessitates attention and supervision from the occupants of the dwelling located on the lot on which it is desired to have the mobile home parked and occupied. In no case shall such a use be allowed unless it is shown by the county health department or by other appropriate medical evidence that the person to occupy the mobile home falls within the provisions of this subsection and unless it is satisfactorily shown that the dwelling on the premises does not contain sufficient facilities to accommodate the proposed occupant of the mobile home. In addition, the application shall contain an affidavit or certified statement of a physician showing that present facilities are inadequate and stating that a hardship condition requiring the use of a mobile home for the health care of a member of the immediate family of the occupant of the premises exists. 
(3)	A mobile home may be parked and occupied in any commercial or industrial district where a building permit has been applied for and where its primary function is that of an office or for storage or related purposes. 
(4)	A mobile home may be parked and occupied in any district on property owned or leased by a church, chapel, temple, synagogue, other places of worship or a school for a period not to exceed 12 months where its primary function is that of an office or classroom or for storage or related purposes, provided that not more than one mobile home for each two acres of vacant land may be located thereon. 
(5)	In all residential classifications, the mayor and council may grant a use permit for the temporary use of one of the homes or for the parking of a mobile home to be used as a real estate sales office for sale of the lots for new homes built and developed within the boundaries of the development, provided that final plans have been approved therefor by all city authorities. The specific location of the mobile home shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and council. 
(6)	In all classifications, the mayor and council may grant a temporary use permit for the use of the land itself under the same ordinance governing mobile home use. 
(7)	In all instances where an application for a mobile home permit has been applied for, the mayor and council shall take into consideration the need for such permit, the aesthetic effect that it may have on the neighborhood, and the location on the property of the mobile home, and may in its discretion grant or refuse a permit, and the grant or refusal shall not be mandatory, but in all instances shall be permissible depending on the finding of the mayor and council as to the conditions stated in this section and any other lawful criteria. 
(c)	For purposes of this section only, the term "mobile home" means both mobile structures designed to function as residences and mobile structures designed to function as classrooms, offices and storage buildings. 
(d)	Use permits may be issued for a period of not more than 24 calendar months other than medical hardships and construction hardship permits which shall be not more than 12 months and shall terminate automatically unless reissued. Any such use for a period of more than 12 months shall necessitate applying for a new permit or renewal. 
(e)	Any violation of this section or the cessation of the need for a use permit shall be grounds for revocation of such permit by the mayor and council in addition to all other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1985, § 22-18)
 
Secs. 48-38—48-62. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. REZONING OR LAND USE PERMIT APPLICATIONS
 
Sec. 48-63. General filing documentation and procedure.
(a)	Prerequisites for processing; contents. Prior to processing of any application for rezoning or a land use permit, the applicant shall be required to file documentation and follow certain procedures as set forth in this section. The applicant shall be required to file an application with the city containing the following: 
(1)	A completed application shall be filed on forms prescribed by the city. 
(2)	The signatures of the applicant and record titleholder shall appear upon the application. 
(3)	The application fee which has been established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council shall be paid. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the city. 
(4)	The applicant shall submit a current boundary survey and plot plan, to scale, prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer. Five copies of site plans shall also include such other information thereon as may be required by the city, including preliminary plans for development, building locations, parking areas, access points, adjacent streets, land lot lines, buffer areas, future right-of-way, wetlands, floodplains, utilities and retention. 
(5)	Private sewage disposal must be approved by the county health department, and written approval from the health department must be filed with the application. 
(6)	The applicant shall submit any other information required by the city which they deem necessary or desirable in processing the application, which is related to the present or proposed use of the property. 
(7)	Every application for rezoning involving a request for a nonresidential zoning district shall include a complete written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters: 
a.	Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
b.	Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
c.	Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
d.	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
e.	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; 
f.	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
g.	Whether the development of the property under the zoning proposal will conform to, be a detriment to or enhance the architectural standards, open space requirements and aesthetics of the general neighborhood, considering the current historical and planned uses in the area; 
h.	Under any proposed zoning classification, whether the use proposed may create a nuisance or is incompatible with existing uses in the area; and 
i.	Whether due to the size of the proposed use, in either land area or building height, the proposed use would affect the adjoining property, general neighborhood and other uses in the area positively or negatively. 
(8)	Any application for a rezoning involving a request of more than 75 residential dwelling units or 50,000 square feet of nonresidential building space, in single or multiple phases, (exempting redevelopment projects) shall be required to submit a traffic impact study (prepared in accordance with industry accepted standards, including, at a minimum, level of service impacts for adjacent roadways and intersections) and mitigation package to address the cumulative effects from the project's impact. The applicant shall also be required to coordinate and fund any recommended mitigation measures limited to project related improvements with applicable federal, state and local agencies including the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority and the Atlanta Regional Commission. Any application for a rezoning involving a request of more than 150 residential dwelling units or 100,000 square feet of nonresidential building space, in single or multiple phases, (exempting redevelopment projects) shall be required to submit a traffic impact study (prepared in accordance with industry accepted standards, including, at a minimum, level of service impacts for adjacent roadways and intersections), the scope of which shall be determined by the director of the public works or his designee and shall, at a minimum, address conditions and impacts resultant from the project within a ten-year scope. The applicant shall also be required to coordinate and fund any recommended mitigation measures limited to project related improvements with applicable federal, state and local agencies including the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority and the Atlanta Regional Commission. 
(b)	Public notice and advertising of hearings.
(1)	The building official shall cause to have posted, in a place conspicuous to the nearest public roadway on the property, one or more signs, each of which will not be less than 20 inches by 20 inches and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, the proposed zoning classification of the property, and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date and time and place of the public hearing before the city council. No such public hearing shall take place until the signs have been posted for at least 15 days prior to the council hearing. In addition to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, the zoning division shall supply a sign that contains the following language: 
(2)	The building official shall cause to have advertising in the legal organ of the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, as amended from time to time. The advertisement shall include a notice of the date, time and place of all public hearings, as well as the nature of the proposed zoning changes. 
(c)	Attendance at hearing. The applicant or representative of the applicant shall be required to attend all public hearings on the application. The failure to attend may result in dismissal with prejudice, rejection of the application or continuance of the hearing at the mayor and council's sole discretion. Failure of the applicant or his representative to appear at the next regularly scheduled hearing shall result in automatic dismissal with prejudice. The building official may waive the attendance requirement for land use permits based upon medical hardship. 
(d)	Withdrawal of application.
(1)	An application may only be withdrawn upon a joint written request of the record titleholder and applicant or their legal counsel. In order to withdraw as of right and without prejudice, the request to withdraw must be given at the city at least seven days prior to the hearing before the planning and zoning commission. Applicants or their legal counsel may personally request (via written or verbal request) withdrawal during a planning and zoning commission or mayor and council's public hearing, provided that the request is made prior to the close of the public hearing. The public hearing shall be considered closed when announced as such by the planning and zoning commission chairperson or city attorney following presentations by the applicant and opposition during their allotted time period. If permission is denied at such time, the application may not be withdrawn and shall be acted upon in the usual manner. In no event shall an application be withdrawn after the vote by the mayor and council. Further, in no event shall an application be withdrawn more than once without prejudicing the right of the applicant or owner to apply for a land use permit or rezoning within 12 months of the first application. 
(2)	An application which is withdrawn within seven days of the planning and zoning commission hearing without the permission of the planning and zoning commission shall be deemed a rejected application with prejudice. 
(3)	Applications which have been publicly heard by either the planning and zoning commission or the mayor and council and which have been withdrawn without right and without permission by a majority vote as set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be deemed a rejected application with prejudice. 
(e)	Resubmission of rejected/deleted applications.
(1)	If an application for rezoning is rejected or deleted to another zoning classification, then any portion of the same property may not again be considered for rezoning for a period of 12 months from the date of the original planning and zoning commission's hearing. An applicant may reapply for rezoning to a more restrictive classification than the application previously denied, or denied without prejudice, following the expiration of six months in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, as amended from time to time. 
(2)	The mayor and council may only consider property for rezoning within the six-month time period in connection with settlement of litigation or pursuant to an order by a court of competent jurisdiction. The mayor and council shall advertise, post the property, and conduct another public hearing prior to taking such action. 
(Code 1985, § 22-71)
 
Sec. 48-64. Staff report.
After the filing of a proper application, the city shall make a written recommendation and zoning analysis (staff report) relating to the following: 
(1)	Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)	Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(4)	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; 
(5)	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
(6)	Whether the development of the property under the zoning proposal will conform to, be a detriment to or enhance the architectural standards, open space requirements and aesthetics of the general neighborhood, considering the current historical and planned uses in the area; 
(7)	Under any proposed zoning classification, whether the use proposed may create a nuisance or is incompatible with existing uses in the area; and 
(8)	Whether due to the size of the proposed use, in either land area or building height, the proposed use would affect the adjoining property, general neighborhood and other uses in the area positively or negatively. 
(Code 1985, § 22-72)
 
Sec. 48-65. Action by planning and zoning commission.
(a)	The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing on each application for a land use permit or rezoning in accordance with a schedule and procedures adopted by the mayor and council. A staff report on each application shall be submitted to and considered by the planning and zoning commission at the public hearing. The planning and zoning commission shall investigate and consider each of the matters listed in the staff report. 
(b)	As to each application, the planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, denial, deferral, continuance, hold, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The planning and zoning commission shall not hold any application for more than two additional hearing dates, unless the application seeks to add additional property in accordance with the application procedures described in this chapter. Written minutes of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation to the mayor and council shall be prepared, maintained and submitted to the mayor and council prior to its hearing. Additionally, the staff report and applicant's report shall be submitted to the mayor and council. All documents shall thereafter become public record. 
(Code 1985, § 22-73)
 
Sec. 48-66. Action by mayor and council.
(a)	Before taking action on an application for rezoning and after receipt of the staff report, the planning and zoning commission's recommendation and the applicant's report, where required, the mayor and council shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with rules and procedures as may be adopted by the mayor and council from time to time. Prior to or in conjunction with the hearing, the mayor and council shall review the applicant's report, if any, the staff report and the planning and zoning commission's recommendation. 
(b)	So that the purpose of this chapter will be served and the health, public safety and general welfare secured, the mayor and council may approve or deny the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning classification, district or category requested, either to a more restrictive zoning classification, district or category, add or delete conditions of the application, including, but not limited to, site-specific conditions, or allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with respect to the 12-month limitation of this division. An action by the mayor and council to defer or continue the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application, and no further notice, except posting and legal advertising is required. 
(c)	The decision by the mayor and council to approve in whole or part, reject, condition or delete an application for rezoning shall be based on, but not limited to, a consideration of the following criteria: 
(1)	Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)	Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(4)	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; 
(5)	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
(6)	Whether the development of the property under the zoning proposal will conform to, be a detriment to or enhance the architectural standards, open space requirements and aesthetics of the general neighborhood, considering the current historical and planned uses in the area; 
(7)	Under any proposed zoning classification, whether the use proposed may create a nuisance or is incompatible with existing uses in the area; and 
(8)	Whether due to the size of the proposed use, in either land area or building height, the proposed use would affect the adjoining property, general neighborhood and other uses in the area positively or negatively. 
(Code 1985, § 22-74)
 
Sec. 48-67. Zoning approval does not ensure utilities or infrastructure.
Approval of an application for rezoning does not ensure the availability of utilities or other infrastructure in connection with development of the site. 
(Code 1985, § 22-75)
 
Sec. 48-68. Site plan/stipulation amendments.
On any rezoning which is conditioned upon a site plan, proposed minor modifications which do not alter or conflict with the basic intent of the plan may be approved by the building official after presentation and approval by the mayor and council at any regularly scheduled meeting or hearing. Also, on any rezoning which is conditioned upon a stipulation or stipulations, proposed minor amendments to the stipulations which do not alter or conflict with the basic intent of the rezoning on which they apply may be approved by the building official after, first, determination by the mayor and council that the amendments are minor and, second, approval of the amendments by the mayor and council at any regularly scheduled meeting or hearing. All other modifications must be advertised and rezoned in accordance with the provisions set forth in this division. 
(Code 1985, § 22-76)
 
Sec. 48-69. Appeal of rezoning decisions.
Any person, persons or entities jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the mayor and council on a rezoning application may take an appeal to the superior court of Cobb County. The appeal shall be a de novo determination of the decision before the judge of the superior court without a jury. Any appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision by the mayor and council, and, upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days, the decision of the mayor and council shall be final. For the purpose of this section, the appeal time shall run from the day the particular vote or action is taken. 
(Code 1985, § 22-77)
 
Sec. 48-70. Appeal of decisions on land use and special land use permits.
Any person, persons or entities jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision by the mayor and council on land use or a special land use permit application may take an appeal to the superior court of Cobb County. The quasi-judicial appeal shall be limited to the proceedings and record before the mayor and council. Any appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision of the mayor and council, and, upon failure to file the appeal within 30 days, the decision of the mayor and council shall be final. For the purpose of this section, the appeal time shall run from the day the particular vote or action is taken. 
(Code 1985, § 22-78)
 
Secs. 48-71—48-98. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP
 
Sec. 48-99. Zoning district categories.
For the purpose of clarification, the categories of zoning districts are listed in this section in order: 
(1)	R-80. 
(2)	RR. 
(3)	R-40. 
(4)	R-30. 
(5)	R-20. 
(6)	R-15. 
(7)	R-10. 
(8)	PUD. 
(9)	RD. 
(10)	RA-6. 
(11)	RM-8. 
(12)	FST. 
(13)	RM-12. 
(14)	MHP. 
(15)	RSL (nonsupportive). 
(16)	O&I. 
(17)	OS. 
(18)	NS. 
(19)	PSC. 
(20)	CBD. 
(21)	GC. 
(22)	LI. 
(23)	HI. 
(Code 1985, § 22-101)
 
Sec. 48-100. General description of zoning districts.
The following general descriptions apply to the various zoning districts: 
(1)	R-80 (single-family residential, 80,000-square foot lot size). The R-80 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-80 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	RR (rural residential). The RR district is established to provide locations for large useable areas for limited residential, agricultural, park and open space needs. This district also serves to correlate growth with utility, service and transportation needs until urbanization is warranted. RR uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses should be located within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RR district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(3)	R-40 (single-family residential, 40,000-square foot lot size). The R-40 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-40 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(4)	R-30 (single-family residential, 30,000-square foot lot size). The R-30 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-30 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(5)	R-20 (single-family residential, 20,000-square foot lot size). The R-20 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-20 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(6)	R-15 (single-family residential, 15,000-square foot lot size). The R-15 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-15 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(7)	R-10 (single-family residential, 10,000-square foot lot size). The R-10 district is established to provide locations for affordable single-family detached residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for the medium density residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-10 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(8)	RD (residential duplex). The RD district is established to provide locations for the development of affordable single-family detached or attached owner-occupied residential dwelling units, including duplexes. The dwelling units are to be designed so as to be placed on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit or on an adjoining lot where the units will be attached by common party wall. This residential use is designed to be located within or on the edge of properties delineated for medium density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RD district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(9)	RA-6 (single-family attached/detached residential). The RA-6 district is established to provide locations for the development of affordable single-family detached or attached residential dwelling units including the combination of duplexes, triplexes and quadruplexes. The dwelling units are to be designed so as to be placed on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit or on an adjoining lot where the units will be attached by a common party wall. This residential use is designed to be located within or on the edge of properties delineated for medium density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RA-6 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(10)	PUD (planned unit development). The PUD district is established to encourage and provide flexible site plan and building arrangements under a unified plan of development rather than a lot-by-lot regulation. The developer benefits from better land utilization and design flexibility. Review of an approval of the development plan by the mayor and council provides an opportunity to ensure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which the development is located. The PUD may be located within any residential category as defined by the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. The PUD is not intended to encourage greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning to ensure the provision of park and recreation land and facilities for the use of the occupants of the development in order to obtain a more desirable environment. PUD development shall be consistent with surrounding development. 
(11)	RM-8 (residential multifamily). The RM-8 district is established to provide locations for multifamily residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within properties delineated for medium and high density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RM-8 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent multifamily detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(12)	FST (fee simple townhouse residential). The FST district is established to provide locations for affordable attached residential dwelling units (six, eight or ten units per acre) or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any medium or high density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the FST district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(13)	RM-12 (residential multifamily). The RM-12 district is established to provide locations for multifamily residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within properties delineated for high density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RM-12 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent multifamily detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(14)	MHP (mobile home park). The MHP district is established to provide for rental of individual pads or lots for the placement of mobile homes or trailers. 
(15)	RSL-nonsupportive (residential senior living facilities). The RSL district is established to provide locations for the development of residential living facilities for tenants age 62 years and older which shall not be established as a precedent for any other residential or nonresidential district. This residential use is designed to be located within properties delineated as traditional neighborhood areas as defined and shown on Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(16)	O&I (office and institutional). The O&I district is established to provide locations for nonretail commercial uses such as offices and financial institutions, which are on properties delineated within or on the edge of an in-town or major highway corridor as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. The office and institutional district is designed primarily to provide for four-story and smaller office developments, office uses, motels, hotels, banking and professional offices that complement and provide step down nodal zoning away from more intensive commercial uses and otherwise to implement the stated purpose of this chapter. 
(17)	OS (office/service). The OS district is established to provide locations for office and business distribution/service facilities, and assembly processes which do not emit noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and are located entirely within an enclosed building which do not involve manufacturing or fabrication of any products. No principal retail sales are allowed unless specified in this article. These uses are allowed on properties delineated within an Industrial Compatible Area or an industrial category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(18)	NS (neighborhood shopping). The NS district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to serve two to four neighborhoods and are located in areas delineated within an in-town or major highway corridor as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(19)	PSC (planned shopping center). The PSC district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to serve several neighborhoods making up a community. Projects developed within the PSC zoning district should be done as compact, unified centers. Projects developed within the PSC zoning district should occupy a quadrant of an intersection, with ingress and egress only from a major collector street or state highway. 
(20)	CBD (central business district). The CBD is established to provide location for limited vehicular and pedestrian oriented businesses which are characteristic of the city's central businesses as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(21)	GC (general commercial). The GC district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are oriented toward automotive businesses, are land intensive with a need for major road access and visibility, and are located in areas delineated within an in-town or major highway corridor as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(22)	LI (light industrial). The LI district is established to provide locations for light industrial uses such as low intensity automobile repair and service, animal care facilities, commercial greenhouses, livestock, poultry, business distribution centers, warehouse and storage, and transportation terminals, which are on properties delineated within or on the perimeter of an industrial-compatible or industrial category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the LI district should provide for uses that are low in intensity and scale such as to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(23)	HI (heavy industrial). The HI district is established to provide locations for heavy industrial uses such as intensive automobile repair and service, heavy manufacturing, chemical manufacturing and storage, petroleum or petrochemical storage, warehousing and storage, which are on properties delineated within an industrial category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the HI district should provide for uses that are lower in intensity and scale such as to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(Code 1985, § 22-102)
 
Sec. 48-101. Zoning map.
Subject to the express provisions in this chapter, all properties shall be zoned as set forth on the official city zoning map, as amended from time to time. The maps shall be kept under the custody of the city community affairs department and shall be subject to public inspection. The official city zoning maps are incorporated in this chapter by express reference. 
(Code 1985, § 22-103)
 
Sec. 48-102. Interpretation of zoning district maps.
In interpreting the zoning district maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the boundary lines of streets, alleys, railroads, public lands or channels or bodies of water, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)	Where such boundaries are indicated so that they approximately follow the lines of lots or other parcels of record and are not more than ten feet distant therefrom, such lot or parcel lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(3)	If the rules set out in subsections (1) and (2) of this section do not apply, the location of a district boundary, unless the boundary is indicated by dimensions shown on the map, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing thereon. 
(Code 1985, § 22-104)
 
Sec. 48-103. Resolution of conflicts between maps and minutes.
It is recognized that discrepancies or conflicts can occur between the official zoning maps and the official city clerk's records (minutes) of actions taken by the mayor and council with respect to a specific parcel, either because of scriveners' errors or in amendment of the official maps. In the event of such a discrepancy or conflict, the official city clerk's record shall prevail. 
(Code 1985, § 22-105)
 
Secs. 48-104—48-134. Reserved.
 
 
ARTICLE IV. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
 
 
Sec. 48-135. Summary of bulk regulations.
District	Designation	Min. Lot Area	Min./Max. Acreage Required	Units per Acre/Max. FAR	Min. Floor Area (sq. ft.)	Min. Lot Width at Front of Setback	Min. Front Yard Setback1	Major Side Yard2	Min. Side Yard3	Min. Rear Yard4	Max. Coverage (%)	Max. Height
							Arterial	Collector	Local					
Rural Residential 	RR 	40,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	1.0 	1,050 	100 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	25 ft. 	35 ft. 	25% 	35 ft. 
Single-Family Detached
2 acres 	R-80 	80,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	0.5 	1,800 	75/50* ft. 	60 ft. 	60 ft. 	60 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	25 ft. 	50 ft. 	25% 	35 ft. 
1 acre 	R-40 	40,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	1.0 	1,800 	75/50* ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	45 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	15 ft. 	40 ft. 	25% 	35 ft. 
¾ acre 	R-30 	30,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	1.1 	1,800 	75/50* ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	45 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	12 ft. 	40 ft. 	25% 	35 ft. 
½ acre 	R-20 	20,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	1.75 	1,800 	75/50* ft. 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	35 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	10 ft. 	35 ft. 	35% 	35 ft. 
⅓ acre 	R-15 	15,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	2.1 	1,800 	75/50* ft. 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	35 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	10 ft. 	30 ft. 	35% 	35 ft. 
¼ acre 	R-10 	10,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	3.5 	1,600 	75/50* ft. 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	40/25** ft. 	15 or 25 ft. 	20† 
or 5** ft. 	40† or 
20** ft. 	30% 	35 ft. 
Single-family, attached or detached: If single-family residences are attached, there must be 30 feet between end units. 
Cluster Residential 	R-A-6 	5,500 sq. ft. 	80,000 sq. ft./20 acres 	6 	950 	70/50* ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	40/25** ft. 	20 or 35 ft. 	35†/5** ft. 	40†/30** ft. 	30% 	35 ft. 
Other Residential
Residential Duplex 	RD 	20,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	4 	700 per 
unit 	75/50* ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	35 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	35†/10** ft. 	35† or 
25** ft. 	35% 	2 stories 
35 ft. 
Multiple- family (8 units per acre) 	RM-8 	80,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	8 	1,600, 
2,750, 
3,900, 
E 450 	75 ft. 	75 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 	40 ft. 	25% 	2 stories 
35 ft. 
Fee Simple Townhouse, Max. 6 units per row 	FST 	80,000 sq. ft. 	20 acres 	10 	1 BR: 
900, 
2 BR: 
1,000 	20/end unit 30 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	35 or 25** ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	40†/10**/0‡ ft. 	35† or 
25** ft. 	30% 	2½ stories 
35 ft. 
Multiple family (12 units per acre) 	RM-12 	80,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	12 	1,600, 
2,750, 
3,900, 
E 450 	75 ft. 	75 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	35 ft. 	35 ft. 	40 ft. 	35% 	2½ stories 
35 ft. 
Mobile Home Park 	MHP 	See District Regulations. 
Residential Senior Living 	RSL 	See District Regulations. 
Commercial
Office Services 	OS 	40,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	75 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	15 ft. 	30 ft. 	N/A 	4 stories 
Office/Institutional 	O&I 	20,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	60 ft. 	50 ft. 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	15 ft. 	30 ft. 	N/A 	4 stories 
Neighborhood Shopping 	NS 	20,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	60 ft. 	50 ft. 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	15 ft. 	30 ft. 	N/A 	35 ft. 
Planned Shopping Center 	PSC 	200,000 sq. ft. 	5 acres/ 
N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	200 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	** 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	N/A 	75 ft. 
General Commercial 	GC 	20,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	60 ft. 	50 ft. 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	10 ft. 	30 ft. 	N/A 	4 stories 
Central Business District 	CBD 	2,500 sq. ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	25 ft. 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 	15 ft. 	0 ft. 	20 ft. 	N/A 	4 stories 
Industrial
Light Industrial 	LI 	40,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 			100 ft. 	75 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	20 ft. 	30 ft. 		4 stories 
Heavy Industrial 	HI 	40,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 			150 ft. 	75 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	25 or 35 ft. 	20 ft. 	40 ft. 		4 stories 

Explanation of symbols:
* Distance required fronting cul-de-sac. 
** Distance if interior portion of development (interior shall be considered the portion which does not abut an exterior property boundary). 
† Distance if not interior portion of development. 
‡ Attached units. 
Notes: 
1 Minimum front yard setback is measured from the future public right-of-way (see diagrams within each district for specific setback requirements). 
2 Major side yard setback is measured from the future public right-of-way (see diagrams within each district for specific setback applications). 
3 See diagrams within each district for specific setback applications. 
4 See diagrams within each district for specific setback applications. 
(Code 1985, § 22-121)
 
Sec. 48-136. Summary of uses.
This chart is provided for the convenience of the users; however, please consult the permitted uses or special exception uses section of the specific zoning districts for possible use limitations for specific permitted uses or special exception uses. 
Type of Use	R-80	RR	R-40	R-30	R-20	R-15	R-10
Accessory retail sales and services 							
Adult entertainment establishments 							
Agricultural produce stands 		P 					
Ambulance services 							
Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes 							
Amphitheaters 							
Amusement centers 							
Ancillary retail sales 							
Animal hospitals 							
Appliance repair (major) 							
Arcades 							
Asphalt plants 							
Assembly halls 							
Athletic and health clubs 							
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (accessory use) 							
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal use) 							
Automobile and truck sales and service facilities 							
Automotive paint and body repair shops 							
Automotive parking lots or garages 							
Automotive repair and maintenance facilities 							
Automotive salvage and wrecking yards 							
Automobile storage yards and wrecker service 							
Automotive upholstery shops 							
Aviation airports (private) 							
Banks/financial institutions with drive-in establishments or automated transfer machines 							
Billiards and pool halls 							
Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facilities 							
Boat sales and service establishments 							
Breeding and boarding kennels 							
Building materials stores 							
Bus stations 							
Bus stations for freight 							
Carwashes 							
Cemeteries 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 
Chemical plants or storage facilities 							
Chipping, grinding or reduction of materials 							
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, and other places of worship 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Clinics 							
Clubs or lodges (noncommercial) 							
Coliseums, stadiums, and convention centers (privately-owned) 							
Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities 							
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries 		P 					
Commercial indoor recreation uses 							
Commercial outdoor recreation uses 							
Commercial recreation restaurants 							
Community fairs 							
Community retail uses 							
Composting facilities 							
Concrete plants 							
Condominiums 							
Contractors (general, heavy, special) 							
Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales 							
Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses 							
Crematories, human or animal 							
Cultural facilities 							
Customary home occupations 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Dairies 		R 					
Designated recycling collection locations 							
Drive-in theaters 							
Dry cleaning plants 							
Eating and drinking establishments (including drive-in fast food restaurants) 							
Electrical supply stores 							
Emissions/inspection stations (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after June 30, 1998) 							
Executive golf courses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Extended stay motels and hotels 							
Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent) 							
Farm and garden supply stores 		P 					
Farm equipment stores/repair establishments 							
Farmers markets (fully enclosed) 							
Field crops 							
Film developing and printing facilities 							
Flea markets 							
Fraternity and sorority houses/residence halls 							
Freight terminals 							
Fruit trees, nuts, vegetables 							
Fuel and ice dealers 							
Full service gasoline stations 							
Funeral homes 							
Golf courses, par 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Group homes 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Halfway houses 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Ham radios (amateur) 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 
Hazardous waste sites 							
Heavy automotive repair establishments 							
Heavy manufacturing establishments 							
Heavy repair service and trade shops 							
Helicopter landing areas 							
High-rise apartments 							
Hospitals 							
Hotels 							
In-home day care 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Landfills (private) 							
Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up establishments 							
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (work done on-site) 							
Light automotive repair establishments 							
Light manufacturing establishments 							
Linen and diaper services 							
Livestock, non-domestic and wild animals, and poultry 	P 	P 					
Livestock sales pavilions 		P 					
Machine shops 							
Mausoleums 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site 							
Mining operations 							
Motels 							
Motorcycle, ATV, and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities 							
Multifamily dwelling units 							
Neighborhood retail uses 							
Newspaper publishing facilities 							
Nightclubs 							
Non-automotive repair service establishments 							
Non-profit (seasonal use) fishing lakes 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Nursery schools and child day care centers 							
Offices not elsewhere classified 							
Office service and supply establishments 							
Other consumer goods and services 							
Other facilities for disposal of the deceased 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Other service establishments 							
Outdoor commercial racing (motorcycle, automobile, truck, tractor, and motorized vehicles) 							
Outdoor golf driving ranges 		P 					
Overnight travel trailer parks 							
Pain clinics and pain management clinics 							
Parking for vehicles 							
Pawn shops 							
Petroleum or bulk storage stations 							
Photography studios 							
Plumbing or heating equipment dealers 							
Poultry hatcheries 		P 					
Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments 							
Private community centers 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Private landfill/composting centers/recycling centers 							
Private parks 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Private schools of general and special education 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Pro shops (accessory to driving ranges/golf courses) 							
Professional offices 							
Radio and television stations 							
Radio, television, and other communication towers and antennas 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Rail stations 							
Railroad car classification yards 							
Railroad stations for freight 							
Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses 							
Research and development centers 							
Research testing laboratories 							
Rest/personal care/convalescent homes 							
Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments 							
Roominghouses and boardinghouses 							
Sawmills 							
Sawmills (temporary) 							
Self-service laundry facilities 							
Self-service storage facilities 							
Shelters (homeless) 							
Signs and outdoor advertising facilities 							
Single-family dwelling units (attached) 							
Single-family dwelling units (detached) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Studios and supplies 							
Tattoo parlors 							
Taxi stands and dispatching agencies 							
Telephone business offices 							
Temporary uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Theaters 							
Tire disposal storage (used or discarded) 							
Tire retreading and recapping facilities 							
Townhouse dwelling units (attached) 							
Trailer salesrooms and sales lots 							
Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities 							
Truck terminals 							
Tutoring or learning centers 							
Two-family dwelling units 							
Utility facilities (private) 							
Vending machine sales, service, rental, or repair establishments 							
Vocational schools (commercial) 							
Warehouse and storage facilities 							
Wholesale sales offices 							
Wholesale trade and distribution facilities 							
Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms 							
Zoos 							

Type of Use	PUD	RA-6	RM-8	FST	RM-12	RD	MHP	RSL
Accessory retail sales and services 								
Adult entertainment establishments 								
Agricultural produce stands 								
Ambulance services 								
Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes 								
Amphitheaters 								
Amusement centers 								
Ancillary retail sales 								
Animal hospitals 								
Appliance repair (major) 								
Arcades 								
Asphalt plants 								
Assembly halls 								
Athletic and health clubs 								
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (accessory use) 								
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal use) 								
Automobile and truck sales and service facilities 								
Automotive paint and body repair shops 								
Automotive parking lots or garages 								
Automotive repair and maintenance facilities 								
Automotive salvage and wrecking yards 								
Automobile storage yards and wrecker service 								
Automotive upholstery shops 								
Aviation airports (private) 								
Banks/financial institutions with drive-in establishments or automated transfer machines 								
Billiards and pool halls 								
Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facilities 								
Boat sales and service establishments 								
Breeding and boarding kennels 								
Building materials stores 								
Bus stations 								
Bus stations for freight 								
Carwashes 								
Cemeteries 		SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		
Chemical plants or storage facilities 								
Chipping, grinding or reduction of materials 								
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, and other places of worship 								
Clinics 								
Clubs or lodges (noncommercial) 								
Coliseums, stadiums, and convention centers (privately-owned) 								
Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities 								
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries 								
Commercial indoor recreation uses 								
Commercial outdoor recreation uses 								
Commercial recreation restaurants 								
Community fairs 								
Community retail uses 								
Composting facilities 								
Concrete plants 								
Condominiums 	P 	P 	P 		P 			
Contractors (general, heavy, special) 								
Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales 								
Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses 								
Crematories, human or animal 								
Cultural facilities 								
Customary home occupations 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Dairies 								
Designated recycling collection locations 								
Drive-in theaters 								
Dry cleaning plants 								
Eating and drinking establishments (including drive-in fast food restaurants) 								
Electrical supply stores 								
Emissions/inspection stations (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after June 30, 1998) 								
Executive golf courses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Extended stay motels and hotels 								
Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent) 								
Farm and garden supply stores 								
Farm equipment stores/repair establishments 								
Farmers markets (fully enclosed) 								
Field crops 								
Film developing and printing facilities 								
Flea markets 								
Fraternity and sorority houses/residence halls 		SLUP 	SLUP 		SLUP 			
Freight terminals 								
Fruit trees, nuts, vegetables 								
Fuel and ice dealers 								
Full service gasoline stations 								
Funeral homes 								
Golf courses, par 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Group homes 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 		
Halfway houses 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 		
Ham radios (amateur) 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		
Hazardous waste sites 								
Heavy automotive repair establishments 								
Heavy manufacturing establishments 								
Heavy repair service and trade shops 								
Helicopter landing areas 								
High-rise apartments 								
Hospitals 								
Hotels 								
In-home day care 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Landfills (private) 								
Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up establishments 								
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (work done on-site) 								
Light automotive repair establishments 								
Light manufacturing establishments 								
Linen and diaper services 								
Livestock, non-domestic and wild animals, and poultry 								
Livestock sales pavilions 								
Machine shops 								
Mausoleums 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		
Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site 								
Mining operations 								
Motels 								
Motorcycle, ATV, and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities 								
Multifamily dwelling units 	P 	P 	P 		P 			
Neighborhood retail uses 								
Newspaper publishing facilities 								
Nightclubs 								
Non-automotive repair service establishments 								
Non-profit (seasonal use) fishing lakes 		P 	P 	P 	P 			
Nursery schools and child day care centers 								
Offices not elsewhere classified 								
Office service and supply establishments 								
Other consumer goods and services 								
Other facilities for disposal of the deceased 			SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		
Other service establishments 								
Outdoor commercial racing (motorcycle, automobile, truck, tractor, and motorized vehicles) 								
Outdoor golf driving ranges 								
Overnight travel trailer parks 								
Pain clinics and pain management clinics 								
Parking for vehicles 		SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 			
Pawn shops 								
Petroleum or bulk storage stations 								
Photography studios 								
Plumbing or heating equipment dealers 								
Poultry hatcheries 								
Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments 								
Private community centers 		SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		
Private landfill/composting centers/recycling centers 								
Private parks 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 		
Private schools of general and special education 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 		
Pro shops (accessory to driving ranges/golf courses) 								
Professional offices 								
Radio and television stations 								
Radio, television, and other communication towers and antennas 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Rail stations 								
Railroad car classification yards 								
Railroad stations for freight 								
Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses 								
Research and development centers 								
Research testing laboratories 								
Rest/personal care/convalescent homes 								
Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments 								
Roominghouses and boardinghouses 								
Sawmills 								
Sawmills (temporary) 								
Self-service laundry facilities 								
Self-service storage facilities 								
Shelters (homeless) 								
Signs and outdoor advertising facilities 								
Single-family dwelling units (attached) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Single-family dwelling units (detached) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Studios and supplies 								
Tattoo parlors 								
Taxi stands and dispatching agencies 								
Telephone business offices 								
Temporary uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Theaters 								
Tire disposal storage (used or discarded) 								
Tire retreading and recapping facilities 								
Townhouse dwelling units (attached) 	P 			P 				
Trailer salesrooms and sales lots 								
Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities 								
Truck terminals 								
Tutoring or learning centers 								
Two-family dwelling units 	P 					P 		
Utility facilities (private) 								
Vending machine sales, service, rental, or repair establishments 								
Vocational schools (commercial) 								
Warehouse and storage facilities 								
Wholesale sales offices 								
Wholesale trade and distribution facilities 								
Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms 								
Zoos 								

Type of Use	O&I	OS	NS	PSC	CBD	GC	LI	HI
Accessory retail sales and services 	P 						P 	
Adult entertainment establishments 						SLUP/ 
SE 		
Agricultural produce stands 								
Ambulance services 							P 	P 
Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes 	P 		P 	P 		P 		P 
Amphitheaters 						P 		
Amusement centers 						SE 	SE 	SE 
Ancillary retail sales 								
Animal hospitals 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Appliance repair (major) 							P 	
Arcades 				P 		P 		
Asphalt plants 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Assembly halls 					P 	P 	P 	P 
Athletic and health clubs 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (accessory use) 						P 	P 	P 
Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal use) 						P 	P 	P 
Automobile and truck sales and service facilities 						SE 	SE 	SE 
Automotive paint and body repair shops 						P 	P 	P 
Automotive parking lots or garages 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Automotive repair and maintenance facilities 							P 	P 
Automotive salvage and wrecking yards 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Automobile storage yards and wrecker service 							SLUP/ 
SE 	SLUP/ 
SE 
Automotive upholstery shops 						P 	P 	P 
Aviation airports (private) 							P 	P 
Banks/financial institutions with drive-in establishments or automated transfer machines 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		
Billiards and pool halls 			P 	P 		P 		
Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facilities 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Boat sales and service establishments 						P 	P 	P 
Breeding and boarding kennels 							P 	P 
Building materials stores 				P 		P 	P 	P 
Bus stations 		P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Bus stations for freight 							P 	P 
Carwashes 			P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Cemeteries 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 
Chemical plants or storage facilities 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Chipping, grinding or reduction of materials 								SLUP 
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, and other places of worship 	SLUP/ 
SE 	SLUP/ 
SE 	SLUP/ 
SE 	SLUP/ 
SE 		SLUP/ 
SE 	SLUP/ 
SE 	SLUP/ 
SE 
Clinics 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Clubs or lodges (noncommercial) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Coliseums, stadiums, and convention centers (privately-owned) 						SE 		SLUP/ 
SE 
Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Commercial indoor recreation uses 				P 		P 		
Commercial outdoor recreation uses 				P 		P 		
Commercial recreation restaurants 			P 			P 		
Community fairs 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Community retail uses 				P 	P 	P 		
Composting facilities 								SLUP 
Concrete plants 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Condominiums 								
Contractors (general, heavy, special) 							P 	P 
Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales 				P 		P 		
Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses 		P 				P 	P 	P 
Crematories, human or animal 						SE 	SE 	SE 
Cultural facilities 				P 	P 	P 		
Customary home occupations 								
Dairies 							P 	P 
Designated recycling collection locations 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Drive-in theaters 						SE 	SE 	SE 
Dry cleaning plants 							P 	P 
Eating and drinking establishments (including drive-in fast food restaurants) 			P 	P 	P 	P 		
Electrical supply stores 							P 	P 
Emissions/inspection stations (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after June 30, 1998) 			P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Executive golf courses 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Extended stay motels and hotels 						SLUP/ 
SE 		
Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent) 				P 	P 	P 		
Farm and garden supply stores 			P 	P 		P 	P 	
Farm equipment stores/repair establishments 						P 	P 	P 
Farmers markets (fully enclosed) 						P 	P 	
Field crops 								
Film developing and printing facilities 				P 	P 	P 		
Flea markets 						SE 		
Fraternity and sorority houses/residence halls 	P 		P 	P 		P 		
Freight terminals 							SLUP 	SLUP 
Fruit trees, nuts, vegetables 								
Fuel and ice dealers 							P 	P 
Full service gasoline stations 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Funeral homes 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Golf courses, par 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Group homes 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 		SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Halfway houses 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 		SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 
Ham radios (amateur) 		SE 	SE 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 
Hazardous waste sites 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Heavy automotive repair establishments 							P 	P 
Heavy manufacturing establishments 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Heavy repair service and trade shops 								P 
Helicopter landing areas 		P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
High-rise apartments 								
Hospitals 	P 		P 	P 		P 		
Hotels 			SLUP 	SLUP 		SLUP 		
In-home day care 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Landfills (private) 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up establishments 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (work done on-site) 								P 
Light automotive repair establishments 				P 		P 	P 	P 
Light manufacturing establishments 							P 	P 
Linen and diaper services 							P 	P 
Livestock, non-domestic and wild animals, and poultry 							P 	P 
Livestock sales pavilions 							P 	
Machine shops 								P 
Mausoleums 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 
Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Mining operations 								SE 
Motels 			SLUP 	SLUP 		SLUP 		
Motorcycle, ATV, and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities 						P 	P 	
Multifamily dwelling units 								
Neighborhood retail uses 			P 	P 		P 		
Newspaper publishing facilities 							P 	P 
Nightclubs 						P 		
Non-automotive repair service establishments 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Non-profit (seasonal use) fishing lakes 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
Nursery schools and child day care centers 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		
Offices not elsewhere classified 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		
Office service and supply establishments 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Other consumer goods and services 				P 	P 	P 		
Other facilities for disposal of the deceased 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 
Other service establishments 				P 	P 	P 	P 	
Outdoor commercial racing (motorcycle, automobile, truck, tractor, and motorized vehicles) 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Outdoor golf driving ranges 		P 				P 	P 	P 
Overnight travel trailer parks 								
Pain clinics and pain management clinics 	SLUP 					SLUP 		
Parking for vehicles 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Pawn shops 						SLUP/ 
SE 		
Petroleum or bulk storage stations 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Photography studios 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Plumbing or heating equipment dealers 							P 	P 
Poultry hatcheries 							P 	
Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Private community centers 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 
Private landfill/composting centers/recycling centers 								SLUP/ 
SE 
Private parks 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Private schools of general and special education 	SE 	SE 	SE 	SE 		SE 	SE 	SE 
Pro shops (accessory to driving ranges/golf courses) 		P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Professional offices 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		
Radio and television stations 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Radio, television, and other communication towers and antennas 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 
Rail stations 							SLUP 	SLUP 
Railroad car classification yards 							SLUP 	SLUP 
Railroad stations for freight 							SLUP 	SLUP 
Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Research and development centers 							P 	P 
Research testing laboratories 							P 	P 
Rest/personal care/convalescent homes 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		
Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments 				P 		P 	P 	P 
Roominghouses and boardinghouses 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 	SLUP 		SLUP 		
Sawmills 								SLUP 
Sawmills (temporary) 							SE 	SE 
Self-service laundry facilities 				P 	P 	P 		
Self-service storage facilities 				P 			P 	P 
Shelters (homeless) 						P 	P 	P 
Signs and outdoor advertising facilities 							P 	P 
Single-family dwelling units (attached) 								
Single-family dwelling units (detached) 								
Studios and supplies 		P 		P 	P 	P 		
Tattoo parlors 						SLUP 		
Taxi stands and dispatching agencies 						P 	P 	P 
Telephone business offices 							P 	
Temporary uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Theaters 			P 	P 	P 	P 		
Tire disposal storage (used or discarded) 								SLUP 
Tire retreading and recapping facilities 								SLUP 
Townhouse dwelling units (attached) 								
Trailer salesrooms and sales lots 							P 	P 
Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities 							P 	P 
Truck terminals 							SLUP 	SLUP 
Tutoring or learning centers 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		
Two-family dwelling units 								
Utility facilities (private) 							P 	P 
Vending machine sales, service, rental, or repair establishments 						P 	P 	
Vocational schools (commercial) 		P 					P 	P 
Warehouse and storage facilities 							P 	P 
Wholesale sales offices 							P 	P 
Wholesale trade and distribution facilities 		P 					P 	P 
Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms 		P 					P 	P 
Zoos 						P 		

Notes: 
P = Permitted Use 
SE = Special Exception Use 
SLUP = Special Land Use Permit 
(Code 1985, § 22-122)
 
Sec. 48-137. R-80 Single-family residential district.
The regulations for the R-80 single-family residential district (80,000-square foot lot size) are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The R-80 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-80 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Land mobile, communication, microwave, and radio transmission antenna towers. 
g.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
h.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
i.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
j.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas subject to section 48-199. 
k.	Riding stables. 
l.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
m.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for R-80 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Landscape buffer and screening requirements are not applicable in this district. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the R-80 district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the R-80 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	No sales of goods or products shall be permitted, except as accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
b.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
c.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city as may be amended from time to time. 
d.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
e.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 25 percent. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities or access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
f.	No tractor trailers, or heavy equipment shall be allowed to be parked in a residential zoned neighborhood. 
g.	RVs, trailers, boats, and the like shall not be allowed to be parked beyond the front building line or allowed in the front yards and must be on a hardened surface. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 1,000 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 1,000 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 1,000 square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses or decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of the wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design shall be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be built until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)e.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)e.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and the city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-123)
 
Sec. 48-138. RR Rural residential district.
The regulations for the RR rural residential district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The RR district is established to provide locations for large useable areas for limited residential, agricultural, park and open space needs. This district also serves to correlate growth with utility, service and transportation needs until urbanization is warranted. RR uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses should be located within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RR district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Agricultural produce stands with a minimum of four off-street parking spaces. 
b.	Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries so long as set back at least 100 feet from any residential property line. 
c.	Customary home occupations. 
d.	Dairies, so long as buildings used for livestock shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line and all animals are maintained at least 100 feet from any property line. 
e.	Executive golf courses. 
f.	Farm and garden supply stores. 
g.	Field crops. 
h.	Fruit trees, nuts and vegetables. 
i.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
j.	Golf courses, par 3. 
k.	In-home day care. 
l.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
m.	Livestock sales pavilions. 
n.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
o.	Outdoor golf driving ranges. 
p.	Poultry hatcheries. All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
q.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
r.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
s.	Riding stables. 
t.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
u.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 100 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown on and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for RR District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Landscape buffer and screening requirements are not applicable in this district. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the RR district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the RR district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
b.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 25 percent. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 1,000 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 1,000 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 1,000 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 1,000 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)e.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)e.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and the city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the chapter proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-124)
 
Sec. 48-139. R-40 Single-family residential district.
The regulations for the R-40 single-family residential district (40,000-square foot lot size) are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The R-40 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-40 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
g.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
h.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
i.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
j.	Riding stable. 
k.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
l.	Temporary uses (as defined by this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for R-40 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Landscape buffer and screening requirements are not applicable in this district. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the R-40 district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the R-40 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
b.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
c.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle (the carrying or towing capacity of which shall not exceed 1½ tons), used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
d.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city or as may be amended from time to time. 
e.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
f.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 30 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer (after certificates of occupancy are issued): Public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. These uses shall not be allowed if an undisturbed buffer is stipulated by the mayor and council. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 650 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 650 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 650 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 650 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and is stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)e.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)e.1 of this section, and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived, provided written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-125)
 
Sec. 48-140. R-30 Single-family residential district.
The regulations for the R-30 single-family residential district (30,000-square foot lot size) are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The R-30 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-30 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
g.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
h.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
i.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
j.	Riding stables. 
k.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
l.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for R-30 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Landscape buffer and screening requirements are not applicable in this district. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the R-30 district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the R-30 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
b.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
c.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle (the carrying or towing capacity of which shall not exceed one and on-half tons), used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
d.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city as amended from time to time. 
e.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
f.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 35 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer (after certificates of occupancy are issued): public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. These uses shall not be allowed if an undisturbed buffer is stipulated by the mayor and council. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 650 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 650 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 650 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	The plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)e.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)e.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)d.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-126)
 
Sec. 48-141. R-20 Single-family residential district.
The regulations for the R-20 single-family residential district (20,000-square foot lot size) are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The R-20 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-20 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a. Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
g.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
h.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
i.	Riding stables. 
j.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
k.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for R-20 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Landscape buffer and screening requirements are not applicable in this district 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the R-20 district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the R-20 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
b.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
c.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle (the carrying and/towing capacity of which shall not exceed 1½ tons), used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
d.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city or as may be amended from time to time. 
e.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
f.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 35 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer (after certificates of occupancy are issued): public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. These uses shall not be allowed if an undisturbed buffer is stipulated by the mayor and council. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 50 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 400 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)e.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)e.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-127)
 
Sec. 48-142. R-15 Single-family residential district.
The regulations for the R-15 single-family residential district (15,000-square foot lot size) are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The R-15 district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-15 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home care. 
f.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
g.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
h.	Riding stables. 
i.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
j.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for R-15 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Landscape buffer and screening requirements are not applicable in this district. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the R-15 district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the R-15 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
b.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
c.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles (the carrying or towing capacity shall not exceed 1½ tons) may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
d.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city or as may be amended from time to time. 
e.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
f.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 35 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer (after certificates of occupancy are issued): public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. These uses shall not be allowed if an undisturbed buffer is stipulated by the mayor and council. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 50 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 400 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)e.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)e.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-128)
 
Sec. 48-143. R-10 Single-family residential district.
The regulations for the R-10 single-family attached/detached residential district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The R-10 district is established to provide locations for affordable single-family detached residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the R-10 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. No new application for R-10 park zoning will be accepted by the mayor and council effective January 1, 2011. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
g.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas subject to section 48-199. 
h.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
i.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet; cul-de-sac or interior lot, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 35 feet; 35 feet minimum public road frontage if interior to development. 
d.	Minimum width between dwellings: 15 feet. 
e.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for R-10 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Distance if interior portion of development. 
2.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
3.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Landscape buffer and screening requirements are not applicable in this district. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the R-10 district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the R-10 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	A site plan shall be submitted to city staff for each lot showing the following: 
1.	Setbacks and dwelling space distances; 
2.	Lot size; 
3.	Delineation of floodplain and wetlands; and 
4.	Accessory structures, including decks, porches, swimming pools, tennis courts and basketball courts. 
b.	A foundation survey shall be required to be submitted and approved prior to continuing with framing. 
c.	Maximum acreage is 20 acres. 
d.	No structure or dwelling shall be closer than five feet to any property line. 
e.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
f.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
g.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle (the carrying or towing capacity shall not exceed 1½ tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
h.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city or as may be amended from time to time. 
i.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
j.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 30 percent. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 25 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 400 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)e.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)e.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and the city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-129)
 
Sec. 48-144. RSL Nonsupportive residential senior living.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The RSL nonsupportive residential units is established to provide locations for the development of attached and detached dwelling units limited to those persons age 55 and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as may be amended from time to time and shall not be established as a precedent for any other residential or nonresidential district. This residential use is designed to be located within any land use category other than industrial, industrial compatible, rural residential and very low density residential as defined by the city comprehensive plan, as may be amended from time to time, provided that it must be located along an arterial roadway (as defined by the city major thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time). 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nonsupportive means individual housing units designed for senior adults that do not include or provide any type of supportive services such as transportation, medical care, food preparation and the like. 
(c)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)	Attached residential units. 
(2)	Detached residential units. 
(d)	Lot size and setback requirements. (See use limitations.) 
(e)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any RSL nonsupportive residential units which abut more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 20-foot landscaped screening or maintained natural buffer adjacent to all residential property. When abutting nonresidentially zoned property, a ten-foot landscaped screening buffer is required. Minimum buffers may be increased by the mayor and council based on existing conditions such as tract size, topographic conditions, etc., in order to provide compatibility with adjacent residential uses. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case necessary private utilities or access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated, undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(1)	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
a.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
b.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
c.	Reduction of glare; 
d.	Buffering of noise; and 
e.	Establishment of privacy. 
(2)	Standards. Buffers or berms shall be required when a PUD district is located adjacent to a more restrictive residential district; a minimum ten-foot buffer is required. 
a.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards. 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff. 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required ten-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
b.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff. Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. They shall be stabilized, constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns, and regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(f)	Floodplain/wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(g)	Building and structure requirements. (See use limitations.) 
(h)	Parking requirements. (See use limitations.) 
(i)	Lighting requirements.
(1)	All utilities must be underground unless otherwise approved by mayor and council. 
(2)	All subdivisions including RSL developments must have street lights. The street lighting plan must be approved by the public works director or his designee. 
(j)	Special exception uses. None. 
(k)	Location criteria, design criteria and use limitations.
(1)	Any RSL nonsupportive residential units shall be subject to the site plan submitted and approved by the building official or his designee. Overall residential development shall be compatible with neighboring residential uses. 
(2)	Minimum tract size of three acres. 
(3)	Maximum density of five units per acre; however, the overall density of a development may be reduced due to topography, drainage, deforestation or sediment and erosion concerns. 
(4)	All dwelling units must be limited to those persons age 55 and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as may be amended from time to time. 
(5)	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
(6)	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
(7)	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city, as amended from time to time. 
(8)	Any food or beverage served within an accessory clubhouse shall be limited to residents and their guests. 
(9)	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings, or as otherwise prohibited in the association declaration and bylaws. 
(10)	A mandatory owners association must be formed and incorporated which provides for building and grounds maintenance and repair, insurance and working capital. The association must also include declaration and bylaws, including rules and regulations, subject to staff review and approval. Staff review and approval will be based on a model on file with the community affairs department. The declaration and bylaws shall not be enforced by the city. The declaration and bylaws shall, at a minimum, regulate and control the following: 
a.	Animals. 
b.	Signs. 
c.	Exterior items such as fences, lawn ornaments and restrictions on removal of landscape areas and buffers. 
d.	Building improvements. 
e.	Outside storage. 
f.	Overnight parking of vehicles. 
g.	Decorations. 
h.	Trash collection. 
i.	Restrictions on single-family residential use only, and leasing of units. No more than ten percent of the total units may be leased by individual owners at any time. 
j.	Restrictions on all units being occupied by persons age 55 and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act as may be amended from time to time. 
k.	Accessory buildings and structures. 
(11)	All units must have an attached garage, which must be used for vehicle parking only. 
(12)	No more than four units may be attached side by side. 
(13)	Maximum of four attached units (quadruplex). 
(14)	Any RSL nonsupportive residential units project must be located along an arterial roadway (as defined by the city major thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time). 
(15)	All RSL nonsupportive residential unit projects must be designed to provide pedestrian access to all adjacent properties and roadways. Connectivity to public transit will be required when available. 
(16)	Any RSL nonsupportive residential units project which proposes an amenity area will be required to design such feature for those residents age 55 and older. 
(17)	At least 50 percent of each individual dwelling unit must be constructed with brick, stucco, stone or other hardened surface. 
(18)	No RSL nonsupportive residential unit development may be located within an existing subdivision, unless being proposed as an assemblage. 
(19)	Maximum building height of two stories. 
(20)	A 30-foot perimeter building setback must be provided to all adjacent residentially zoned properties. This perimeter setback may include required buffers. A 20-foot setback shall be required adjacent to any public roadway. There shall be a minimum setback of 15 feet between buildings. Minimum setbacks may be increased by the mayor and council based on existing conditions such as tract size, topographic conditions, etc., in order to provide compatibility with adjacent residential uses. 
(21)	An overall landscape plan is to be approved by the building official or his designee with emphasis on size of tract, buffers, surrounding uses, and passive recreational areas. 
(22)	Projects must incorporate applicable accessibility and easy living standards (as administered and copyrighted by a coalition of state citizens including AARP of Georgia, Atlanta Regional Commission, Concrete Change, state department of community affairs, Governor's Council on Developmental Disabilities, Home Builders' Association of Georgia, Shepherd Center and the Statewide Independent Living Council of Georgia) to include at least one full bath on the main floor, with ample maneuvering space; a bedroom on the main floor; ample interior door widths; and one stepless entrance at either the front, side or back of the home, or through the garage. 
(23)	Projects must incorporate an area designated as common space or recreational space for the enjoyment of the residents. 
(24)	Impervious surface shall not exceed 55 percent of the total site area. 
(25)	Projects proposing public infrastructure to be accepted by the city for maintenance must be designed in accordance with all applicable standards and specifications, including, but not limited to, building setbacks. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(l)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and the size of the accessory building or structure: Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure; which cannot include dwelling or commercial space for profit, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs department or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
(1)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Maximum height is one story or 15 feet. 
b.	Accessory uses shall include garbage dumpsters, designated recycling locations, clubhouse and recreation centers, amenities, swimming pools, and tennis courts, antennas and satellite dishes, heating and air conditioning units, and Jacuzzis, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Uses must be located within building setbacks. 
2.	No ground based antenna or satellite dish shall exceed 35 feet in height without compliance with standards in section 48-200. 
3.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be built until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	Outdoor activities shall cease by 11:00 p.m. within clubhouse and recreation centers and swimming pools and tennis courts. 
c.	Such buildings, structures, uses or decks shall be located on the same lot as the principal uses to which the building, structure use or deck is accessory. 
(2)	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-199. 
(3)	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
(Code 1985, § 22-130)
 
Sec. 48-145. PUD Planned unit development.
The regulations for the PUD planned unit development district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The PUD district is established to encourage and provide flexible site plan and building arrangements under a unified plan of development rather than lot-by-lot regulation. The developer benefits from better land utilization and design flexibility. Review of and approval of the development plan by the mayor and council provides an opportunity to ensure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which the development is located. The PUD district may be located within any residential category as defined by the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. The PUD district is not intended to encourage greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning to ensure the provision of park and recreation land and facilities for the use of the occupants of the development in order to obtain a more desirable environment. PUD development shall be compatible with surrounding development. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Condominiums. 
b.	Customary home occupations. 
c.	Executive golf courses. 
d.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
e.	Golf courses, par 3. 
f.	In-home day care. 
g.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
h.	Multifamily dwelling units. 
i.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
j.	Riding stables. 
k.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
l.	Temporary uses (as defined by this chapter). 
m.	Townhouse dwelling units (attached). 
n.	Two-family dwelling units. 
o.	Combinations of the uses listed in this subsection. 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size (single-family dwelling): 8,500 square feet. 
b.	Minimum side yard: Ten feet. 
c.	Minimum back yard: 30 feet. 
d.	Minimum front yard: 40 feet measured from right-of-way line. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within a PUD district which abuts a more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum ten-foot landscaped screening buffer. Additionally, during the construction phase, a 40-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained, except for access points, required detention/retention facilities or utilities. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Standards. Buffers or berms shall be required when a PUD district is located adjacent to a more restrictive residential district; a minimum ten-foot buffer is required. 
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards. 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required ten-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements.
a.	Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
b.	No more than 30 percent of total number of homes in a PUD development to have a minimum of 1,200 square feet of heated floor space. 
c.	No less than 50 percent of homes to have a minimum of 1,600 square feet of heated floor space. 
d.	Mayor and council may allow that 400 square feet of this space may be studded and plumbed for future completion, i.e., bonus room, basement room, etc. 
e.	All homes to have two car garages. 
(7)	Parking requirements.
a.	See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
b.	All homes shall have a minimum of 20 feet wide driveways from street to garage. 
c.	All subdivision roads must be a minimum of 24 feet wide (two 12-foot lanes). 
d.	All roads must cul-de-sac. No dead-ends will be allowed. Cul-de-sacs containing landscaped islands or infiltration islands are encouraged. 
e.	Sidewalks must be installed on at least one side of the road opposite the side that has the water line installed and must be a minimum of four feet wide. 
(8)	Lighting requirements.
a.	All utilities must be underground unless otherwise approved by mayor and council. 
b.	All subdivisions including PUD developments must have street lights. The street lighting plan must be approved by the public works director or his designee. 
(9)	Use limitations.
a.	A PUD district shall be located within any residential category as defined by the Austell Comprehensive Land Use Plan: Policy Guide, so long as it meets the standards set forth in this section and is compatible with surrounding uses and zoning districts and does exceed the density set forth in the comprehensive plan. 
b.	Maximum density shall not exceed 3.5 units per acre. Floodplain or wetlands acreage may not be used in calculating the overall density. 
c.	A PUD shall require ten contiguous acres unless the acreage is being added to an existing PUD as an extension of or additional phase to an already approved PUD which originally met the minimum ten-acre requirement. 
d.	A minimum of 550 square feet per dwelling unit in a PUD shall be reserved for open space, parks, other recreational uses or other public uses, subject to the following: 
1.	No more than 50 percent of the land so reserved may lie in a floodplain or wetland. 
2.	While such open space shall not be required to be contiguous, the open space must be useable and functional for open space, parks, other recreational or other public uses. 
3.	The required yards, parking and right-of-way areas shall not be credited toward the minimum open space requirements. 
4.	The amount of required common open space will be automatically reduced as the density of development is reduced and will be automatically increased as the density of development is increased. 
5.	The required open space shall be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved landscaping plan. 
e.	All PUD developments shall be zoned and subject to a specific site plan. 
f.	The entire PUD shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to ensure the continuance of the PUD in accordance with approved plans and developments. 
g.	The overall residential development should be compatible with surrounding uses and zoning. 
h.	Relation to residentially developed property lying outside the PUD. The sides, rear, or front of a lot developed for multifamily dwellings shall neither abut nor lie across the street from property lying outside the PUD that is developed with single-family dwellings. 
i.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
j.	During the construction phase only, a 40-foot undisturbed buffer shall be maintained, except for access points, required detention/retention facilities or utilities. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(10)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the PUD district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 650 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 650 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
a.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design shall be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or other accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffer, whichever is greater. 
10.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. The accessory building, structure or use shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. This shall not apply to decks. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
d.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the property line, setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)d.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and the city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)d.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-131)
 
Sec. 48-146. RD Residential duplex district.
The regulations for the RD residential duplex district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The RD district is established to provide locations for the development of affordable single-family detached or attached owner-occupied residential dwelling units, including duplexes. The dwelling units are to be designed so as to be placed on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit or on an adjoining lot where the units will be attached by a common party wall. This residential use is designed to be located within or on the edge of properties delineated for medium density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RD district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
g.	Single-family dwelling units (attached). 
h.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
i.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
j.	Two-family dwelling units. 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for RD District 
Note: all setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Distance if interior portion of development. 
2.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
3.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an RD district which abuts a more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum ten-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residential property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Standards. Buffers or berms shall be required when an RD district is located adjacent to a more restrictive residential district. A minimum ten-foot buffer is required. 
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls shall be a minimum of six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required ten-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the RD district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the RD district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	There shall be a maximum of four units per acre. 
b.	Where single-family dwelling units are proposed to be constructed in area zoned RD, the minimum house size shall be 1,000 square feet, and the minimum lot size for an individual attached unit shall be 12,500 square feet. 
c.	Architectural style and design shall be compatible with or upgrade the existing neighborhood. 
d.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
e. 1. Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 35 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer: public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. 
2.	Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 50 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 400 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)d.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)d.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and the city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure that no light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-132)
 
Sec. 48-147. RA-6 Single-family attached/detached residential district.
The regulations for the RA-6 single-family attached/detached residential district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The RA-6 district is established to provide locations for the development of affordable single-family detached or attached residential dwelling units, including the combination of duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes. The dwelling units are to be designed so as to be placed on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit or on an adjoining lot where the units will be attached by a common party wall. This residential use is designed to be located within or on the edge of properties delineated for any residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RA-6 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals and poultry. 
g.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
h.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas subject to section 48-199. 
i.	Riding stables. 
j.	Single-family dwelling units (detached). 
k.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 5,500 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 70 feet; cul-de-sac or interior lot, 50 feet. 
c.	Minimum width between dwellings: 15 feet. 
d.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet; cul-de-sac, 35 feet; 50 feet minimum public road frontage if interior to development. 
e.	Minimum building setbacks: as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for RA-6 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	If public road frontage is along an arterial or collector roadway, a 50-foot front setback shall be required. 
2.	Distance if interior portion of development. 
3.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
4.	If the structure fronts a major side setback, the major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an RA-6 district which abuts a more restrictive, residentially zoned property shall have a minimum ten-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residential property, such buffer subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities or access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated, undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Landscape buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs; 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for design situation; 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffer should maximize visual barrier to height of six feet within two years of planting; 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is to be five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs; 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be minimum six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff; 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff; 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owners to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this section are met; 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required ten-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer; and 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
c.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features; 
2.	Berms shall be stabilized; 
3.	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns; and 
4.	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain/wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the RA-6 district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the RA-6 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	There shall be a maximum of six units per acre; however, the overall density of a development may be reduced due to topography, drainage, deforestation or sediment and erosion concerns. 
b.	Where single-family dwelling units are proposed to be constructed in areas zoned RA-6, the minimum house size shall be 950 square feet and the minimum lot size for an individual lot shall be 5,500 square feet. All setbacks shall be as set forth in this section. 
c.	Architectural style and design shall be compatible with or upgrade the existing neighborhood. 
d.	Maximum acreage is 20 acres. 
e.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
f.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
g.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle (the carrying or towing capacity of which shall not exceed 1½ tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of home occupation. 
h.	All uses are subject to subdivision regulations of the city as may be amended from time to time. 
i.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
j.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 30 percent. 
k.	Pools and outbuildings permitted as accessory structures within the RA-6 zoning district must have a site plan approved by the BOC. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities or access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks.
a.	Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 50 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 400 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
b.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions unless otherwise defined as in subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet, when located within building setbacks or at least 100 feet from a property line, otherwise maximum height is one story. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design are to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200, pertaining to standards for antennas, satellite television antennas and dishes. 
d.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed, principal structure permitted within the district or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools, subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along such property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along such line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)d.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)d.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and the city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cut-off type fixtures only are permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure no light is cast upon the roadway, and no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)e.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-133)
 
Sec. 48-148. RM-8 Residential multifamily district.
The regulations for RM-8 residential multifamily district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The RM-8 district is established to provide locations for multifamily residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within properties delineated for medium and high density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RM-8 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent multifamily detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Condominiums. 
b.	Customary home occupations. 
c.	Executive golf courses. 
d.	Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls. 
e.	Fruit trees, nuts and vegetables. 
f.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
g.	Golf courses, par 3. 
h.	In-home day care. 
i.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
j.	Multifamily dwelling units. 
k.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
l.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
m.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas subject to section 48-199. 
n.	Riding stables. 
o.	Single-family dwelling units (attached), not to exceed six units to the acre. 
p.	Single-family dwelling units (detached), not to exceed six units to the acre. 
q.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum tract size: 80,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for RM-8 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an RM-8 district which abuts a more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 25-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residential property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff. 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 25-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
c.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
2.	Berms shall be stabilized. 
3.	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
4.	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. Buildings within the RM-8 district may be split level, three and four stories in height. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the RM-8 district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have a city department of transportation approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the RM-8 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	There shall be a maximum of eight units per acre; however, the overall density of a development may be reduced due to topography, drainage, deforestation or sediment and erosion concerns. 
b.	Where single-family dwelling units are proposed to be constructed in areas zoned RM-8, the minimum house size shall be 950 square feet and the minimum lot size for individual lots shall be 5,500 square feet. Setbacks applicable to the R-10 zoning district (for detached residences) set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
c.	Maximum acreage is 40 acres. 
d.	Density calculations for projects developed within the RM-8 district shall not include in excess of 50 percent of floodplain area present on the property. Floodplain area included in such density calculations shall not be counted toward any other project unless the original project was not developed. In such instance, only such amounts of floodplain area not utilized in the previously approved project shall be eligible for inclusion in another project. 
e.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
f.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
g.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle, the carrying or towing capacity of which shall not exceed 1½ tons, used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
h.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city or as may be amended from time to time. 
i.	Any food or beverage served within an accessory clubhouse shall be limited to residents and their guests. 
j.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
k.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 25 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer: public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. When single-family detached dwellings are developed in areas zoned RM-8, any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 50 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 400 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
a.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses or decks shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage dumpsters, designated recycling collection locations, clubhouses and recreation centers, amenities, swimming pools and tennis courts, antennas and satellite dishes, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, playhouses and playgrounds subject to the following conditions: 
(i)	Such uses must be located within building setbacks. 
(ii)	No ground-based antenna or satellite dish shall exceed 35 feet in height without compliance with the standards in section 48-199. 
(iii)	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be built until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
(iv)	Outdoor activities shall cease by 11:00 p.m. within clubhouse and recreation centers and swimming pools and tennis courts. 
3.	Such buildings, structures, uses or decks shall be located on the same lot as the principal use to which the building, structure, use or deck is accessory. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
d.	Where single-family dwelling units are proposed to be constructed in areas zoned RM-8, neighborhood recreation centers, amenities, swimming pools and tennis courts are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along such property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along such line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)d.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)d.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and the city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cut-off type fixtures only are permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure no light is cast upon the roadway, and no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)d.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-134)
 
Sec. 48-149. FST Fee simple townhouse residential district.
The regulations for the FST fee simple townhouse residential district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The FST district is established to provide locations for affordable attached residential dwelling units (six or eight units per acre) or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within or on the edge of properties delineated for medium and high density residential categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the FST district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings, and shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Customary home occupations. 
b.	Executive golf courses. 
c.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
d.	Golf courses, par 3. 
e.	In-home day care. 
f.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
g.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
h.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
i.	Radio, television, other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
j.	Riding stables. 
k.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
l.	Townhouse dwelling units (attached). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum tract size: 80,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 20 feet; 30 feet for lot with end unit. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 20 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for FST District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	If public road frontage is along an arterial or collector roadway, a 50-foot front setback shall be required. 
2.	Distance of interior portion of development If attached units, minor side setback can be zero feet. Maximum of six units attached. Ten feet required between unattached units. 
3.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
4.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an FST district which abuts a more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum ten-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residential property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Standards. Buffers and berms shall be required when an FST district is located adjacent to a residential district; a minimum ten-foot buffer is required. 
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required ten-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the FST district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the FST district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	There shall be a maximum of eight units per acre. 
b.	Architectural style and design are to be compatible with or upgrade the existing neighborhood. 
c.	Maximum acreage is 20 acres. 
d.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
e.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
f.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle (the carrying or towing capacity shall not exceed 1½ tons), used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
g.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city or as may be amended from time to time. 
h.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
i.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 30 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer: public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 50 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. 
a.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
3.	All accessory uses shall be located to the rear of the principal building, except for heating and air conditioning units or garbage pads, which may be located on the side or rear. 
4.	The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
5.	Architectural style and design shall be approved by the building official or his designee. 
6.	Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal building subject to the limitations in this subsection. 
7.	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be built until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
8.	On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
9.	Any accessory building or structure less than 650 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
d.	Neighborhood recreation centers, amenities and swimming pools are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)d.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)d.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure no that light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)d.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-135)
 
Sec. 48-150. RM-12 Residential multifamily district.
The regulations for the RM-12 residential multifamily district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The RM-12 district is established to provide locations for multifamily residential uses or residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses which are within properties delineated for high density residential and regional activity center categories as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When residentially compatible institutional and recreational uses are developed within the RM-12 district, they should be designed and built to ensure intensity and density compatibility with adjacent multifamily detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Condominiums. 
b.	Customary home occupations. 
c.	Executive golf courses. 
d.	Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls. 
e.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
f.	Golf courses, par 3. 
g.	In-home day care. 
h.	Multifamily dwelling units. 
i.	Private parks, SLUP required. 
j.	Riding stables. 
k.	Single-family dwelling units (attached), not to exceed six units to the acre. 
l.	Single-family dwelling units (detached), not to exceed six units to the acre. 
m.	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum tract size: 80,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 75 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for RM-12 District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an RM-12 district which abuts a more restrictive residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 25-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residential property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; and 
4.	Buffering of noise. 
b.	Standards. Buffers or berms shall be required when an RM-12 district is located adjacent to a more restrictive residential district; a minimum 25-foot buffer is required. 
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 25-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. Buildings within the RM-12 district may be split level, three and four stories in height. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the RM-12 district which proposes any outdoor lighting must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the RM-12 district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	There shall be a maximum of 12 units per acre; however, the overall density of a development may be reduced due to topography, drainage, deforestation or sediment and erosion concerns. 
b.	Where single-family dwelling units are proposed to be constructed in areas zoned RM-12, the minimum house size shall be 950 square feet and the minimum lot size for individual lots shall be 6,500 square feet. Setbacks applicable to the RA-6 zoning district (for detached residences) set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
c.	Maximum acreage is 40 acres. 
d.	Density calculations for projects developed within the RM-12 district shall not include in excess of 50 percent of any floodplain area present on the property. Floodplain area included in such density calculation shall not be counted toward any other project unless the original project was not developed (which included the floodplain calculation). 
e.	No sale of goods or products shall be permitted, except if accessory to a customary home occupation, land use permit, special land use permit or special exception use. 
f.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
g.	No materials, equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises, except that one business vehicle (the carrying or towing capacity of which shall not exceed 1½ tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. The off-site employees of the resident shall not congregate on the premises for any purpose concerning the business of the home occupation. 
h.	All uses are subject to the subdivision regulations of the city or as may be amended from time to time. 
i.	Any food or beverage served within an accessory clubhouse shall be limited to residents and their guests. 
j.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
k.	Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed 35 percent. An undisturbed buffer equal to the required rear yard setback for this zoning district shall be established along the perimeter boundaries during construction until certificates of occupancy for affected lots are obtained. In the event that this undisturbed perimeter buffer conflicts with any required building setbacks, the required building setbacks may be altered by the building official or his designee, so as to accommodate the 40-foot undisturbed perimeter buffer. The following uses shall be allowed within the undisturbed perimeter buffer: public and private utilities, detention facilities, access drives, pools, decks, gazebos and fences. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to, Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 400 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. When single-family detached dwellings are developed in areas zoned RM-12, any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 50 feet from any property line. Any accessory building or structure less than 400 square feet and greater than 144 square feet must be located to the rear of the primary structure within the building setbacks. No garage or accessory building, structure, use or deck less than 144 gross square feet, shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or within any required buffers, whichever is greater, regardless if the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway. If the garage, accessory building, structure, use or deck is attached to the primary structure by a breezeway, it shall be located up to a maximum of 25 feet from the primary structure to which it is attached. 
a.	Accessory buildings, structures, uses or decks shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet. 
2.	Accessory uses shall include garbage dumpsters, clubhouse and recreation centers, amenities, swimming pools and tennis courts, antennas and satellite dishes, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, playhouses and playgrounds subject to the following conditions: 
(i)	Uses must be located within building setbacks. 
(ii)	No ground-based antenna or satellite dish shall exceed 35 feet in height without compliance with standards in section 48-199. 
(iii)	No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be built until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
(iv)	Outdoor activities shall cease by 11:00 p.m. within clubhouse and recreation centers and swimming pools and tennis courts. 
3.	Such buildings, structures, uses or decks shall be located on the same lot as the principal use to which the building, structure, use or deck is accessory. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Incidental storage is permitted, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
d.	Multifamily or apartment projects, neighborhood recreation centers, amenities, swimming pools and tennis courts must be located with applicable building setbacks. Where single-family dwelling units are proposed to be constructed in areas zoned RM-12, neighborhood recreation centers, amenities, swimming pools and tennis courts are subject to the following: 
1.	Site plans must be approved by the building official or his designee to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments, except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
2.	Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(i)	Upon written consent of all owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(ii)	The setback may be reduced to 20 feet from an interior property line of the property on which the use is located if a ten-foot landscaped buffer is provided along the property line and a six-foot solid wood or masonry fence is erected and maintained along the line so as to provide a visual and noise screen for adjacent property; provided, however, the setback after reduction shall not be less than 100 feet from an exterior property line unless also reduced in accordance with subsection (11)d.2(i) of this section. Such landscaped buffer shall be shown on the landscaping plan specified in subsection (11)d.1 of this section and must be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(iii)	When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback may be waived provided a written waiver is obtained from the building official or his designee. 
3.	Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and city. 
4.	Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
5.	Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cutoff type fixtures only is permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed Cobb County or city public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by the mayor and council to ensure no that light is cast upon the roadway and that no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
6.	No residence or structures shall be built upon any adjacent lot within the development within which the facility is located until construction of the recreation area has commenced to the extent that buyers of adjacent property will be aware of where the recreation area will be located. 
7.	Parking requirements are as follows: 
(i)	A minimum of 20 spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis facility with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only. 
(ii)	In addition to the requirement of subsection (11)d.7(i) of this section, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or pro-rated share thereof, over 100 shall be provided. 
(iii)	Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to section 48-198, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. No parking shall be allowed within a front yard setback. 
8.	No park, playground, tennis court, basketball court, or the like shall be allowed to be constructed unless the following criteria are met, except those recreational improvements included in a site plan approved by the mayor and council: 
(i)	The adjacent property owners shall be in favor of the proposed recreational improvement. 
(ii)	Sixty percent of the subdivision, if located in a subdivision shall be in favor of the proposed park. 
(iii)	Approval has been received by mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-136)
 
Sec. 48-151. MHP Mobile home park district.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The MHP district is established to provide locations for mobile home parks which eliminate or minimize certain conditions associated with mobile homes. The mayor and council finds that it is necessary to restrict the location of mobile homes in order to: preserve land for low density, single-family dwellings; protect property values; guard against increased crime; guard against traffic congestion; maintain aesthetics; regulate population density; prevent waste and sewage problems; regulate housing stock; and attempt to address concerns regarding wind vulnerability. No new application for MHP mobile home park zoning will be accepted by the mayor and council effective January 1, 2011. 
(b)	Standards. The regulations for the MHP mobile home park district are as follows: 
(1)	Conditions of operation. Each mobile home park shall provide the following minimum facilities on the site for the common use of all trailer occupants: 
a.	Drives. Paved drives at least 20 feet wide shall be provided to each trailer space and to laundry or other service buildings and recreation areas. 
b.	Refuse collection facilities. One refuse collection station shall be provided for each 20 families or fraction thereof, not more than 200 feet from any trailer served, and shall be conveniently located for collection. If individual refuse containers are used on the trailer site, these containers must be submerged in the ground with only the top portion extending above the ground level. In lieu of a submerged unit, stands may be provided to hold the cans and screen the cans from conspicuous view. 
c.	Underground utility lines. Utility lines shall be underground unless the plans approved by the mayor and council indicate certain specific lines above the ground. 
d.	Landscaping. Each mobile home park shall be landscaped with shade trees and exterior screen planting. 
e.	Recreation area. At least ten percent of the gross land area shall be set aside for recreational use. No such area shall be less than one-half acre. 
(2)	Improvements to trailers; patios.
a.	No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto or become a part of any trailer unit. 
b.	The owner of the mobile home park shall install a concrete patio at least four inches thick, with minimum dimensions of 20 feet by eight feet, within each trailer space. 
(3)	Required lot area.
a.	No mobile home park shall be constructed or maintained on a lot or tract which has an average width of less than 400 feet or a total area of less than ten acres. 
b.	Each trailer space shall be at least 50 feet in width and shall be a minimum of 4,000 square feet in area. In cul-de-sac or curved street design, the width of the trailer space shall be at least 50 feet at the location of the mobile home unit. 
c.	Each trailer space shall be defined by a marker at each corner. 
(4)	Yard requirements. No trailer shall be located within: 
a.	Ten feet of its individual lot line. 
b.	Forty feet from any exterior boundary of the mobile home park. 
(5)	Buffer strip requirements. A buffer strip at least 25 feet wide shall be located adjacent to each exterior property line of the mobile home park and not be included within any individual trailer lot. This buffer strip shall be increased to a width of 50 feet when located adjacent to property zoned for single-family dwellings or duplexes. This strip shall be densely planted with evergreen shrubs and trees. 
(6)	Off-street parking. A paved driveway, connecting to the interior drive, shall be provided on each trailer site, sufficient in length and width to serve as two off-street parking spaces. 
(7)	Sewerage and water supply. Central sewage disposal facilities must be used and there shall be no individual septic tanks in areas zoned for the uses provided in this section, and public water supply shall be used and there shall be no private wells allowed under the uses in this zone. 
(8)	Use limitations.
a.	No outside storage is permitted, excluding firewood and lawn furnishings. 
b.	Maximum density of six units to the acre. 
c.	Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(9)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(10)	Mobile home requirements. Each mobile home must consist of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family (as defined in section 48-1) and two or fewer persons who are not family members. 
a.	A mobile home may be occupied only by a family and up to two persons who are not family members. 
b.	A mobile home shall have an interior bathroom and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed. 
c.	A mobile home shall have at least 250 square feet of total square footage (as determined in the records maintained by the Cobb County tax assessor) per each adult occupant. 
d.	A travel trailer, recreational vehicle or the like does not constitute a mobile home for the purposes of this section. 
e.	No more than one vehicle per 250 square feet of total square footage may be parked regularly overnight at or within the paved parking area as required in subsection (b)(6) of this section. The term "regularly" means a majority of nights in any seven-day period. 
(Code 1985, § 22-137)
 
Sec. 48-152. O&I Office and institutional district.
The regulations for the O&I office and institutional district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The O&I district is established to provide locations for nonretail commercial uses such as offices and financial institutions, which are on properties delineated within or on the edge of a neighborhood activity center and or a community activity center as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. The office and institutional district is designed primarily to provide for four-story and smaller office developments, office uses, motels, hotels, banking and professional offices that complement and provide step-down nodal zoning away from more intensive commercial uses and otherwise to implement the stated purpose of this chapter. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory retail sales and services. 
b.	Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes. 
c.	Animal hospitals. 
d.	Athletic and health clubs. 
e.	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
f.	Banks and financial institutions with drive-in establishments or automated transfer machines. 
g.	Clinics. 
h.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
i.	Colleges and universities, including, but not limited to, research and training facilities (private). 
j.	Community fairs. 
k.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
l.	Executive golf courses. 
m.	Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls, if within 1,000 feet of a college or university. 
n.	Funeral homes. 
o.	Golf courses, par 3. 
p.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
q.	Hospitals. 
r.	In-home day care. 
s.	Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site. 
t.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
u.	Nursery schools and child care centers. 
v.	Pain clinic and pain management clinic. 
1.	No on-site dispensing of any prescription medications or controlled substances. 
2.	One parking space per 200 gross square-feet of building. 
3.	Hours of operation to be established by mayor and council, considering the operational hours of surrounding businesses. 
4.	Signage and lighting plan to be approved by city staff. 
5.	Special land use permit as provided by section 48-36. 
6.	The maximum length of approval for this use is 12 months. 
(i)	Offices not elsewhere classified. 
(ii)	Parking for vehicles. 
(iii)	Private parks. 
(iv)	Professional offices. 
(v)	Radio and television stations. 
(vi)	Radio, television and other commercial towers and antennas subject to section 48-199. 
(vii)	Rest homes, personal care homes and convalescent homes. 
(viii)	Temporary uses (as defined in this chapter). 
(ix)	Tutoring and learning centers (See section 48-1). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 60 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for O&I District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an O&I district which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 20-foot landscaped screening buffer. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Standards. Buffers and berms shall be required when an O&I district is located within or adjacent to a residential district; a minimum 20-foot buffer is required. 
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by the city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffer should provide a 100 percent visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height (fence to be located on exterior of buffer) as approved by city staff. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 20-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)	Any appeals from a determination by the city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by the city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the O&I district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval from the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the O&I district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	Maximum floor area ratio is 0.75 for office uses and 0.25 for retail uses (accessory). 
b.	All structures located within an O&I district shall be appropriately scaled in relation to the transitional nature of the immediate area. 
c.	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
d.	No outside storage is permitted. Within the O&I district, outside storage shall not include commercial vehicles. 
e.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
f.	No drive-in eating or drinking establishments are permitted. 
g.	No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
h.	No outside runs are permitted with any veterinary office use permitted within this district. 
i.	Maximum impervious surfaces: 70 percent. 
j.	No loading docks or facilities may be located in the front of any primary structure. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 40 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory retail sales and service. 
b.	Accessory storage buildings, to include parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories, not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
3.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
5.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
6.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
7.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
c.	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
d.	Freestanding parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height: 50 feet. 
2.	When abutting any residential property line, freestanding parking garages shall not be located within any required buffers. 
3.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no freestanding garage shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
e.	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
2.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
4.	No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
f.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
(Code 1985, § 22-138)
 
Sec. 48-153. OS Office/service district.
The regulations for the OS office/service district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The OS district is established to provide locations for office and business distribution/service facilities, and assembly processes which do not emit noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odors or radiation and are located entirely within an enclosed building which do not involve manufacturing or fabrication of any product. No principal retail sales are allowed unless specified in this section. These uses are allowed on properties delineated within a RAC category, ICA category or an industrial category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Athletic and health clubs. 
b.	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
c.	Bus stations. 
d.	Clinics. 
e.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
f.	Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities. 
g.	Community fairs. 
h.	Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses within this district. 
i.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
j.	Executive golf course. 
k.	Golf course, par 3. 
l.	Golf course, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
m.	Helicopter landing areas, provided that the area is fenced. 
n.	In-home day care. 
o.	Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site. 
p.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
q.	Office service and supply establishments. 
r.	Outdoor golf driving ranges. 
s.	Parking for vehicles. 
t.	Photography studios. 
u.	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments. 
v.	Private parks. 
w.	Pro shops (accessory to driving ranges/golf courses). 
x.	Radio and television stations. 
y.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
z.	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
aa.	Rest homes, personal care homes and convalescent homes. 
bb.	Studios and supplies. 
cc.	Temporary uses. 
dd.	Vocational schools (commercial). 
ee.	Wholesale trade and distribution facilities. 
ff.	Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms, display and other facilities generally accessible to the public, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 75 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for OS District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an OS district which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 30-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by city staff. 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 30-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
c.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
2.	Berms shall be stabilized. 
3.	Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
4.	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the OS district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval by the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the OS district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	Maximum floor area ratio of 0.75 for office use and 0.25 for retail use (accessory). 
b.	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
c.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
d.	No drive-in establishments are permitted. 
e.	No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
f.	No outside storage. 
g.	No bulk warehousing. 
h.	Maximum impervious surfaces: 70 percent. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 40 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this section. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of the community affairs department or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory storage buildings, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories, not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
3.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
5.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
6.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
7.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Freestanding parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height: 50 feet. 
2.	When abutting any residential property line, freestanding parking garages shall not be located within any required buffers. 
3.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no freestanding garage shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
d.	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
2.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
4.	No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
e.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
(Code 1985, § 22-139)
 
Sec. 48-154. NS Neighborhood shopping district.
The regulations for the NS neighborhood shopping district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The NS district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and services uses which are designed and oriented to serve two to four neighborhoods and are located in areas delineated within a neighborhood activity center or community activity center as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes. 
b.	Animal hospitals. 
c.	Athletic and health clubs. 
d.	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
e.	Banks and financial institutions with drive-in establishment or automated transfer machines. 
f.	Billiards and pool halls, subject to this Code. 
g.	Bus stations. 
h.	Carwashes. 
i.	Clinics. 
j.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
k.	Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities. 
l.	Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, provided that all goods stored outside shall be stored in a designated area. 
m.	Commercial recreation restaurants. 
n.	Community fairs. 
o.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
p.	Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in fast food restaurants. 
q.	Emissions and inspection stations. (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after July 1, 2009.) 
r.	Executive golf courses. 
s.	Farm and garden supply stores. 
t.	Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls. 
u.	Funeral homes. 
v.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
w.	Golf courses, par 3. 
x.	Helicopter landing areas, provided that the area is fenced. 
y.	Hospitals. 
z.	In-home day care. 
aa.	Laundry and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
bb.	Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site. 
cc.	Neighborhood retail uses. 
dd.	Nonautomotive repair service establishments. 
ee.	Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
ff.	Nursery schools and child day care centers. 
gg.	Office service and supply establishments. 
hh.	Offices not elsewhere classified. 
ii.	Parking for vehicles. 
jj.	Photography studios. 
kk.	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
ll.	Private parks. 
mm.	Pro shops, if accessory to driving ranges or golf courses. 
nn.	Professional offices. 
oo.	Radio and television stations. 
pp.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
qq.	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
rr.	Rest homes, personal care homes and convalescent homes. 
ss.	Temporary uses. 
tt.	Theaters. 
uu.	Tutoring and learning centers (See section 48-1). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 60 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for NS District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an NS district which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a 35-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should provide a 100 percent visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by city staff. 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 35-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
c.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
2.	Berms shall be stabilized. 
3.	Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
4.	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the NS district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval by the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the NS district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
g.	Hotel. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5 for office uses and 0.25 for retail uses. 
b.	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
c.	No outside storage is permitted. Within the NS district outside storage shall not include commercial vehicles or plants and shrubs. 
d.	Any emission or automotive inspection station shall be located within a permanent facility. (No temporary buildings/tents are to be utilized after July 1, 2009.) 
e.	No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
f.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
g.	Outdoor displays of merchandise: Where permitted those displays such as garden centers, home building supplies, hardware stores, general merchandise and the like, not including landscape nurseries, automotive sales and rentals or heavy equipment sales and rentals, shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.	The area displaying the merchandise shall be ancillary to the primary retail business on-site. 
2.	The location of outdoor displays must be shown on a site/construction plan approved by the building official or his designee. 
3.	Outdoor displays located in areas between the buildings and a public street or roadway shall not be located outside the required building setbacks. 
4.	The areas displaying the merchandise must be screened from any adjoining residential use or district compliant to an approved landscape plan. 
5.	Areas for outdoor display may not be located within any required buffers. 
6.	Outdoor displays may be allowed in front of the buildings but must not block sidewalks or parking areas. Outdoor displays may not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). At a minimum, a five-foot pedestrian access shall be provided. 
7.	Any temporary or seasonal sales conducted within parking spaces can be done so only within parking spaces above and beyond the required minimum for the entire retail center. 
8.	Due to safety concerns, no permanent or temporary display of merchandise shall be allowed on or adjacent to any gasoline pump island or under a canopy covering any gasoline pump island. 
h.	Maximum impervious surfaces: 70 percent. 
i.	No loading docks or facilities may be located in the front of any primary structure. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 40 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of the community affairs department or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory storage buildings, to include parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories, not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
3.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
5.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
6.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
7.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Carwashes are accessory to convenience food stores with self-service fuel. 
d.	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
2.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
4.	No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
e.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
(Code 1985, § 22-140)
 
Sec. 48-155. PSC Planned shopping center district.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The PSC district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to serve several neighborhoods making up a community. Projects developed within the PSC zoning district should be done as compact, unified centers. Projects developed within the PSC zoning district should occupy a quadrant of an intersection, with ingress and egress only from a major collector street or state highway, within an area delineated within a community activity center as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(b)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)	Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes. 
(2)	Animal hospitals. 
(3)	Arcades. 
(4)	Athletic and health clubs. 
(5)	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
(6)	Banks or financial institutions with drive-in establishment or automated transfer machines. 
(7)	Billiards and pool halls, subject to this Code. 
(8)	Building materials stores. 
(9)	Bus stations. 
(10)	Carwashes. 
(11)	Clinics. 
(12)	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
(13)	Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities. 
(14)	Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, provided that all goods stored outside shall be stored in a designated area. 
(15)	Commercial indoor recreation uses. 
(16)	Commercial outdoor recreation uses. 
(17)	Community fairs. 
(18)	Community retail uses. 
(19)	Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales, provided that the building shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area and that no automotive repairs shall be done on-site. 
(20)	Cultural facilities. 
(21)	Designated recycling collection locations. 
(22)	Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in fast food restaurants. 
(23)	Emissions or inspections stations. (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after July 1, 2009.) 
(24)	Executive golf course. 
(25)	Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent). 
(26)	Farm and garden supply stores. 
(27)	Film developing and printing facilities. 
(28)	Fraternity and sorority houses/residence halls. 
(29)	Full service gasoline stations. 
(30)	Funeral homes. 
(31)	Golf course, par 3. 
(32)	Golf course, 18-hole regulation, public or private. 
(33)	Helicopter landing areas, provided that the area is fenced. 
(34)	Hospitals. 
(35)	In-home day care. 
(36)	Laundry and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
(37)	Light automotive repair establishments. 
(38)	Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site. 
(39)	Neighborhood retail uses. 
(40)	Nonautomotive repair service establishments. 
(41)	Non-profit (seasonal use) fishing lakes. 
(42)	Nursery schools and child day care centers. 
(43)	Office service and supply establishments. 
(44)	Offices not elsewhere classified. 
(45)	Other consumer goods and services. 
(46)	Other service establishments. 
(47)	Parking for vehicles. 
(48)	Photography studios. 
(49)	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
(50)	Private parks. 
(51)	Pro shops, if accessory to driving ranges or golf courses. 
(52)	Professional offices. 
(53)	Radio and television stations. 
(54)	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
(55)	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
(56)	Rest homes, personal care homes and convalescent homes. 
(57)	Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments. 
(58)	Self-service laundry facilities. 
(59)	Studios and supplies, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
(60)	Temporary uses. 
(61)	Theaters. 
(62)	Tutoring and learning centers (See section 48-1). 
(c)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Minimum lot size: 200,000 square feet. 
(2)	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 200 feet. 
(3)	Minimum public road frontage: 100 feet. 
(4)	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for PSC District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(d)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within a PSC district which abuts residentially zoned property shall have a 40-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(1)	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
a.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
b.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
c.	Reduction of glare; 
d.	Buffering of noise; and 
e.	Establishment of privacy. 
(2)	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
a.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
b.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
c.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
d.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
e.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by city staff. 
f.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
g.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
h.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 40-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
i.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
(3)	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
a.	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
b.	Berms shall be stabilized. 
c.	Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
d.	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(e)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(f)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
(g)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(h)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the PSC district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval by the building official or his designee. 
(i)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the PSC district are the uses listed as follows: 
(1)	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
(2)	Cemeteries. 
(3)	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
(4)	Mausoleums. 
(5)	Club or lodge, private. 
(6)	Private schools of general and special education. 
(7)	Hotel. 
(j)	Use limitations. The PSC development shall meet at the minimum the following: 
(1)	The development shall be compatible with the topography of the land and shall preserve any unusual topographic or natural features. 
(2)	The development shall not adversely affect developed or undeveloped neighboring properties. 
(3)	Water, sewerage, highway and school facilities shall be adequate for the proposed development, or there shall be a definite proposal for making them so. 
(4)	Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5 for office uses and 0.25 for retail uses. 
(5)	Minimum acreage is five acres. 
(6)	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
(7)	All of the land in a PSC development shall be owned initially by an individual, corporation, partnership or some other legal entity. Individual properties in a PSC development may be sold after a final plat has been duly recorded with the properties subject to private deed covenants that ensure the continuance of the PSC development as originally approved. 
(8)	Any emission or automotive inspection station shall be located within a permanent facility. (No temporary buildings/tents are to be utilized after July 1, 2009.) 
(9)	No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
(10)	The side yard setbacks may be waived, except along the exterior boundaries of the development. 
(11)	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
(12)	A PSC development shall have ingress and egress only on a major or collector street or state highway. 
(13)	Outdoor displays of merchandise: Where permitted those displays such as garden centers, home building supplies, hardware stores, general merchandise and the like, not including landscape nurseries, automotive sales and rentals or heavy equipment sales and rentals, shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.	The area displaying the merchandise shall be ancillary to the primary retail business on-site. 
b.	The location of outdoor displays must be shown on a site/construction plan approved by the building official or his designee. 
c.	Outdoor displays located in areas between the buildings and a public street or roadway shall not be located outside the required building setbacks. 
d.	The areas displaying the merchandise must be screened from any adjoining residential use or district compliant to an approved landscape plan. 
e.	Areas for outdoor display may not be located within any required buffers. 
f.	Outdoor displays may be allowed in front of the buildings but must not block sidewalks or parking areas. Outdoor displays may not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, compliant with the ADA. At a minimum, a five-foot pedestrian access shall be provided. 
g.	Any temporary or seasonal sales conducted within parking spaces can be done so only within parking spaces above and beyond the required minimum for the entire retail center. 
h.	Due to safety concerns, no permanent or temporary display of merchandise shall be allowed on or adjacent to any gasoline pump island or under a canopy covering any gasoline pump island. 
(14)	Maximum impervious surfaces: 70 percent. 
(15)	No loading docks or facilities may be located in the front of any primary structure. 
(16)	All PSC zoning districts shall be site plan specific. Any vacant properties zoned PSC must have a site plan approved by the mayor and council. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(k)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 40 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of the community affairs department or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
(1)	Accessory storage buildings, to include parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Maximum height is two stories, not to exceed 35 feet. 
b.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
c.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
d.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
e.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
f.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
g.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
(2)	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
(3)	Carwashes as accessory to convenience food stores with self-service fuel. 
(4)	Freestanding parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Maximum height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
b.	When abutting any residential property line, freestanding parking garages shall not be located within any required buffers. 
c.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no freestanding garage shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
(5)	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
b.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
c.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
d.	No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(6)	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
(Code 1985, § 22-141)
 
Sec. 48-156. CBD Central business district.
The regulations for the CBD central business district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The CBD is established to provide locations for limited vehicular and pedestrian oriented businesses which are characteristic of the city's central businesses as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Animal hospitals. 
b.	Athletic and health clubs. 
c.	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
d.	Banks or financial institutions with drive-in establishment or automated transfer machines. 
e.	Clinics. 
f.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
g.	Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, provided that all goods stored outside shall be stored in a designated area. 
h.	Community fairs. 
i.	Community retail uses. 
j.	Cultural facilities. 
k.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
l.	Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in fast food restaurants. 
m.	Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent). 
n.	Film developing and printing facilities. 
o.	Full service gasoline stations. 
p.	Funeral homes. 
q.	Laundry and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
r.	Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site. 
s.	Nonautomotive repair service establishments. 
t.	Nursery schools and child day care centers. 
u.	Office service and supply establishments. 
v.	Offices not elsewhere classified. 
w.	Other consumer goods and services. 
x.	Other service establishments. 
y.	Photography studios. 
z.	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
aa.	Private parks. 
bb.	Professional offices. 
cc.	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
dd.	Self-service laundry facilities. 
ee.	Studios and supplies, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
ff.	Temporary uses. 
gg.	Theaters. 
hh..	Tutoring and learning centers (see section 48-1). 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 2,500 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 25 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 25 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within a CBD district which abuts residentially zoned property shall have a 15-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property. The buffer shall be subject to approval by city staff. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by city staff. 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 15-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
c.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
2.	Berms shall be stabilized. 
3.	Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
4.	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. It should be noted that there are no parking spaces within the CBD, except for the following: On new construction, development or redevelopment which exceeds 10,000 square feet the number of parking spaces will be calculated on the square footage of the building. Exempt are those properties directly facing Broad Street. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the CBD district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval by the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. There are no special exception uses for the CBD district. 
(10)	Use limitations. The CBD development shall meet at the minimum the following: 
a.	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
b.	No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
c.	No adult entertainment uses are permitted. 
d.	Outdoor displays of merchandise. Where permitted those displays such as garden centers, home building supplies, hardware stores, general merchandise and the like, not including landscape nurseries, automotive sales and rentals or heavy equipment sales and rentals, shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.	The area displaying the merchandise shall be ancillary to the primary retail business on-site. 
2.	The location of outdoor displays must be shown on a site/construction plan approved by the building official or his designee. 
3.	Outdoor displays shall not be located in areas between the buildings and a public street or roadway. 
4.	The areas displaying the merchandise must be screened from any adjoining residential use or district compliant to an approved landscape plan. 
5.	Areas for outdoor display may not be located within any required buffers. 
6.	Temporary/seasonal outdoor displays/sales may be allowed in front of the buildings but must not block sidewalks or parking areas. 
(i)	Outdoor displays may not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, compliant with the ADA. 
(ii)	At a minimum, a five-foot pedestrian access shall be provided. 
(iii)	Temporary or seasonal outdoor displays/sales events not to exceed seven days. 
(iv)	Sales events may be conducted the last week of the month during the months of March, June, September and December. 
7.	No more than five percent of the total store inventory may be displayed outside. 
8.	Those businesses located in the CBD may conduct a sidewalk or liquidation sale during the last week of the month during the months of March, June, September and December not to last more than seven days. 
9.	Due to safety concerns, no permanent or temporary display of merchandise shall be allowed on or adjacent to any gasoline pump island or under a canopy covering any gasoline pump island. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 144 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 40 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of the community affairs department or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory storage buildings, to include parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories, not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
3.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
5.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
6.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
7.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Freestanding parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
2.	When abutting any residential property line, freestanding parking garages shall not be located within any required buffers. 
3.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no freestanding garage shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
d.	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
2.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
4.	No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
e.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
(Code 1985, § 22-142)
 
Sec. 48-157. GC General commercial district.
The regulations for the GC general commercial district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The GC district is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are oriented toward automotive businesses, are land intensive with a need for major road access and visibility, and are located in areas delineated within a community activity center as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Ambulance services, if accessory to a hospital or funeral home. 
b.	Amphitheaters. 
c.	Animal hospitals. 
d.	Arcades. 
e.	Assembly halls. 
f.	Athletic and health clubs. 
g.	Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal or accessory). 
h.	Automotive paint and body repair shops. 
i.	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
j.	Automotive upholstery shops. 
k.	Banks and financial institutions with drive-in establishment or automated transfer machines. 
l.	Billiards and pool halls, subject to this Code. 
m.	Boat sales and service establishments. 
n.	Building materials stores. 
o.	Bus stations. 
p.	Carwashes. 
q.	Clinics. 
r.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
s.	Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities. 
t.	Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, provided that all goods stored outside shall be stored in a designated area. 
u.	Commercial indoor recreation uses. 
v.	Commercial outdoor recreation uses. 
w.	Commercial recreation restaurants. 
x.	Community fairs. 
y.	Community retail uses. 
z.	Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales, provided that the building shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area and that no automotive repairs shall be done on-site. 
aa.	Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses. 
bb.	Cultural facilities. 
cc.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
dd.	Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in fast food restaurants. 
ee.	Emissions or inspection stations. (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after July 1, 2009.) 
ff.	Executive golf courses. 
gg.	Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent). 
hh.	Farm and garden supply stores. 
ii.	Farm equipment stores and repair establishments. 
jj.	Farmers' markets (fully enclosed). 
kk.	Film developing and printing facilities. 
ll.	Fraternity and sorority residence halls. 
mm.	Full service gasoline stations provided that the facility shall not be located adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
nn.	Funeral homes. 
oo.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
pp.	Golf courses, par 3. 
qq.	Helicopter landing areas, provided that the area is fenced. 
rr.	Hospitals. 
ss.	In-home day care. 
tt.	Laundry and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
uu.	Light automotive repair establishments. 
vv.	Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site. 
ww.	Motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle (ATV) and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities. 
xx.	Neighborhood retail uses. 
yy.	Nightclubs. 
zz.	Nonautomotive repair service establishments. 
aaa.	Nursery schools and child day care centers. 
bbb.	Office service and supply establishments. 
ccc.	Offices not elsewhere classified. 
ddd.	Other consumer goods and services. 
eee.	Other service establishments. 
fff.	Outdoor golf driving ranges. 
ggg.	Pain clinic and pain management clinic. 
1.	No on-site dispensing of any prescription medications or controlled substances. 
2.	One parking space per 200 gross square-feet of building. 
3.	Hours of operation to be established by mayor and council, considering the operational hours of surrounding businesses. 
4.	Signage and lighting plan to be approved by city staff. 
5.	Special land use permit as provided by section 48-36. 
6.	The maximum length of approval for this use is 12 months. 
(i)	Parking for vehicles. 
(ii)	Photography studios. 
(iii)	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
(iv)	Private parks. 
(v)	Pro shops, if accessory to driving ranges or golf courses. 
(vi)	Professional offices. 
(vii)	Radio and television stations. 
(viii)	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas subject to section 48-199. 
(ix)	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
(x)	Rest homes, personal care homes and convalescent homes. 
(xi)	Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments. 
(xii)	Self-service laundry facilities. 
(xiii)	Shelters (homeless). 
(xiv)	Studios and supplies, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
(xv)	Taxi stands and taxi dispatching agencies. 
(xvi)	Temporary uses. 
(xvii)	Theaters. 
(xviii)	Tutoring and learning centers (see section 48-1). 
(xix)	Tire retreading and recapping facilities for small equipment. 
(xx)	Vending machine sales, service, rental or repair establishments. 
(xxi)	Zoos. 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 60 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for GC District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within a GC district which abuts residentially zoned property shall have a 40-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property, which will be subject to the city landscape architect's approval. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Standards. Buffers or berms shall be required when a GC district is located adjacent to a residential district; a minimum 40-foot buffer is required. 
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should provide a 100 percent visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by city staff. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 40-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)	Any appeals from a determination by city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the GC district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval by the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the GC district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
g.	Flea markets, provided that the applicant meets the requirements of this Code. 
h.	Automobile and truck sales and service facilities. 
i.	Adult entertainment establishments. 
j.	Amusement centers. 
k.	Coliseums, stadiums and convention centers (privately-owned). 
l.	Crematories, human and animal. 
m.	Drive-in theatres. 
n.	Hotel. 
(10)	Use limitations.
a.	Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5 for office uses and 0.25 for retail uses. 
b.	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
c.	Any emission or automotive inspection station shall be located within a permanent facility. (No temporary buildings/tents are to be utilized after July 1, 2009.) 
d.	No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
e.	Outdoor displays of merchandise: Where permitted those displays such as garden centers, home building supplies, hardware stores, general merchandise and the like, not including landscape nurseries, automotive sales and rentals or heavy equipment sales and rentals, shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.	The area displaying the merchandise shall be ancillary to the primary retail business on-site. 
2.	The location of outdoor displays must be shown on a site/construction plan approved by the building official or his designee. 
3.	Outdoor displays located in areas between the buildings and a public street or roadway shall not be located outside the required building setbacks. 
4.	The areas displaying the merchandise must be screened from any adjoining residential use or district compliant to an approved landscape plan. 
5.	Areas for outdoor display may not be located within any required buffers. 
6.	Outdoor displays may be allowed in front of the buildings but must not block sidewalks or parking areas. Outdoor displays may not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, compliant with the ADA. At a minimum, a five-foot pedestrian access shall be provided. 
7.	Any temporary or seasonal sales conducted within parking spaces can be done so only within parking spaces above and beyond the required minimum for the entire retail center. 
8.	Due to safety concerns, no permanent or temporary display of merchandise shall be allowed on or adjacent to any gasoline pump island or under a canopy covering any gasoline pump island. 
f.	Maximum impervious surfaces: 70 percent. 
g.	No loading docks or facilities may be located in the front of any primary structure. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(11)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 40 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of the community affairs department or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory storage buildings, to include parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories, not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
3.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
5.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
6.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
7.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Carwashes are accessory to convenience food stores with self-service fuel. 
d.	Freestanding parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
2.	When abutting any residential property line, freestanding parking garages shall not be located within any required buffers. 
3.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no freestanding garage shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
e.	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
2.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
4.	No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
f.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
(12)	Architectural requirements. It is the intent of the city to promote sustainable economic development within our commercial districts. The city community affairs department has set architectural guidelines utilizing a smart-growth based strategy plan. Architectural harmony is a significant factor in an economic revitalization plan. 
a.	Application and review process.
1.	These architectural requirements shall apply to all developments within the city general commercial zoning district as well as any accessory structures related to those developments. Compliance with the architectural requirements is required in addition to the underlying zoning regulations found within the city zoning regulations. 
2.	Redevelopment, refacing, exterior remodels and additions to existing buildings and development sites shall also comply with the provisions of these requirements. 
3.	The community affairs department director will review all development applications within the general commercial zoning district for compliance with these requirements. 
b.	Building materials.
1.	Primary building material (required). The primary building material (excluding: windows; display windows; doors; roofing; fascia or soffit materials) constituting a minimum of 60 percent of the facade shall be either: 
(i)	Brick; 
(ii)	Stone (e.g., natural/cultured, limestone, marble, or granite); 
(iii)	Split-face block; or 
(iv)	Architectural concrete, if the surface is designed to simulate brick or stone. 
2.	Prohibited exterior building materials. The following building materials shall be prohibited: 
(i)	Vinyl siding; 
(ii)	Smooth-faced gray concrete block; 
(iii)	Painted or stained concrete (including concrete block); 
(iv)	Metal siding; or 
(v)	Plastic. 
c.	Building shape and facade treatment.
1.	Base, body, and cap.
(i)	The composition of the building shall include a clearly recognizable base, body, and cap along the entire length of the facade. 
(ii)	A recognizable base shall consist of a minimum of nine percent of the vertical height of the building wall and shall be constructed of a masonry material. 
(iii)	A recognizable cap shall consist of a minimum of seven percent of the vertical height of the building wall and shall be designed with multiple three-dimensional decorative layers. 
2.	Variation in shape. Building walls shall consist of a building bay or structural building system that is a maximum of 30 feet in width. Bays shall be visually established by architectural features such as columns, ribs, pilasters or piers, changes in plane, no less than 12 inches in width and four inches in depth or an equivalent element that subdivides the wall into human scale proportions. 
d.	Animating features.
1.	Building walls shall be subdivided and proportioned using a variety of features such as windows, entrances, arcades, arbors, awnings, trellises, friezes or alternate architectural detail that defines human scale, along no less than 60 percent of the linear length of the facade. 
2.	Windows and glass doors shall be provided on a minimum of two building facades based on the highest levels of pedestrian traffic and vehicular visibility as follows: 
(i)	Ground level (first ten feet measured vertically at street level) of commercial uses under 25,000 square feet of gross main floor area: 40 percent minimum surface area. 
(ii)	Ground level (first ten feet measured vertically at street level) of commercial uses over 25,000 square feet of gross main floor area: 20 percent minimum surface area. 
(iii)	Ground level (first ten feet measured vertically at street level) of office and institutional uses: 20 percent minimum surface area. 
(iv)	Upper levels of all uses: 15 percent minimum surface area. 
(v)	Ground floor windows shall be traditional storefront style (e.g., floor/base to ceiling) and generally vertical in orientation. 
e.	Human scale design elements. Facades shall incorporate a minimum of two continuous or repeating details refined to the scale of 12 inches or less within the first 15 feet of the building facade, measured vertically from grade (e.g., quoins, change in brick pattern/belt course, decorative light fixtures, trim or molding, medallions, or sign frieze). 
f.	Colors. The number of colors used to create interest in the building architecture shall be limited to no more than three discernable colors or ranges of complementary hues. The primary color shall constitute a minimum of 60 percent of the facade (excluding: windows; display windows; doors; roofing; fascia or soffit materials). 
g.	Texture. Interest shall be added to a building facade though the use of a combination of rough, smooth, striated, or other surface textures on the primary building material or through the use of secondary building materials which vary in texture from the primary building material. 
h.	Roof treatment.
1.	Rooflines shall vary in height, material, treatment, direction, etc., and shall not extend in a continuous plane for more than 50 feet. 
2.	All sides of parapet walls visible from public view shall be finished to match the primary facade and shall extend an appropriate depth that is proportionate with the building size. 
i.	Facade modulation. For buildings greater than 25,000 square feet of gross main floor area, any wall exceeding 100 feet in length shall include at least one change in wall plane, such as projections or recesses, having a depth of at least three percent of the entire length of the facade and extending at least 20 percent of the entire length of the facade. 
j.	Shopping centers. All buildings located in a shopping center shall utilize and repeat selected architectural design requirements which are in harmony with area developments and other recent developments within the city. A master architecture plan shall be required for all shopping centers to promote consistency among buildings within a development and enhance compatibility of design and appearance requirements. A master architecture plan shall be filed and approved prior to the erection, location, or placement of any building for such shopping center. 
k.	Single use sites. All buildings located on a single use site shall utilize selected design and appearance elements which are in harmony with area developments and other recent developments within the city. 
l.	Building orientation.
1.	Shopping centers. All buildings shall be designed and oriented with a front facade toward any customer parking area, courtyard, or to the public street frontage of the shopping center. In the case of two or more public street frontages, a similar finished facade treatment shall be applied to each facade oriented toward a public street frontage. All buildings shall be oriented to each other in a similar pattern to create a unified site design and layout. 
2.	Single use sites. All buildings shall be oriented with the front facade toward the public street frontage of the site. In the case of two or more public street frontages, a similar finished facade treatment shall be applied to each facade oriented toward a public street frontage. 
m.	Fencing. All fencing located between a front lot line and the front line of the primary building shall be ornamental fencing. All fencing located along a side or rear lot line shall be black vinyl coated chain link or ornamental fencing. 
n.	Variance from architectural and site design requirements. In order to avoid undue hardship and to expedite the development approval process for commercial developments within the city, alternate compliance with any of the architectural and site design requirements contained in this article, may be heard and determined in connection with a site plan review by the director of community affairs; however, variances may only be granted upon making the following findings: 
1.	Alternate compliance with the architectural and site design requirements contained in the proposed development represents the use of (building materials, building shape and facade treatment, building orientation, signs, landscaping, lighting or open space) which will result in a development pattern which is equivalent to or superior to that achievable under the applicable regulations; 
2.	The proposed development will be compatible with and will enhance the use or value of area properties; 
3.	The proposed development is consistent with the intent of the comprehensive plan; and 
4.	The proposed development is consistent with the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations. 
All findings specified above for the granting of variance from the architectural and site design requirements shall be reduced to writing and signed by the director and retained as a part of the permanent record of the determination. 
(Code 1985, § 22-143)
 
Sec. 48-158. LI light industrial district.
The regulations for the LI light industrial district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The LI district is established to provide locations for light industrial uses such as low intensity automobile repair and service, animal care facilities, commercial greenhouses, livestock, poultry, business distribution centers, warehousing and storage, and transportation terminals, which are on properties delineated within or on the perimeter of an industrial compatible and industrial category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the LI district should provide for uses that are low in intensity and scale such as to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory retail sales and services. 
b.	Ambulance services. 
c.	Animal hospitals. 
d.	Appliance repair (major). 
e.	Assembly halls. 
f.	Automobile, truck and trailer lease or rental facilities (principal or accessory use). 
g.	Automotive paint shops and body repair shops. Such uses shall not be established on lots which are either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential districts. 
h.	Automotive parking lots and garages. 
i.	Automotive repair and maintenance facilities. 
j.	Automotive upholstery shops. 
k.	Aviation airports (private). 
l.	Boat sales and service facilities. 
m.	Breeding and boarding kennels. 
n.	Building materials stores. 
o.	Bus stations. 
p.	Bus stations for freight. 
q.	Carwashes. 
r.	Clinics. 
s.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
t.	Colleges and universities (private), including research and training facilities. 
u.	Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries. 
v.	Community fairs. 
w.	Contractors (general, heavy or special). 
x.	Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses within this district. 
y.	Dairies. 
z.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
aa.	Dry cleaning plants. 
bb.	Electrical supply stores. 
cc.	Emissions and inspection stations. (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after July 1, 2009.) 
dd.	Executive golf courses. 
ee.	Farm and garden supply stores. 
ff.	Farm equipment stores and repair facilities. 
gg.	Farmers' markets (fully enclosed). 
hh.	Fuel and ice dealers. 
ii.	Full service gasoline stations. 
jj.	Funeral homes. 
kk.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
ll.	Golf courses, par 3. 
mm.	Heavy automotive repair services and trade shops. 
nn.	Helicopter landing areas, provided that the area is fenced. 
oo.	In-home day care. 
pp.	Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations. 
qq.	Light automotive repair facilities. 
rr.	Light manufacturing establishments. 
ss.	Linen and diaper services. 
tt.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
uu.	Livestock sales pavilions. 
vv.	Medical and dental laboratories (with no limitations, except that such uses must have required federal and state permits). 
ww.	Motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle (ATV) and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities. 
xx.	Newspaper publishing facilities. 
yy.	Nonautomotive repair service establishments. 
zz.	Office service and supply establishments. 
aaa.	Other service establishments. 
bbb.	Outdoor golf driving ranges. 
ccc.	Parking for vehicles. 
ddd.	Plumbing and heating equipment dealers. 
eee.	Poultry hatcheries. 
fff.	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments. 
ggg.	Pro shops, if accessory to driving ranges or golf courses. 
hhh.	Radio and television stations. 
iii.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas subject to section 48-199. 
jjj.	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
kkk.	Research and development centers. 
lll.	Research testing laboratories. 
mmm.	Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments. 
nnn.	Self-service storage facilities (subject to section 48-202). 
ooo.	Shelters (homeless). 
ppp.	Signs and outdoor advertising facilities. 
qqq.	Taxi stands and taxi dispatching agencies. 
rrr.	Telephone business offices. 
sss.	Temporary uses. 
ttt.	Trailer salesrooms and sales lots. 
uuu.	Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities. 
vvv.	Utility facilities (private). 
www.	Vending machine sales, service, rental or repair establishments. 
xxx.	Vocational schools (commercial). 
yyy.	Warehouse and storage facilities. 
zzz.	Wholesale sales offices. 
aaaa.	Wholesale trade and distribution facilities. 
bbbb.	Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms. 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 100 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks means as shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for LI District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an LI district which abuts residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 50-foot landscaped screening buffer. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Standards. Buffers and berms shall be required when an LI district is located within or adjacent to a residential district. The minimum buffer shall be 50 feet and the maximum buffer shall be 75 feet. 
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by the city arborist or city landscape architect in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should provide a 100 percent visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by the city landscape architect or city arborist. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 50-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
(ix)	Any appeals from a determination by the city landscape architect or city arborist shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by the city landscape architect or city arborist in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is four stories or 50 feet. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the LI district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval by the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the LI district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
g.	Automobile and truck sales and service facilities. 
h.	Sawmills; tree service (temporary fire wood sales and wood service). 
(10)	Special exception uses for industrial areas only. The following uses, with the proper scrutiny and conditions, may or may not be considered as special exception uses within the LI district, only if they are within properties delineated as industrial or industrial-compatible as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. Any special exception use for industrial areas only shall adhere to the landscape buffer and screening requirements in subsection (4) of this section and the lighting requirements in subsection (8) of this section. 
a.	Amusement centers. 
b.	Crematories, human or animal. 
c.	Drive-in theaters. 
(11)	Use limitations.
a.	Maximum floor area ratio is 0.75 for office uses. 
b.	All refuse collection and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
c.	Any outside storage shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from any public right-of-way. In other cases, the setbacks as required for accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall apply. 
d.	No drive-in establishments are permitted. 
e.	No uses that emit noxious odors, fumes or sounds are permitted. 
f.	No outside runs are permitted with any veterinary office use permitted within this district. 
g.	Maximum impervious surfaces: 70 percent. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(12)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of the community affairs department or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory storage buildings, to include parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories. 
2.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
3.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
5.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
6.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
7.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
2.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
d.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Outdoor displays of merchandise shall not be seen from any public right-of-way, residential zoned area, or any open space area accessible to the public. All displayed items shall be screened by solid fences, walls, buildings, landscaping, or by any combination of screening elements, which comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 22-144)
 
Sec. 48-159. HI Heavy industrial district.
The regulations for the HI heavy industrial district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The HI district is established to provide locations for heavy industrial uses such as intensive automobile repair and service, heavy manufacturing, chemical manufacturing and storage, petroleum or petrochemical storage, and warehousing and storage, which are on properties delineated within an industrial category as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. When located on the perimeter of an industrial node, the HI district should provide for uses that are lower in intensity and scale such as to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(2)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Ambulance services. 
b.	Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes. 
c.	Animal hospitals. 
d.	Assembly halls. 
e.	Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal and accessory uses). 
f.	Automotive paint and body repair shops. Such uses shall not be established upon a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential district. 
g.	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
h.	Automotive repair and maintenance facilities. 
i.	Automotive upholstery shops. 
j.	Aviation airports (private). 
k.	Boat sales and service. 
l.	Breeding and boarding kennels. 
m.	Building materials stores. 
n.	Bus stations. 
o.	Bus stations for freight. 
p.	Carwashes. 
q.	Clinics. 
r.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
s.	Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research and training facilities. 
t.	Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, provided that all goods stored outside shall be stored in a designated area. 
u.	Community fairs. 
v.	Contractors (general, heavy or special). 
w.	Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses within this district. 
x.	Dairies. 
y.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
z.	Dry cleaning plants. 
aa.	Electrical supply stores. 
bb.	Emissions and inspections stations. (No temporary buildings/tents to be utilized after June 30, 1998.) 
cc.	Executive golf courses. 
dd.	Farm equipment stores and repair establishments. 
ee.	Fuel and ice dealers. 
ff.	Full service gasoline stations. 
gg.	Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private. 
hh.	Golf courses, par 3. 
ii.	Heavy automotive repair establishments. 
jj.	Heavy repair service and trade shops. 
kk.	Helicopter landing areas. 
ll.	In-home day care. 
mm.	Laundry and dry cleaning pickup establishments. 
nn.	Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (work done on-site). 
oo.	Light automotive repair establishments. 
pp.	Light manufacturing establishments. 
qq.	Linen and diaper services. 
rr.	Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry. 
ss.	Machine shops. 
tt.	Medical and dental laboratories (with no limitations other than state and federal regulations). 
uu.	Newspaper publishing facilities. 
vv.	Nonautomotive repair service establishments. 
ww.	Office service and supply establishments. 
xx.	Outdoor golf driving ranges. 
yy.	Parking for vehicles. 
zz.	Plumbing or heating equipment dealers. 
aaa.	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments. 
bbb.	Private parks. 
ccc.	Pro shops, if accessory to driving ranges or golf courses. 
ddd.	Radio and television stations. 
eee.	Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas, subject to section 48-199. 
fff.	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
ggg.	Research and development centers. 
hhh.	Research testing laboratories. 
iii.	Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments. 
jjj.	Self-service storage facilities (subject to section 48-202). 
kkk.	Shelters (homeless). 
lll.	Signs and outdoor advertising facilities. 
kkk.	Taxi stands and taxi dispatching agencies. 
lll.	Temporary uses. 
mmm.	Trailer salesrooms and sales lots. 
nnn.	Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities. 
ooo.	Utility facilities (private). 
ppp.	Vocational schools (commercial). 
qqq.	Warehouse and storage facilities. 
rrr.	Wholesale sales offices. 
sss.	Wholesale trade and distribution facilities, including packing of wholesale commodities for distribution, subject to the following: 
1.	Unless in a district in which manufacturing is permitted, no fabricating of goods to be sold shall be permitted. 
2.	Unless in a district in which heavy manufacturing is permitted, no wholesaling activity shall be permitted which processes the goods handled in a manner that produces liquid or solid waste or noise, odor, fumes or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which such wholesaling activity is housed. 
ttt.	Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms. 
(3)	Lot size and setback requirements. Lot size and setback requirements are as follows: 
a.	Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet. 
b.	Minimum lot width at front setback line: 150 feet. 
c.	Minimum public road frontage: 50 feet. 
d.	Minimum building setbacks: As shown and applied in the following diagram: 
Minimum Building Setback Requirements for HI District 
Note: All setbacks shall be measured from future right-of-way. 
 
Notes: 
1.	Property with shorter amount of road frontage will be the front setback for determining other setbacks (major side, side, rear). 
2.	If structure fronts a major side setback, major side setback shall be 35 feet. 
(4)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this district's requirements, any property within an HI district which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a 50-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property, which will be subject to city staff's approval. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscape buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, a buffer should maximize a visual barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
4.	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by city staff. 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 50-foot buffer should be an undisturbed buffer. 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by the city staff shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
c.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Berms shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
2.	Berms shall be stabilized. 
3.	Where possible, berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural drainage patterns. 
4.	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(5)	Floodplain and wetlands preservation requirements. Subject to the conditions set forth in the city floodplain management and prevention ordinance. 
(6)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 50 feet, with no more than four stories. 
(7)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(8)	Lighting requirements. Any project permitted within the HI district which proposes a lighted facility must have approval by the building official or his designee. 
(9)	Special exception uses. See section 48-197 for requirements for special exception uses. Special exception uses for the HI district are the uses listed as follows: 
a.	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead. 
b.	Cemeteries. 
c.	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other places of worship. 
d.	Mausoleums. 
e.	Club or lodge, private. 
f.	Private schools of general and special education. 
g.	Sawmills; tree service (temporary fire wood sales and wood service). 
(10)	Special exception uses for industrial areas only. The following uses, with the proper scrutiny and conditions, may be considered as special exception uses within the HI district, only if they are within properties delineated as industrial as defined and shown on the Austell Comprehensive Plan: Policy Guide, adopted July 2, 2007. Any special exception use for industrial areas only shall adhere to the landscape buffer and screening requirements in subsection (5) of this section and the lighting requirements in subsection (9) of this section. 
a.	Amusement centers. 
b.	Asphalt plants or concrete plants. 
c.	Automobile salvage and wrecking yards. 
d.	Automobile storage yards and wrecker services for damaged or confiscated vehicles. 
e.	Coliseums, stadiums. and convention centers (privately-owned). 
f.	Crematories, human or animal. 
g.	Drive-in theaters. 
h.	Heavy manufacturing establishments. 
i.	Mining. 
j.	Petroleum or bulk storage facilities or chemical plants or storage facilities. 
k.	Private landfills, composting centers or recycling centers. 
l.	Outdoor commercial racing (motorcycle, automobile, truck, tractor and motorized vehicles). 
(11)	Use limitations.
a.	Maximum floor area ratio is 0.5 for office uses and 0.75 for industrial uses. 
b.	All refuse and designated recycling collection location facilities must be contained within completely enclosed facilities. 
c.	No uses that exceed state and federal guidelines for allowable emissions and discharge of effluents into the air, water and soil are permitted. 
d.	No uses that create unabated noise creating a nuisance as defined under state law are permitted. 
e.	If potentially hazardous materials or chemicals are used on the premises or pollutants result from the operation under this section, a spill containment plan shall be approved by city staff. 
f.	Maximum impervious surfaces: 70 percent. 
Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities and access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
(12)	Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks. Any accessory building or structure in excess of 400 square feet of gross space shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any residential property line. Any accessory building or structure which exceeds 144 square feet of gross space must have the approval of the building official or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to commencing construction. The building official or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, style of exterior (the exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure), use of the proposed accessory structure, impact on adjacent properties, and requirements as deemed appropriate by plan review as set forth in this subsection. All accessory buildings, structures and uses in excess of 144 gross square feet shall be required to submit for plan review through the community affairs department or receive approval from the director of community affairs or his designee. Accessory structure plans must be accompanied by a signed affidavit from the property owner stating that such structure will not be used for a dwelling or commercial gain. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Accessory storage buildings, to include parking garages, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	Maximum height is two stories, not to exceed 35 feet. 
2.	Such structures shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are accessory. 
3.	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
4.	On a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
5.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no garage or other accessory building shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
6.	When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
7.	Where any nonresidential lot adjoins the side or rear of a residential lot, an accessory building shall not be located within any required buffers. 
b.	Antennas and satellite dishes, which shall meet the requirements set forth in section 48-200. 
c.	Heating and air conditioning units, subject to the following conditions: 
1.	When abutting any residential property line, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffers. 
2.	When abutting any other nonresidential district, no heating and air conditioning units shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
3.	Heating and air conditioning units may be installed on the roof of any structure zoned commercially so long as the heating and air conditioning unit does not exceed the height restrictions stated in this section and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
4.	No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
d.	Incidental storage, provided that the material stored is incidental to the permitted use, as determined by the building official or his designee, and stored completely within a portion of the enclosed principal structure permitted within the district, or within a permitted accessory structure. 
e.	Outdoor displays of merchandise shall not be seen from any public right-of-way, residential zoned area, or any open space area accessible to the public. All displayed items shall be screened by solid fences, walls, buildings, landscaping, or by any combination of screening elements, which comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 22-145)
 
Sec. 48-160. MUOD Mixed use overlay district.
The regulations for the MUOD mixed use overlay district are as follows: 
(1)	Purpose and intent. The MUOD is established to encourage, protect and enhance the pedestrian environment; encourage additional street level activity; reduce automobile trips; create a sense of community; provide for the efficient use of land and services; reduce urban sprawl; promote a smart growth based approach to development; and allow for mix of land uses which strengthens opportunities for economic growth. 
(2)	Applicability.
a.	The MUOD may only be implemented within specific geographic areas or developed corridors within the city as designated by the mayor and council. 
b.	Existing conditions of zoning which apply to MUOD properties shall remain in effect. Where such conditions conflict with any requirement of this section, the more restrictive requirement shall take precedence. Notwithstanding the above, the mayor and council may modify or dissolve pre-existing conditions of zoning upon official designation of the overlay district. 
c.	The MUOD encourages the mixing of uses both horizontally and vertically. Uses subject to approval of a special land use permit in the underlying district shall continue to require approval of the permit. 
(3)	Mixed use overlay district review. Site plan with architectural rendering required with application for MUOD designation. All MUOD projects shall be governed by an approved site plan. The site plan shall be submitted, reviewed and approved by the building official or his designee. Upon approval of the MUOD application by the building official, two public hearings will be held in accordance with the requirements as set forth for a rezoning application. 
(4)	Permitted uses. Permitted uses are as follows: 
a.	Animal hospitals. 
b.	Athletic and health clubs. 
c.	Automotive parking lots or garages. 
d.	Banks or financial institutions without drive-in establishment. 
e.	Clinics. 
f.	Clubs or lodges (noncommercial). 
g.	Community fairs. 
h.	Community retail uses. 
i.	Cultural facilities. 
j.	Designated recycling collection locations. 
k.	Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-in fast food restaurants. 
l.	Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent). 
m.	Film developing and printing facilities. 
n.	Full service gasoline stations. 
o.	Laundry and dry cleaning pickup only establishments. 
p.	Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site. 
q.	Multifamily dwelling units. 
r.	Nonautomotive repair service establishments. 
s.	Nursery schools and child day care centers. 
t.	Office service and supply establishments. 
u.	Offices not elsewhere classified. 
v.	Other consumer goods and services. 
w.	Other service establishments. 
x.	Photography studios. 
y.	Printing, publishing and lithography establishments, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
z.	Private parks. 
aa.	Professional offices. 
bb.	Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
cc.	Self-service laundry facilities. 
dd.	Single-family dwelling units. 
ee.	Studios and supplies, provided that no more than 50 percent of the total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
ff.	Temporary uses. 
gg.	Theaters. 
hh.	Townhouses. 
ii.	Tutoring and learning centers (see section 48-1). 
(5)	Density, building height, and minimum project size.
a.	Residential density shall be based upon gross project acreage, and may be developed up to a maximum of 32 units per acre. Maximum building height shall be governed by the underlying zoning district. The mayor and council may reduce maximum project density or establish increased building heights on a case-by-case basis at the time an overlay district is established. 
b.	MUOD projects shall contain a minimum of five contiguous acres of land area; except those areas of redevelopment as approved by the building official or his designee, or within the CBD. A single use may occupy no more than 70 percent of the gross site acreage (exclusive of required common area). 
(6)	Development requirements.
a.	Single-family detached on individual lots.
1.	Minimum lot area: No minimum, except that each building envelope shall contain at least 1,000 square feet outside the 100-year floodplain elevation. 
2.	Minimum lot width means the minimum lot width of all building lots shall be at least 40 feet. 
3.	Minimum road frontage per lot: 40 feet. Exception: Road frontage may be reduced to 20 feet for lots with frontage upon cul-de-sac turnarounds. 
4.	Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): Five feet. 
5.	Minimum side yard: Five feet per side (single-family detached); or ten feet one side/zero feet opposite side (zero lot-line). Note: Zero lot-line will require eight foot access/maintenance easement on the adjoining lot. 
6.	Minimum rear yard: Five feet. 
7.	Where the adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback shall increase an additional five feet for every ten-foot incremental increase in building height above 35 feet. 
8.	Sodded yards means all grassed areas shall be sodded. 
9.	Minimum garage required: Two-car garage. 
10.	The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. Where garages are front entry, the garage facade shall be recessed a minimum of four additional feet from the building line. 
11.	All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
b.	Single-family attached on individual lots.
1.	Minimum lot area: None. 
2.	Minimum lot width: 18 feet. 
3.	Minimum road frontage per lot: Zero feet. 
4.	Minimum front yard (from streets interior to the development): Zero feet. 
5.	Minimum side yard: Five feet on non-attached side. 
6.	Minimum rear yard: Five feet. 
7.	Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback shall increase an additional five feet for every ten-foot incremental increase in building height above 35 feet. 
8.	Sodded yards means all grassed areas shall be sodded. 
9.	Minimum garage required: One-car garage. 
10.	The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. 
11.	Firewalls means a minimum of a two-hour rated firewall shall be required between each attached dwelling unit. A four-hour rated firewall shall be required between every fourth attached dwelling unit. Firewalls shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable building codes of the city. 
12.	All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
c.	Residential/business dwellings.
1.	Minimum lot area: None. 
2.	Minimum unit width: 18 feet. 
3.	Minimum road frontage per lot: Zero feet. 
4.	Minimum front yard (from street interior to the development): Zero feet. 
5.	Minimum side yard: Zero feet on non-attached side. 
6.	Minimum rear yard: Zero feet. 
7.	Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback shall increase an additional five feet for every ten-foot incremental increase in building height above 35 feet. 
8.	Sodded yards means all grassed areas shall be sodded. 
9.	Minimum garage required: One-car garage. 
10.	The required garage and off-street parking must be located to the rear of at least 50 percent of all dwelling units. 
11.	The businesses shall have direct entry from the street frontage sidewalk. 
12.	All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
13.	Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-foot-high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
d.	Multifamily residences.
1.	Minimum lot area: None. 
2.	Minimum lot width: None. 
3.	Minimum road frontage: 40 feet. 
4.	Minimum front yard: Zero feet. 
5.	Maximum front yard: 15 feet, except when common area is provided between the street and building. 
6.	Minimum side yard: Zero feet. 
7.	Minimum rear yard: Zero feet. 
8.	Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback shall increase an additional five feet for every ten-foot incremental increase in building height above 35 feet. 
9.	Minimum building height: Two floors/stories. 
10.	Sodded yards means all grassed areas shall be sodded. 
11.	Parking shall be provided in designated lots/decks subject to review and approval of city staff. 
12.	All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
13.	Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-foot-high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
e.	Commercial/office/residences.
1.	Minimum lot area: None. 
2.	Minimum lot width: None. 
3.	Minimum road frontage: 40 feet. 
4.	Minimum front yard: Zero feet. 
5.	Maximum front yard: 15 feet, except when common area is provided between the street and building. 
6.	Minimum side yard: Zero feet. 
7.	Minimum rear yard: Zero feet. 
8.	Where adjacent to a required buffer, the minimum required side or rear yard setback shall increase an additional five feet for every ten-foot incremental increase in building height above 35 feet. 
9.	Sodded yards means all grassed areas shall be sodded. 
10.	Dwellings may be constructed on floors/stories above first floor nonresidential uses. 
11.	All new or relocated utilities shall be placed underground. 
12.	Dumpsters must be screened on all sides by a minimum six-foot-high brick or masonry wall with access via an opaque metal gate. 
(7)	Common area. Common area shall be provided according to the following standards: 
a.	At least 20 percent of the gross project acreage (excluding 100-year floodplain and wetland areas) shall be designated on a recorded plat as permanent common area for the use of the residents and visitors to the development. 
b.	Sidewalks and associated amenities may be credited toward common area calculations, if the sidewalk is constructed at a width of eight feet or greater and the streetscape is enhanced with decorative, commercial quality street furniture, fountains, planters, public seating or similar improvements (subject to review of streetscape design by the building official or his designee). 
c.	Landscaped strips along internal or external streets may be credited toward common area calculations, if the landscaped strip is constructed at a continuous width of 25-feet or greater. 
d.	Wetland and floodplain areas shall be preserved in their natural state, except for the installation of required detention facilities and stormwater BMPs. 
e.	Stormwater facilities may be located within common area, if designed and improved as an amenity, subject to review and approval of city staff. 
f.	Common areas shall be distributed throughout the project to proved linkages, amenities and visual appeal for the development. Final common area design shall include provisions of at least one centrally located public gathering area (with related amenities and improvements) in the form of a town green, amphitheater, landscaped plaza, or similar approved element. 
g.	Common area ownership. Common areas, stormwater facilities, floodplain and wetland areas shall be owned in fee-simple by a mandatory property owner's association or approved entity which administers a reciprocal access and maintenance agreement for the project; or other entity approved in advance by the mayor and council during their normal course of business. The developer shall record the deed to the common area prior to, or concurrent with, the recording of the first final subdivision plat or certificate of occupancy. An access easement following the alignment of future public streets is acceptable. However, pocket parks or greens may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the final subdivision plat of which it is a part. 
h.	Property owner's association. The property owner's association bylaws or covenants, at a minimum, shall contain the following provisions: 
1.	Governance of the association by the Georgia Property Owner's Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations. 
2.	Responsibility for maintenance of common areas. 
3.	Responsibility for insurance and taxes. 
4.	Automatic compulsory membership of all property owners and subsequent lot purchasers and their successors; and compulsory assessments. 
5.	Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the property owners. 
6.	Guarantee that the association will not be dissolved without the advance approval the mayor and council. 
7.	Restrict the time of deliveries to commercial businesses and dumpster pickup to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
i.	Maintenance. The property owner's association, or other entity approved in advance by the mayor and council shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance of buffers, common areas and recreation areas. 
(8)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements.
a.	A naturally vegetated, undisturbed buffer, replanted where sparsely vegetated and supplemented by an eight-foot-high solid opaque wall or fence along the interior of the buffer, shall be provided adjacent to external residential properties. Where adjacent properties are zoned or developed for single-family residential uses, a buffer of 75 feet in width shall be provided, and where adjacent properties are zoned or developed for fee-simple townhouse/condominium uses a buffer of 50 feet in width shall be provided. These minimum buffer widths may be adjusted by mayor and council at the time an overlay district is established. Buffers shall not be required adjacent to adjoining property zoned for or developed as office, institutional, commercial, industrial or multifamily uses. 
b.	The development shall comply with the requirements of the buffer requirements, landscape requirements and the city tree ordinance with the following exceptions: 
1.	Buffers shall not be required between nonresidential uses and residential uses internal to the mixed-use development. 
2.	The ten-foot-wide landscape strip shall only be required on the external roadways, and planted with approved understory trees. 
3.	All required parking lot trees shall be native straight-trunked hardwood shade trees. 
4.	Projects with the mixed-use development project shall provide, at a minimum, 20 tree density units per acre for the entire development. 
5.	Street trees shall be required along both sides of all internal and external streets spaced every 50 feet on center. Each tree shall be a minimum four inch caliper at time of planting and shall be a native straight-trunked hardwood shade tree species or similar tree suitable to this region. 
c.	Above ground planters may not be used to fulfill tree planting or tree density requirements. 
(9)	Parking. Parking for single-family detached or attached uses shall be on a per lot basis. Parking for both multifamily and nonresidential uses may be provided through a combination of on-street parking and off-street parking in surface parking lots and above or below ground parking structures. 
a.	Parking spaces shall be as required by section 48-198. 
b.	Parking for nonresidential or multifamily uses may be granted a 20 percent reduction in required parking when parking is shared between adjacent uses within the project. An additional ten percent reduction may be administratively approved by the building official or his designee. Final parking design plans shall be subject to review and approval of city staff. 
c.	Up to 50 percent of multifamily and nonresidential parking may be provided by on-street parking spaces internal to the development. Designated on-street parking spaces shall not be allowed on external streets. 
d.	Parking structures must be designed so that the only opening at street level are those to accommodate vehicle entrances and pedestrian access to the structure, as follows: 
1.	Any openings for ventilations, service or emergency access located on the first floor level in the building facade must be decorative and must be an integral part of the overall building design. 
2.	The balance of the street frontage of a parking structure must be either occupied retail/office space or designed to screen the parking areas utilizing decorative elements such as grill-work, brick, louvers, or a vegetative screen. 
3.	Deck floors located above the first floor level of a parking structure must be screened from view from the street utilizing decorative elements such as grill-work, brick or louvers (minimum 42 inches in height). In no instance will cabling alone be sufficient to meet this screening requirement. 
e.	Off-street parking areas shall be screened from adjacent roadways and sidewalks by an opaque decorative fence or wall, berm or vegetative screen at least 30 inches in height. Fence or wall shall be of similar design and materials to the surrounding buildings. Screening shall be installed between the parking area and the sidewalks. Perpendicular driveway crossings and pedestrian paths are allowed through the screening. 
f.	When the overlay district falls within the district designated as CBD the parking requirements of that district will be enacted. 
(10)	Signage. A unified signage plan, submitted for approval by the building official or his designee, shall govern all signage within the development. Signs and the amount of signage shall be subject to the requirements of the city sign ordinance with the following exceptions: 
a.	Oversized signs shall be prohibited. 
b.	Ground signs shall be limited to monument-type signs. Base and sign structures shall be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, stucco, wood or metal consistent with the architecture and exterior treatment of the building. 
c.	Blinking, exposed neon, portable, inflatable and temporary signage shall be prohibited. 
d.	Internally illuminated wall signs may not be located within 150 feet of adjacent property developed for single-family residential uses. 
(11)	Street/pedestrian lighting and street furniture.
a.	Streetlights utilizing decorative fixtures and poles shall be provided along all internal streets and along all public rights-of-way. Streetlights shall be staggered, 150 feet on center, along both sides of the street. Pedestrian scale lighting shall be provided every 50 feet along both sides of the street. The lamps of streetlights shall be directed down and capped. Pedestrian lighting shall utilize fixtures designed to accommodate a shielding plate. 
b.	Decorative, commercial-quality bike racks, benches, and trash receptacles shall be provided throughout the development in accordance with the approved pedestrian access plan. 
(12)	Architectural design. Architectural design of all buildings shall comply with the following: 
a.	For single-family detached residences: Front facades shall have architectural treatments of brick, stone, stucco or wood shake. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake or fiber-cement siding. 
b.	For attached townhouses and residential/business dwellings: Front facades shall have architectural treatments of brick, stone or stucco. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake or fiber-cement siding. 
c.	For multifamily residential buildings: Architectural treatments of each building elevation shall be a minimum 50 percent brick, stone or stucco. The balance of each elevation may be wood, wood shake, or fiber-cement siding. 
d.	For nonresidential and mixed use buildings: Architectural treatments shall be of glass or brick, stone or stucco. Tilt-up or pre-cast concrete, wood, wood shake, fiber-cement siding or architectural metal may be used subject to review and approval of the building official or his designee. Additionally: 
1.	In order to encourage and complement street level pedestrian activity, the street level facade of nonresidential buildings facing public or private streets shall incorporate varying edifice details such as trellises, windows or recessed panels suggestive of windows, door or colonnade openings, or storefronts every 20-30 linear feet. 
2.	Contrasting accent colors of any wall, awning or other feature (other than a neutral color) shall be limited to no more than 15 percent of the total area for any single facade. 
3.	Metal or portable buildings shall be prohibited. 
4.	Buildings shall incorporate live plant material growing immediately in front of or on the buildings. 
5.	Nonresidential buildings of less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be designed with pitched roofs, minimum pitch of 4:12. Portions of the roof structure may be flat to accommodate vents, mechanical systems or similar appurtenances, if adequately screened subject to review and approval of the building official or his designee. 
6.	Roofing materials for pitched or mansard roofs shall be limited to the following: 
(i)	Metal standing seam of red, green or silver in color. 
(ii)	Tile, slate or stone. 
(iii)	Wood shake. 
(iv)	Architectural shingles with slate, tile or metal appearance. 
7.	Parapets of flat roofed buildings shall be articulated to provide visual diversity. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at least every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or features shall be one foot, and may be provided in height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. The rear of parapet articulations visible from the street level view (within 300 feet) shall be finished to match the exterior architectural treatment. 
8.	Design of flat-roofed buildings shall include minimum one-foot deep cornices, extending along the entire front of the building and the sides of the building for a depth of at least ten feet. 
9.	Building design shall include a minimum one-foot-high contrasting base, extending along the entire front of buildings and the sides of buildings for a depth of at least ten feet. 
10.	All mechanical, HVAC and like systems shall be screened from street level view (within 300 feet) on all sides by an opaque wall or fence of brick, stucco, split faced block or wood. 
11.	Accessories provided such as railings, benches, trash receptacles or bicycle racks shall be of commercial quality, and complement the building design and style. 
(13)	Building plans. Building plans shall be subject to review and approval of the building official or his designee. Designs which are inconsistent with these minimum performance guidelines may be denied. The approved plan must be on file with the office of the building official before building permits will be issued. 
(Code 1985, § 22-145)
 
Secs. 48-161—48-188. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 48-189. Classification of streets.
For the purpose of this article, all of the streets, roads and highways in the city are classified as arterial, major and minor collector and local streets and state highways. 
(Code 1985, § 22-162)
 
Sec. 48-190. Vision clearance at intersections.
In all zoning districts, no fence, wall, structure, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet, except utility poles, light or street sign standards or tree trunks, shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads. 
(Code 1985, § 22-163)
 
Sec. 48-191. Nonresidential access not to cross residential property.
No nonresidential access shall cross residentially zoned property unless part of a mixed use project that has been approved on the site plan. 
(Code 1985, § 22-165)
 
Sec. 48-192. Setbacks for gasoline pumps and canopies.
Within any zoning district which allows for gasoline pumps and canopies (attached or detached) covering the pumps, pumps and canopies shall be set back at least 15 feet from the future right-of-way. Any permanent building, whether or not attached to a canopy, must be located within the required building setbacks. Within any zoning district which allows for freestanding carwashes, canopies that cover any vehicles being washed on-site must be permitted (thru both the site plan review and structural review process and subject to the landscape enhancement strip provisions contained in section 48-204) as a permanent structure requiring a footing or foundation to which the canopy is structurally attached, capable of supporting a pre-designed load withstanding wind and other natural forces as may be further defined in this article, including structural calculations as prepared and certified by a professional designer licensed to practice in the state and as distinguished from a temporary canopy or tent and the like (temporary canopies or tents are prohibited). When permitted, these canopies must be at least 15 feet from the future right-of-way. Canopies originally constructed to cover gasoline pumps may be utilized as canopies covering vehicles being washed on-site, provided that they shall be set back at least 15 feet from the future right-of-way. Canopies, whether permitted as a permanent structure or pre-existing as described above, may not be used for signage purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 22-166)
 
Sec. 48-193. General development standards.
(a)	Prerequisites for moving building. No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be moved within or into the city unless, when relocated, it meets all requirements of this article and requirements of this Code and is approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)	Height offences and walls. No fence or freestanding wall other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight feet in height, or be constructed in a public right-of-way or future street right-of-way. If a fence is adjacent to a public road right-of-way and within the required setback in a residential district such fence shall not exceed six feet in height and shall further meet the requirements set forth in section 48-190. The required height limitation (which includes posts and ornaments on top of fence) must be met on both sides of fence, and measured from the existing grade upon which it is erected. 
(c)	Open space. Open space area required to be established by this article shall be permanently maintained as open space and appropriately landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stones, rocks or other landscaping materials. Such areas may not be used for vehicular access, parking or similar uses, except as otherwise permitted in this article. 
(d)	Required fences to be completed prior to occupancy. When this article requires a fence to be constructed, such fence shall be completed prior to occupancy of the primary use structure. 
(e)	Site plan preparation. Site plans and other development plans required to be submitted under the provisions of this article shall be prepared only by those currently registered for such work in accordance with applicable state law. No plans for structures shall be prepared by other than a currently state-registered engineer. 
(f)	Compliance with other regulations. Any development sought to be constructed or built under the existing zoning requirements shall meet or exceed all applicable development codes and regulations of the city, the state and federal law, as amended from time to time, including, but not limited to, the subdivision regulations for the city, the floodplain management and prevention ordinance of the city, and the city sign ordinance. 
(g)	Footings survey.
(1)	On any development, prior to obtaining a building permit, the developer or builder must file a copy of a current plat and survey of the property signed by a registered land surveyor providing such information as shall be required from the city. 
(2)	Prior to commencing pouring of footings, it shall be the responsibility of the builder or developer to accurately and clearly flag all pin corner boundaries prior to the conduct of any footings inspection. Should the developer or builder desire to place the footing within five feet of the applicable building setback line, then the builder or developer shall provide a footings (foundation) survey signed by a registered land surveyor showing the footing location and the outer perimeter of the proposed structure. The failure to provide such a footing survey shall be a primary consideration in whether or not the board of variance and zoning appeals may dispose of a variance application. 
(h)	Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act. Assurances of compliance with the ADA, including the ADA as it may be amended from time to time, will be given to the city by all development applicants. 
(i)	Outdoor displays of merchandise. Where outdoor displays of merchandise are permitted as part of a retail or service establishment (as distinguished from a sales, contractor or supply operation dealing in material or merchandise that is intended for storage or display outdoors) in any nonresidential zoning district, the following minimum requirements shall apply: 
(1)	The area displaying the merchandise shall be limited to an area no greater than 20 percent of the total lot area. 
(2)	The location of the outdoor display of merchandise must be shown on a plan approved by the zoning division manager or his designee. 
(3)	The area displaying the merchandise must be screened from any contiguous residentially zoned property. 
(4)	The area displaying the merchandise may not be located within any required buffers. 
(5)	The area displaying may be within designated parking spaces, if the spaces are above and beyond the minimum required. 
(6)	The area displaying merchandise shall not impede vehicular traffic within the site, nor shall it prohibit or disrupt traffic entering or exiting the site from or to public rights-of-way, nor shall it impede adequate site distance to vehicles entering or exiting the site to or from public rights-of-way. 
(7)	The area displaying the merchandise shall not impede pedestrian traffic within the site, particularly any sidewalks or pedestrian areas designed in accordance with the ADA. 
(8)	These requirements shall apply to peddlers as defined and regulated in sections of this Code. 
(j)	Limitation on utility meters in certain residential zoning districts. Single-family residential zoning districts shall be limited to a maximum one gas meter and one electrical meter per lot. This requirement shall apply to the R-80, RR, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-10, PUD, RA-6 and MHP zoning districts. Additionally, this requirement shall apply to the RSL, RM-8 and RM-12 zoning districts when developed for single-family detached uses. Application may be made to the board of variance and zoning appeals for a variance to allow more than one electrical or gas meter per lot. 
(Code 1985, § 22-167)
 
Sec. 48-194. Determination of unclassified uses; purpose; intent.
In the event an applicant wishes to use property for a use which is not specifically identified under inherent uses, or uses allowed from the approval of a special land use permit, and where such use is not specifically prohibited from the district, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	The applicant shall submit to the community affairs director a written request for a determination of the unclassified use. 
a.	The director shall review the request as submitted and determine if the proposed use is of a similar character to the district in which it is proposed. 
b.	If the director determines that the use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the uses permitted inherently within the district, then the applicant shall apply for a special land use permit subject to approval in the normal manner. 
(2)	If the director is unable to make the determination within 14 days or the applicant chooses to appeal the director's decision, the following procedure shall apply: 
a.	The director shall submit to the planning and zoning board and city attorney a written request for a determination of the unclassified use at the next regularly scheduled planning and zoning board meeting. 
b.	The planning and zoning board and city attorney shall review the request as submitted and determine if the proposed use is of a similar character to the district in which it is proposed. 
c.	If the planning and zoning board and city attorney determine that the use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the uses permitted inherently within the district, they shall instruct the director to allow the use. 
d.	In the event the planning and zoning board and city attorney determine the proposed use in the district is consistent with the character and intent of a special land use permit inherently within the district, then the applicant shall apply for a special land use permit subject to approval in the normal manner. 
(3)	In no event shall the provisions of this article be used to allow an incompatible use or a use specifically prohibited by this article within a certain zoning district. 
(4)	Once a use has been allowed or disallowed by the planning and zoning board and or director, it shall then be considered classified under the appropriate category in the district. 
(Code 1985, § 22-168)
 
Sec. 48-195. Lighting plan.
(a)	Lighting plans shall be drawn to scale and shall show the location of all proposed lights and nearby city roads and adjacent properties and the following information: 
(1)	Arrangement of all poles (with dimensions); 
(2)	Height of all poles; 
(3)	Number of luminaries per pole; 
(4)	Mounting heights of luminaries; 
(5)	Wattage of proposed lights; 
(6)	Mounting angle of fixtures; and 
(7)	Lamp source to be used. 
(b)	A picture of the light to be utilized must be attached to the final plans. Care must be exercised to control any stray light that might trespass upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(c)	All required parking spaces must be adequately lit during non-daylight hours. 
(d)	These are minimum requirements, based on the city street lighting ordinance or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 22-169)
 
Sec. 48-196. Golf courses.
Requirements for golf courses are as follows: 
(1)	Standards.
a.	Par 3 golf course. The following standards shall apply to par 3 golf courses: 
1.	Minimum lot size: Nine holes, 20 acres; 18 holes, 40 acres. 
2.	Minimum course yardage: Nine holes, 1,750 yards; 18 holes, 3,500 yards. 
3.	Minimum public road frontage: 100 feet. 
4.	Minimum building, driving range, fairway, clubhouse and pro shop setbacks: 50 feet from future public road right-of-way; 75 feet from property lines. 
b.	Public golf course orsemipublic golf course. The following standards shall apply to public golf courses and semipublic golf courses: 
1.	Minimum lot size: 125 acres. 
2.	Minimum course yardage: 6,000 yards. 
3.	Minimum public road frontage: 100 feet. 
4.	Minimum building, driving range, fairway, clubhouse, pro shop and hole setbacks: 50 feet from future public road right-of-way; 75 feet from property lines. 
c.	Private golf course. The following standards shall apply to private golf courses: 
1.	Minimum lot size: 115 acres. 
2.	Minimum course yardage: 5,500 yards. 
3.	Minimum public road frontage: 100 feet. 
4.	Minimum building, driving range, fairway, clubhouse and pro shop setbacks: 50 feet from future public road right-of-way and 75 feet from property lines, unless the property is developed in connection with a residential subdivision. In such cases, the overall plan shall be approved by the division manager of zoning or his designee. 
d.	Executive golf course. The following standards shall apply to executive golf courses: 
1.	Minimum lot size: 65 acres. 
2.	Minimum course yardage: 4,000 yards. 
3.	Minimum public road frontage: 100 feet. 
4.	Minimum building, driving range, fairway, clubhouse and pro shop setbacks: 50 feet from future public road right-of-way; 75 feet from property lines. 
e.	Regulation public nine-hole course. The following standards shall apply to regulation public nine-hole courses: 
1.	Minimum lot size: 65 acres. 
2.	Minimum course yardage: 3,000 yards. 
3.	Minimum public road frontage: 100 feet. 
4.	Minimum building, driving range, fairway, clubhouse and pro shop setbacks: 50 feet from future public road right-of-way; 75 feet from property lines. 
(2)	Safety netting. Safety netting of not less than 32 feet in height shall be placed along the perimeter of the golf course playing area which abuts any public road frontage. 
(3)	Landscape buffer and screening requirements. Unless otherwise noted within this section, any golf course developed in accordance with this section which abuts residentially zoned property shall have a 25-foot landscaped screening buffer adjacent to all residentially zoned property, subject to city staff approval. 
a.	Objectives. Undisturbed, planted landscape buffers and berms shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screen objectionable views and enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direct vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduce glare; 
4.	Buffer noise; and 
5.	Establish privacy. 
b.	Standards.
1.	Buffers. Landscape buffers are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Plantings are to be a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs. 
(ii)	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
(iii)	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, the buffer should provide a maximum barrier to a height of six feet within two years of planting. 
(iv)	Minimum height of plant materials at installation is five feet for trees and two feet for shrubs. 
(v)	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height or as determined by city staff. 
(vi)	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
(vii)	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owner to ensure that the objectives and standards set out in this subsection are met. 
(viii)	When any golf course developed in accordance with this section abuts a residential district, a minimum 25-foot buffer is required. When topography and existing conditions allow, this 25-foot buffer should be undisturbed. If topography and existing conditions do not allow for an undisturbed buffer, then the 25-foot buffer shall be a planted, landscaped, maintained buffer. 
2.	Berms. Berms are subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)	Berm shall be utilized when consistent with surrounding property features. 
(ii)	Berms shall be stabilized. 
(iii)	Berms shall be constructed to be consistent with natural or proposed drainage patterns. 
(iv)	Berms shall be regularly maintained by the property owner. 
(4)	Building and structure requirements. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
(5)	Parking requirements. See section 48-198 for paved parking specifications. 
(6)	Lighting requirements. Any golf course and accessory uses permitted in accordance with this section which proposes a lighted facility must have a city-approved lighting plan in accordance with the minimum conditions listed in section 48-195. 
(7)	Use limitations.
a.	The maximum size for a pro shop or clubhouse associated with par 3 or executive golf courses is 2,000 square feet. 
b.	The maximum size for a clubhouse or pro shop for an 18-hole public or private regulation golf course is 40,000 square feet. 
c.	Loudspeakers are not allowed if adjacent to residential districts. 
d.	No advertising of retail sales is permitted when located within a residential category as defined by the city comprehensive land use plan. 
e.	Any structure used in conjunction with this use shall be subject to the site plan and architectural requirements presented at the time of zoning. 
f.	No outside lighting of a golf course is permitted when the course is located within or adjacent to a residential district. However, accessory uses approved by the mayor and council in an internal location not less than 100 feet from any residential property line may be lighted in accordance with section 48-195. 
(8)	Accessory structures and uses. Permitted accessory structures and uses are as follows: 
a.	Buildings used to house equipment solely for the maintenance and operation of the golf courses, not to exceed 3,000 square feet in size. 
b.	Professional teaching and lessons. 
c.	Golf club and ball rental. 
d.	Pro shop. 
e.	Tennis courts (two acres required in addition to required golf course acreage). 
f.	Swimming pools (one acre required in addition to required golf course acreage). 
g.	Driving range (eight acres required in addition to required golf course acreage). 
(Code 1985, § 22-170)
 
Sec. 48-197. Special exceptions.
The following uses are permitted as special exception uses, provided the conditions listed are met and they are located in the allowable zoning district. The mayor and council or their designee shall issue a certificate of special exception to an applicant when the conditions relating to the special exception have been met. 
(1)	Amusement centers, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum acreage is five acres. 
b.	Such use shall not be located closer than 500 feet to any school property. 
c.	Such use shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any residential property line. 
d.	An overall parking and landscape plan shall be approved by city staff. The plan will provide for safe and efficient vehicle and pedestrian circulation and aesthetics. 
(2)	Any other facility for the disposal of the dead, provided all requirements for a cemetery have been satisfied. 
(3)	Adult entertainment establishments (including adult novelty shops), with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Must obtain a special land use permit. 
b.	Must be located at least 1,500 feet between any residence, school, church or any educational facility. 
(4)	Asphalt plants or concrete plants, subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.	A special land use permit is required. 
b.	Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws is required. 
c.	All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained. 
d.	A spill containment plan shall be approved by city staff. 
e.	Minimum acreage is five acres. 
f.	No use shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any residential dwelling or school. 
g.	Hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours. 
h.	Noise abatement and air pollution abatement plans shall be approved by city staff. 
(5)	Automobile and truck sales and service facilities: 
a.	Minimum of one acre of a paved surface is required for parking of vehicles, excluding any area used for, but not limited to, buildings, offices, service or sales area: 
b.	If any entity sells more than three cars per year, they are considered a dealer which requires a city business license. 
c.	A special land use permit is required. 
d.	All vehicles are required to be parked off any right-of-way or easement. 
e.	Must have a minimum of 1,500 feet between any other similar businesses. 
(6)	Automobile title pawns must have a minimum of 1,500 feet between any other similar businesses. 
(7)	Automobile salvage and wrecking yards, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	A special land use permit is required. 
b.	Such use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than eight feet in height which provides visual screening. 
c.	No such activity may be conducted within 100 feet of any property line or 200 feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
d.	The incidental sale of auto parts removed from cars on the site shall be permitted. 
(8)	Automobile storage yards and wrecker services for damaged or confiscated vehicles, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Such use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than eight feet in height which provides visual screening. 
b.	No dismantling, repair or other such activity shall be conducted. 
c.	Such use shall be located at least 40 feet from any residential district or use. 
d.	Such automobiles shall not be held longer than provided by state and city law. 
e.	A special land use permit is required. 
f.	Must have a minimum of 1,500 feet between any other similar businesses. 
(9)	Biomedical waste disposal facilities or hazardous waste sites, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	A spill containment plan shall be approved by city staff. 
b.	Such use shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to any residential dwelling or school. 
c.	A special land use permit is required. 
d.	Such use shall be carried on within an enclosed building, with no outside storage of any materials or biomedical waste, except for vehicles used for the operation. 
e.	All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained. 
f.	Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws is required. 
g.	Minimum acreage is five acres. 
h.	The facility must be designed with an impervious liner. 
i.	The facility must have an on-site water purification system which returns water to a potable condition. 
(10)	Cemeteries for human or animal interment, with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum lot size is ten acres. 
b.	Minimum public road frontage is 100 feet. 
c.	When abutting any residential property line, a 50-foot natural or landscaped buffer shall be approved by city staff (see landscaping standards). 
d.	Permanent public ingress and egress shall be provided. 
e.	Compliance with all state requirements is required. 
f.	An overall parking and landscaping plan shall be approved by city staff. 
(11)	Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues and other such places of worship when located within the R-80, RR, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-10, RD, PUD, RA-6, RM-8, FST, RM-12 and MHP districts with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum lot size is five usable acres, excluding floodplain. 
b.	Primary access to the facility shall be from an arterial or major collector roadway. 
c.	Structures associated with the use shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
d.	Structures associated with the use shall be limited to 55 feet in height. 
e.	When abutting any residential property line, a 35-foot landscaped screening buffer shall be approved by city staff (see landscaping standards). 
f.	An overall parking and landscape plan for the entire site shall be approved by city staff. 
g.	One paved parking space shall be provided per four seats in the principal place of worship, provided that the number of spaces thus required may be reduced by not more than 50 percent if the place of worship is located within 500 feet of any public parking lot or any commercial parking lot where sufficient spaces are available by permission of the owner without charge, during the time of services, to make up the additional spaces required. 
h.	A lighting plan shall be approved by the building official or his designee in accordance with section 48-195. 
i.	A church may have an accessory cemetery with the following minimum requirements: 
1.	Minimum lot size is two usable acres for a cemetery in addition to the five-acre requirement for a church. 
2.	When abutting any residential property line, a 50-foot natural or landscaped buffer shall be approved by city staff (see landscape standards). 
3.	Ingress and egress shall be provided. 
4.	Compliance with all state requirements is required. 
j.	A church may have an accessory school with the following minimum requirements: 
1.	Minimum lot size is three usable acres for a school in addition to the five-acre requirement for a church. 
2.	Minimum public road frontage is 100 feet. 
3.	An overall parking and landscape plan for the entire site shall be approved by city staff. 
4.	One paved parking space shall be provided per every one full-time employee of the accessory school in addition to required parking for the principal church use. 
k.	A SLUP is required for all zoning districts. 
(12)	Club or lodge, private, when located within the R-80, RR, R-40, R-30, R-20, R-15, R-10, RD, PUD, RA-6, RM-8, FST, RM-12 and MHP districts with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum lot size is five usable acres, excluding floodplain. 
b.	Primary access to the facility shall be from an arterial or major collector roadway. 
c.	Structures associated with the use shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
d.	Structures associated with the use shall be limited to 45 feet in height. 
e.	When abutting any residential property line, a 35-foot landscaped screening buffer shall be approved by city staff (see landscaping standards). 
f.	An overall parking and landscape plan for the entire site shall be approved by city staff. 
g.	One paved parking space shall be provided for every four seats in the designated assembly area, plus one per employee. In the absence of designated assembly areas, one paved space shall be provided per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
h.	A lighting plan shall be approved in accordance with section 48-195. 
(13)	Coliseums, stadiums and convention centers (privately-owned), subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum acreage is ten acres. 
b.	A special land use permit is required. 
c.	A traffic and parking plan shall be approved by the city staff. 
d.	Hours of operation shall be approved by the mayor and council at the time of the special land use permit public hearing. 
e.	A noise abatement plan shall be approved by the mayor and council at time of the special land use permit public hearing. 
(14)	Drive-in theaters, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum acreage is two acres. 
b.	Driving and parking areas shall be paved. 
c.	The theater screen, projection booth or other buildings shall be set back not less than 50 feet from any property line (unless the front setback is greater). 
d.	The theater screen shall not be visible from an expressway, arterial or major collector roadway. 
e.	No damaged or confiscated vehicles shall be stored on-site. 
(15)	Extended stay motel and hotel, with the minimum requirements: 
a.	Must obtain a special land use permit. 
b.	A 75-foot buffer shall be provided where it abuts single-family residential and a six foot fence, or wall, placed on the property line. 
c.	Required area, yards, height requirements shall be the same as those specified for RM-12. 
d.	Distance between building structures: Building structures which are front face to front face or back face to back face shall be not less than 60 feet apart. Building structures which are side face to side face shall be not less than 30 feet apart. Building structures which are side face to front face or back face shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
e.	Arrangement of buildings: No building structure shall be situated so as to face the rear of another building structure within the development or on adjoining properties, unless differences in terrain and elevation would provide effective visual separation or unless the units are more than 60 feet apart. 
f.	Structure length: Building structures shall not exceed 250 feet in length. 
g.	Recreation area: One acre of land shall be set aside as open space and be developed for recreational purposes for each 50 building units planned for the development in accordance with the assumed needs of the occupants (or a proportionate percentage for less than 50 building units). The minimum size of a single recreational area shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(16)	Heavy manufacturing establishments, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	A special land use permit is required. 
b.	Such use shall not be located closer than 500 feet to any residential property line. 
c.	Such use shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building, with no outside storage, except for vehicles used for the operation. 
d.	All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained. 
e.	Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws is required. 
(17)	Hotel, subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.	A special land use permit is required. 
b.	Minimum acreage is two acres. 
c.	All rooms shall be accessed through a main or central lobby. 
d.	No rooms shall access to the exterior of the building unless required by fire/safety regulations. 
e.	The minimum number of floors allowed shall be three floors, unless otherwise approved by the mayor and council. 
f.	Architectural style/design to be approved by the mayor and council. 
g.	All buildings shall have a minimum roof pitch of 4:12 as defined by applicable building codes. 
h.	Conference, meeting or banquet facilities are allowed when supported by adequate parking and approved by the mayor and council as part of the special land use permit. 
i.	Restaurants or other type of eating facilities are allowed when supported by adequate parking and approved by the mayor and council. Continental-style dining for the guests of the facility only is allowed within or near the main or central lobby without additional parking. 
j.	At a minimum, provisions for weekly cleaning for each suite must be provided. 
k.	Each suite must be protected with a smoke detector and sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal or his designee. 
l.	Each suite shall be required to include an automatic power off timer for each stove/cook top unit or other type burner. 
m.	Parking shall be calculated as one space required for each suite, with an additional ten spaces provided for employees. Parking requirements for conference, meeting or banquet facilities or restaurants or other type of eating facilities within a suite hotel shall be calculated as provided for each use in section 48-198, in addition to the above parking requirements and approved by the mayor and council. 
n.	There shall be no outside storage allowed or long-term parking of heavy equipment, or parking of construction or related equipment allowed. 
o.	A landscaping plan is to be approved by staff with emphasis on planting within the parking facilities. 
p.	No facility under this section is to be converted or used primarily as an apartment or condominium. 
(18)	Mausoleums when used in conjunction with a cemetery provided that all requirements for the cemetery have been satisfied. 
(19)	Mining, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Removal or extraction of dirt, sand and soil is subject to the following: 
1.	The removal area shall be completely enclosed with a fence not less than six feet in height when considered necessary by the building official. 
2.	Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit. 
3.	Such uses shall not be established within 500 feet of a residential use or 200 feet of any other use. 
4.	This subsection shall not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district done for land development purposes. 
b.	Removal or extraction of rock and gravel is subject to the following: 
1.	The removal area shall be sealed by fencing or grading or some other device from general public access. All entrances shall be fenced and locked during non-business hours. 
2.	Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit. 
3.	The operational and removal area of such uses shall not be established within 4,000 feet of a residential use or 2,000 feet of any other use. 
c.	No mining shall be allowed, except after advertisement of a public hearing by the board of zoning and variance appeals for the purpose of determining whether or not any adverse effect would result to surrounding property owners and whether or not a nuisance, as defined by state law, would be created. 
(20)	Outdoor commercial racing of motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, tractors and motorized vehicles, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	A special land use permit is required. 
b.	All necessary state and federal permits, if any, shall be obtained. 
c.	A traffic impact study must be submitted with the application. 
d.	No damaged vehicles shall be stored on-site for more than seven days. 
e.	A noise abatement plan and air pollution abatement plan shall be approved by city staff. 
f.	Hours of operation shall be limited as per the city noise ordinance. 
(21)	Pawnshops and check cashing establishments, with the following requirements: 
a.	Must obtain a special land use permit. 
b.	Must have a minimum of 1,500 feet between any other similar businesses. 
(22)	Petroleum or bulk storage facilities or chemical plants or storage facilities, subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.	A special land use permit is required. 
b.	Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws is required. 
c.	All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained. 
d.	A spill containment plan shall be approved by city staff. 
e.	Minimum acreage is five acres. 
f.	No use shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any residential dwelling or school. 
g.	Hours of operation shall be limited to daylight hours. 
h.	Noise abatement and air pollution abatement plans shall be approved by city staff. 
i.	A fire prevention, evacuation and safety plan shall be approved by the fire marshal. 
(23)	Private landfills, composting centers or recycling centers, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
a.	A special land use permit is required. 
b.	All necessary state and federal permits shall be obtained. 
c.	Compliance with all applicable state and federal laws is required. 
d.	Such facilities shall only be allowed in a heavy industrial zoning district, provided that the mayor and council may grant a variance for filling of a specific natural land depression provided such fill shall not include garbage or other materials subject to decomposition. 
e.	Such facilities shall be approved by the mayor and council after public hearing. Both a development permit from the building official and written approval of the health department shall be issued before any landfill operation begins. 
f.	Such facilities shall be allowed only in areas incapable of development without landfill operations as determined by the building official. 
g.	No hazardous wastes as defined by state and federal law shall be disposed or discharged into the landfill site. 
h.	No garbage shall be disposed of within 2,000 yards of the public highway, a residence, or any gathering place unless approved by the mayor and council. 
i.	Truck traffic routes and entrances to the facility shall be approved by the traffic engineer. 
j.	The sanitary landfill site must be accessible without travel over residential streets. 
k.	All sanitary landfills shall have and keep on their premises in good working order a crawler-type tractor equipped with either a straight blade bulldozer, an angle blade bulldozer, a scraper (eight cubic yards or larger), a front end loader, a bull clam, or other attachments of a similar nature. The combined weight of such tractor and accessories as set forth in this subsection shall be not less than 18,000 pounds. 
l.	All sanitary landfills hereafter established or operated shall be enclosed with a fence at least six feet high with openings therein not more than those in two-inch mesh wire, or some other similar fencing materials or device. Such fencing shall be adequate to prevent paper and similar or related refuse from blowing from the landfill onto neighboring property. 
m.	All sanitary landfills shall have an operator in attendance at all times when the fill is in use, and such fill must be barricaded when closed to the public. 
n.	Any changes in the normal drainage of the property upon which the sanitary fill is located shall be accommodated by storm sewers as necessary to properly care for drainage. Such storm sewers shall be installed at the expense of the user. 
o.	All operators of sanitary landfills must pack and cover daily all materials placed thereon with at least six inches of earth in such a manner as to prevent fires and meet any and all other requirements of the fire code. All completed landfills must be covered with at least two feet of earth. Burning of any kind of refuse on the landfill is prohibited. 
p.	This section shall not prohibit the dumping for disposal by burial of dry waste building materials concurrently with and on the same property as a structure under construction. Such waste shall be covered with at least two feet of earth before occupancy of the structure, but no such waste may be buried within 20 feet of any structure, drainage easement or drainfield. 
(24)	Private schools of general and special education with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Minimum lot size is five acres. 
b.	Minimum public road frontage is 100 feet. 
c.	An overall parking and landscape plan for the entire site shall be approved by city staff. 
d.	One paved parking space shall be provided for every person lawfully permitted within the assembly areas at one time, plus one per employee. In the absence of designated assembly areas, one paved space shall be provided per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(25)	Sawmill (temporary), firewood dealers or similar businesses with the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Must be located a minimum 500 feet from any residentially zoned property. 
b.	Must maintain a visual buffer, either natural or manmade, so as to be screened from residential property. 
c.	Any area where parking is needed for equipment, vehicles or trucks, they must be on a paved surface. 
(26)	Tattoo parlors, with the following requirements: 
a.	Must obtain a special land use permit. 
b.	Must have a minimum of 1,500 feet between any other similar businesses. 
(Code 1985, § 22-171)
 
Sec. 48-198. Traffic and parking.
Each use shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Street access generally. Each building shall be located on a lot or parcel which abuts a public street for at least 50 feet. Access to a public street by means of a recorded access easement may be permitted if approved by city engineer. 
(2)	Curb cuts in districts other than R districts. Curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits and other similar facilities on public streets in other than R districts shall not be located within 50 feet of any intersection or within 40 feet of another curb cut. A curb cut shall be no greater than 40 feet in width and no closer than 20 feet to any property line. 
(3)	Approval of entrances and exits on state highways. All entrances or exits of any street or drive, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state highway department prior to the construction of such street or drive, or the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive, but permit approval shall not be withheld longer than 30 days. 
(4)	Corner visibility clearance. In any district, no fence, structure, sign, planting or other obstruction above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
(5)	Off-street automobile parking. Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
a.	Design standards. All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.	All parking design standards shall meet the requirements set forth in the city development regulations. 
2.	Such facilities shall have access to a public street. 
3.	Such facilities, including access drives, shall be graded and paved, and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control. 
4.	Such facilities shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curbstones or other similar designations. 
5.	Spaces and drives shall conform to the following standards: 
(i)	Each space set at a 90-degree angle shall be not less than 162 square feet in size and shall not be less than eight feet, six inches wide and 19 feet deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than 24 feet wide. 
(ii)	Each space set at a 60-degree angle shall be not less than 176 square feet in size and shall be not less than eight feet, six inches wide and 20 feet, eight inches deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than 18 feet six inches wide. 
(iii)	Each space set at a 45-degree angle shall be not less than 165 square feet in size and shall be not less than eight feet, six inches wide and 19 feet, five inches deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than 13 feet, six inches wide. 
(iv)	There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street. 
6.	Such facilities shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. 
7.	Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. Such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties and shall be subject to the lighting requirements in section 48-195. 
8.	Any parking areas within the required front yard of any RM or office district shall not be closer than ten feet to any public right-of-way. 
9.	No parking or loading area shall be established in the required front yard of any R district, except for a single-family residential use; no more than 35 percent of the required front yard may be used for parking in such case. No tractor trailers or heavy equipment shall be allowed to park in any residential district. 
The provisions of subsections (5)a.2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 of this section shall not apply to single-family residential uses where three or less spaces are required. 
b.	Location. All parking facilities shall be located in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.	The required space shall be provided on the same plot with the use it serves, except as provided in this section. 
2.	If vehicular parking or storage space required cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the board of variance and zoning appeals may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such vehicular parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
3.	The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sunday may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
4.	In the R-30, R-20, R-15, R-10, RD, and RA-6 districts, only one vehicle, one boat and one recreational vehicle (or any combination of such totaling three) may be parked in the rear and side yard areas but shall not be beyond the front building line and must be parked on a hardened surface. 
5.	In the R-40, R-80 and RR districts, any combination of boats and recreational vehicles exceeding three must be screened from public roadways via a buffer (approved by city staff) or fencing. 
c.	Surfacing. The parking of any vehicle on any lot in any district other than a surface treated and hardened with concrete, asphalt, tar and gravel mix, or the like, to accommodate such vehicle, is prohibited, except as provided in this section. (All tires of vehicle must be on hardened surface.) The required number of surface treated and hardened parking spaces for any use or number of separate uses may be reduced via an administrative variance per section 48-34, if: 
1.	The reduced number of spaces is provided on a pervious surface approved by the building official or his designee; or 
2.	Documentation is submitted and approved by city staff that indicates a reduced number of spaces is sufficient for the use or combination of uses provided that the area remains in a natural state or is landscaped. 
This reduction shall not allow for any increase in square footage of any use or number of separate uses. In addition, parking of vehicles within the front yard setback or in front of the principal building line in an R district shall be prohibited, except on a hardened surface with concrete, asphalt, tar and gravel mix, or the like, driveway or in a carport or garage. (For the purpose of this section only, the use of concrete blocks, pavers, runners or the like, used as a treated and hardened surface, must be installed permanent and not loosely on top of the ground.) 
d.	Off-street truck, RV, or trailer parking.
1.	There shall be no parking in residential areas either on- or off-street of any form of tractor-trailer truck or any other truck (either in part or whole). The on-street parking of boats, boat trailers, campers, utility trailers, etc., is prohibited. 
2.	Tractor trailers of any form, either in part or whole, shall be prohibited from parking in any business district, except for heavy industrial zoned areas over night or prohibited from being used for storage, except for those trucks used to sell seasonal products such as pine straw, wheat straw or annual plants. This shall be for no longer period of time than a two month duration. A special land use permit may be applied to exceed this period of time. 
e.	Required spaces. The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 
Type of Use	Parking Requirements
Accessory retail sales and services 	Number required for office or institutional, motel, hotel or high-rise apartment use to which it is accessory. If it is a permitted secondary use in a structure other than the primary use, one space shall be provided per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Adult entertainment establishments 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Agricultural produce stands 	Three spaces per stand. 
Ambulance services 	One space per employee, one space per ambulance parked on-site. 
Ambulance services, if accessory to hospitals or funeral homes 	One space per ambulance parked on-site. 
Amphitheaters 	One space per four seats in amphitheater. 
Amusement centers 	One space per 2,000 square feet (gross) of site area, with a minimum of 25 spaces required and a maximum of 100 spaces. 
Ancillary retail sales 	Number of spaces required for the primary use. 
Animal hospitals 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Appliance repair (major) 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Arcades 	N/A 
Asphalt plants 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Assembly halls 	One space per three seats for every person lawfully permitted within the assembly hall at one time. 
Athletic and health clubs 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Automobile truck and trailer lease and rental facilities (accessory use) 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal use) 	One space per employee, one space per 250 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Automotive and truck sales and service facilities 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Automotive paint and body repair shops 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Automotive parking lots or garages 	As may be required to serve the principal use (see specific principal use for requirement); for freestanding parking garage, not applicable. 
Automotive salvage and wrecking yards 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee, with a minimum of five spaces. 
Automotive storage yards and wrecker services 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee, with a minimum of five spaces. 
Automotive upholstery shops 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Aviation airports (private) 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per hanger or tiedown pad. 
Bank/financial institutions with drive-in establishments or automated transfer machines 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace, three additional spaces per automated transfer machine, five queue spaces per drive-in teller. 
Billiards and pool halls 	Two spaces per pool table. 
Biomedical waste transfer and disposal facilities 	One space per employee. 
Boat sales and service facilities 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee, one space per boat parked on-site. 
Breeding and boarding kennels 	One space per 250 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Building materials stores 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per vehicle parked on-site, one space per loading dock. 
Bus stations 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Bus stations for freight 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Carwashes 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, five queue spaces per service line. 
Cemeteries 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Chemical plants or storage facilities 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, and other places of worship 	One space per four seats in the principal place of worship, provided that the number of spaces thus required may be reduced by not more than 50 percent if the place of worship is located within 500 feet of any public parking lot or any commercial parking lot where sufficient spaces are available by permission of the owner without charge, during the time of services, to make up the additional spaces required. 
Clinics 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Clubs or lodges (noncommercial) 	One space per 250 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Coliseums, stadiums and convention centers (privately-owned) 	One space per three seats for every person lawfully permitted within the coliseum or stadium at one time, plus one space per employee. 
Colleges and universities (private), including, but not limited to, research or training facilities 	One space per 2,000 square feet of site area. 
Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Commercial indoor recreation uses 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Commercial outdoor recreation uses 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Community fairs 	One space per 2,000 square feet of site area. 
Community retail uses 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Composting plants 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Concrete plants 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Condominiums 	Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
Contractors (general, heavy or special) 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales 	Minimum of five spaces, one space per employee. 
Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Crematories 	One space per employee. 
Cultural facilities 	One space per 400 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Customary home occupations 	N/A 
Dairies 	One space per employee. 
Designated recycling collection locations 	Minimum of ten spaces. 
Drive-in theaters 	N/A 
Dry cleaning plants 	One space per employee. 
Eating and drinking establishments (including drive-in fast food restaurants) 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace (to include any patio area that houses tables or chairs). 
Electrical supply stores 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Emissions and inspection stations (for a period not to exceed five months) 	Minimum of two spaces, five queue spaces per bay, one space per employee. 
Executive golf courses 	Five spaces per hole, one space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Exterminating facilities (insect or rodent) 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Farm and garden supply stores 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Farm equipment stores and repair establishments 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Farmers' markets (fully enclosed) 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Field crops 	N/A 
Film developing and printing establishments 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Flea markets 	One space per 500 square feet of site area. 
Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls 	1.5 spaces per bedroom, one space per employee. 
Freight terminals 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Fruit trees, nuts and vegetables 	N/A 
Fuel and ice dealers 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Full service gasoline stations 	Three spaces per bay, one space per employee. 
Funeral homes 	One space per four seats in assembly room, one space per 250 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Golf courses, 18-hole regulation, public and private 	Five spaces per hole, one space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Golf courses, par 3 	Five spaces per hole, one space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Group homes 	One space per two residents. 
Halfway houses 	One space per 1.5 residents. 
Hazardous waste sites 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Heavy automotive repair establishments 	Three spaces per bay, one space per employee. 
Heavy manufacturing establishments 	One space per employee, one space per loading dock. 
Heavy repair services and trade stores 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Helicopter landing areas 	N/A 
High-rise apartments 	1.75 spaces per dwelling unit. 
Hospitals 	One space per two beds. 
Hotels 	1.25 spaces per unit. 1.0 spaces per unit with no restaurants, conference, banquet or meeting facilities. 
In-home day care 	N/A 
Landfills (private) 	One space per employee, with a minimum of five spaces. 
Laundry and dry cleaning pickup establishments 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, two queue spaces for each drive-in window. 
Light automotive repair establishments 	Three spaces per bay, one space per employee. 
Light manufacturing establishments 	One space per employee, one space per loading dock. 
Linen and diaper services 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Livestock, nondomestic and wild animals, and poultry 	N/A 
Livestock sales pavilions 	One space per 2,000 square feet of site area. 
Machine shops 	One space per employee. 
Mausoleums 	One space per employee. 
Medical and dental laboratories, provided that no chemicals are manufactured on-site 	One space per employee. 
Mining operations 	One space per employee. 
Motels 	1.25 spaces per unit. 1.0 spaces per unit with no restaurants, conference, banquet or meeting facilities. 
Motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle (ATV) and 3-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Multifamily dwelling units 	1.75 spaces per dwelling unit. 
Neighborhood retail uses 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Newspaper publishing facilities 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site, one space per loading dock. 
Nightclubs 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Nonautomotive repair service establishments 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Nonprofit riding stables 	One space per employee, one space per stable. 
Nonprofit (seasonal use) fishing lakes 	N/A 
Nursery schools and child day care centers 	Minimum of 20 spaces. 
Office service and supply establishments 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Offices not elsewhere classified 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Other consumer goods and services 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Other facilities for disposal of the deceased 	One space per employee. 
Other service establishments 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Outdoor commercial racing (motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, tractors and motorized vehicles) 	One space per two seats, one space per 3,000 square feet (gross) of site area. 
Outdoor golf driving ranges 	1.5 spaces per tee, one space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace for pro shop or clubhouse. 
Overnight travel trailer parks 	N/A 
Parking for vehicles 	N/A 
Pawnshops 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Petroleum or bulk storage stations 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Photography studios 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Plumbing or heating equipment dealers 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Poultry hatcheries 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Printing, publishing and lithography establishments 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Private community centers 	One space per every person lawfully permitted within the assembly area at one time, plus one space per employee. In the absence of a designated assembly area, one space shall be provided per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Private parks 	One space per 3,000 square feet of site area. 
Private schools of general and special education 	Two spaces per classroom, one space per employee. 
Pro shops (accessory to driving ranges or golf courses) 	One space per 100 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Professional offices 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Radio and television stations 	One space per 285 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Radio, television and other communication towers and antennas 	N/A 
Rail stations 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Railroad car classification yards 	One space per employee. 
Railroad stations for freight 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Recreational grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses 	One space per 10,000 square feet of site area. 
Recycling drop-off centers 	Minimum of ten spaces. 
Research and development centers 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Research and testing laboratories 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Rest homes, personal care homes and convalescent homes 	One space per four beds. 
Reupholstery and furniture repair establishments 	One space per 250 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Roominghouses and boardinghouses 	One space per two residents. 
Sawmills (temporary) 	N/A 
Self-service laundry facilities 	One space per 200 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Self-service storage facilities 	Minimum of five spaces. 
Shelters (homeless) 	One space per employee. 
Signs and outdoor advertising facilities 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Single-family dwelling units (attached) 	Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
Single-family dwelling units (detached) 	Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
Studios and supplies 	One space per 250 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Taxi stands and taxi dispatching agencies 	N/A 
Telephone business offices 	N/A 
Temporary uses 	N/A 
Theaters 	One space per three seats per person lawfully permitted at one time. 
Tire retreading and recapping facilities 	One space per employee, one space per vehicle parked on-site. 
Townhouse dwelling units (attached) 	Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
Trailer salesrooms and sales lots 	One space per 500 square feet of site area. 
Transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities 	One space per employee. 
Truck terminals 	One space per employee. 
Two-family dwelling units 	Four spaces per dwelling unit (duplex). 
Utility facilities (private) 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per employee. 
Vending machine sales, service, rental or repair establishments 	One space per 500 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Vocational schools (commercial) 	One space per 2,000 square feet of site area. 
Warehouse and storage facilities 	One space per 2,000 square feet (net) of storage space, with a minimum of five spaces. 
Wholesale sales offices 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace. 
Wholesale trade and distribution facilities 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms 	One space per 300 square feet (net) of floorspace, one space per loading dock. 
Zoos 	One space per 3,000 square feet (gross) of site area. 

The mayor and council may, at its discretion, reduce the required parking spaces to such number as it deems adequate in instances where applicant reduces the impact on roads and traffic, and the impact associated with runoff by grading and creation of impervious surfaces, by incorporating and utilizing an active ride-sharing program through the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1985, § 22-172)
 
Sec. 48-199. Television, land mobile, communication, microwave and radio transmission antennas and towers over 35 feet in height.
Television, land mobile, communication, microwave and radio transmission antennas and towers shall be subject to the following: 
(1)	General provisions; applicability.
a.	The height limitations set forth in this chapter applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antennas which shall be governed by the special use permit procedure set forth in this chapter. 
b.	These standards shall only be applicable to antennas and towers in excess of 35 feet in height. 
c.	The mayor and council may consider for approval a site plan specific request which is in substantial conformance with the requirements listed in this section. 
d.	In considering applications under this section, it shall be the policy of the city to construe all exemptions from zoning under this chapter narrowly and, unless expressly exempted, to ensure that all proposals to construct television, land mobile, communication, cellular, PCS, wireless communication, microwave and radio transmission towers, antennas and other facilities conform to the requirements set forth herein. 
(2)	Special use permit required. A special land use permit shall be required for all television, land mobile, communication microwave and radio transmission antennas and towers. An application to place any such facilities on a tower or other facilities constructed, or to be constructed, pursuant to the exemption set forth in section 48-3(2) shall be considered as though the applicant were seeking to build not only the new facilities to be constructed, but also the tower or other facilities that were or are to be built pursuant to that exemption. 
(3)	Application, design, location and safety requirements.
a.	Setback and separation. 
1.	All towers and antennas in excess of 70 feet must be set back a distance equal to the full height of the tower from any adjoining off-site residential structure or as safety concerns may dictate. 
2.	When proposed to be constructed upon parcels which are less than three acres, all towers shall be set back a distance equivalent to one-half of the tower's height as measured from the tower's base, to any public right-of-way or property boundary. When proposed to be constructed upon parcels which are three acres or greater, towers shall be set back a distance equivalent to height of the tower. However, the mayor and council may waive the requirements contained in this subsection if it finds that placement of the proposed tower at a different location on the parcel would mitigate any negative effects of the proposed tower upon the adjoining parcels. 
3.	In any R, or residential zoning district, any tower over 100-feet in height shall not be located within 1,500 feet from an existing or approved tower that is more than 100 feet in height. 
4.	Any property within the fall zone of a tower may not be developed for residential uses, or uses in which more than 25 people congregate. 
b.	Collocation of antennas or other facilities or equipment on existing towers that have already received special land use permits is required, so long as technically feasible and space is available on the existing towers to do so, and all towers should be designed to accommodate at least three users. 
c.	Accessory structures shall be limited to usages associated with operation of the antennas or towers and shall be appropriate in scale and intensity. 
d.	All towers and antennas shall be equipped with an anti-climbing device, such as a six-foot barbed strand fence or other appropriate devices to prevent unauthorized access. 
e.	All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission or such governing agency guidelines as may be established from time to time. All towers and antennas must be updated and brought into conformity with such standards and regulations within six months of their adoption. The failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or repermitting of the antenna or tower at the owner's expense. 
f.	At the time of application for building permit, the plans for tower or antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable codes. 
g.	Applicants are required to explore and fully utilize space on existing towers that have already received special land use permits and are required to bear an equitable share of capital, operating and other expenses in connection with such shared usage. 
h.	Residential sites are strongly disfavored for tower location. Use of platted lots in existing subdivisions is prohibited. In addition to all other criteria contained in this section, applicants proposing towers on residentially zoned parcels must demonstrate that there are no other residentially zoned but not residentially used, locations for the proposed tower, such as parks, schools, churches, and other institutional uses. 
i.	Towers and antennas are encouraged to be located at a height above the tree line no greater than necessary to reasonably accommodate the facilities. 
j.	In addition, all such towers and antennas shall be designed to minimize visual scenic impact when located on a hill. 
k.	Any tower approved under the provisions of this section which is not utilized by any communications service provider for any communications related purpose for a period of 24 consecutive months shall lose any privilege of special use previously granted by the mayor and council, and must thereafter be resubmitted for approval prior to use for any purpose not permitted by the existing zoning. 
l.	Other than amateur radio towers, no new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the mayor and council that there is an actual need for the proposed tower and that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. At the time of filing the application for the tower, the items listed below must be satisfactorily addressed by the applicant. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts and shall consist of more than mere conclusory statements. Evidence submitted in connection with this subsection shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: 
1.	That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirement. 
2.	That the existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's antenna and related equipment. 
3.	That the applicant's proposed antennas on the existing towers or structures, or the antennas on the existing towers or structures, would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
4.	That the cost of contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure are unreasonable. 
5.	That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render towers and structures unsuitable. 
6.	With respect to wireless communications towers, that there is a significant gap in wireless service in the geographic area under consideration, and the this gap is demonstrated by dropped call data and analysis and actual wireless coverage field tests performed in the geographic area under consideration. 
7.	That a lower tower height was considered but determined not to offer adequate coverage improvement. 
(i)	For each of the above, the applicant must submit an affidavit listing the existing towers which were considered, and ultimately rejected, by the applicant and provide a detailed explanation of why the existing towers are not usable. 
(ii)	Further, at the time of filing the application for a tower, the applicant shall provide a site plan, scaled elevation drawing of the proposed tower, information regarding topography, radio frequency engineer's report that details the need for the proposed tower (the radio frequency engineer's report shall address possible alternatives, such as lowering the height of the tower, collocating on another tower, and incorporating stealth towers such as monopines, slick sticks, and the like), and coverage zone and tower height requirements. The applicant shall provide documentation of all towers within a three mile radius of the proposed locations, to include the number of users approved to collocate and the number of users on the towers. The applicant shall be required to submit a written analysis to address the 15 considerations contained in section 48-36(e). and the following additional items: 
A.	The proximity of the tower to off-site residential structures and residential areas. 
B.	The tower's effect on property owners or potential purchasers of nearby or adjacent residentially zoned properties. 
C.	The height and species of surrounding trees and foliage. 
D.	The height of existing structures. 
E.	The aesthetic design of the tower in relation to reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness to the surrounding area. 
F.	The impact of the proposed tower upon the scenic views and visual quality of the area. The community affairs department shall be authorized to charge a fee to applicants in an amount set by the mayor and council designed to allow the city to retain services of one or more consultants, engineers, or other experts in the area of radio frequency engineering or other relevant fields to assist the city in analyzing the application. 
(4)	Nonconforming clause. Any existing tower or antenna location existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be considered a legal nonconforming tower and not required to meet the requirements of this section, subject to the other provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	Landscape buffer and screening requirement. Telecommunication tower equipment shall have a 15-foot screening buffer between the tower and the residentially zoned property which will be subject to city staff approval. Required buffers may be included within required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Additionally, necessary private utilities or access drives may be allowed through, over or across a landscaped buffer. Any such uses which are proposed through, over or across a designated, undisturbed buffer must be approved pursuant to an original site plan or site plan modification. 
a.	Objectives. The landscape screening buffer required by this section shall be implemented in connection with a permitted project and shall address the following objectives: 
1.	Screening to enhance aesthetic appeal; 
2.	Control or direction of vehicular and pedestrian movement; 
3.	Reduction of glare; 
4.	Buffering of noise; and 
5.	Establishment of privacy. 
b.	Standards. The landscape screening buffer required by this section is subject to review and approval by city staff in accordance with the following standards: 
1.	Plantings are to be a mix of rows of evergreen trees and shrubs, deciduous trees and taller evergreen trees. 
2.	Species are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for the design situation. 
3.	Unless public safety concerns dictate otherwise, buffers should provide a maximum visual barrier. 
4.	The minimum height of plant materials at installation is to be five feet for trees. 
5.	Fencing or walls are to be a minimum of six feet in height as approved by city staff. 
6.	Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by the city subject to review and approval of city staff. 
7.	Buffers shall be regularly maintained by the property owners to ensure that the objectives and standards of this section are met. 
8.	When topography and existing conditions allow, the required landscape buffer should be an undisturbed buffer; provided, however, the buffer may be crossed by an access drive as shown on the site plan or necessary utilities. 
9.	Any appeals from a determination by city staff regarding the landscape buffer shall be to the board of variance and zoning appeals. 
(6)	Exemptions.
a.	A single antenna under 70 feet in height owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator shall be exempted from the requirements of this section. However, the owner or operator of such antenna shall be required to comply with all applicable city, state and federal building codes. 
b.	Roof antennas on nonresidential structures are exempted from the requirements of this section, except that such antennas shall meet or exceed FAA and FCC standards. Subsection (4) of this section shall also apply to roof antennas on nonresidential structures. Such nonresidential structures shall include signs, light poles, water towers and other such suitable freestanding structures as may be located throughout the city. Antenna placement above the height of the structure utilized shall be limited to 20 feet. Placement of antennas or other communications equipment on any legal nonconforming use shall provide no vested right for continued use of the site should the nonconforming use cease. 
c.	Placement of antennas or other facilities or transmission equipment on existing, towers that have already obtained a special land use permit, as well as on towers that are covered by subsection (4) of this section, shall be exempted from the requirements of this section so long as the structure or height of such existing tower is not altered. The building official or his designee shall be authorized to grant administrative approval to site plan amendments necessitated by the placement of such additional equipment in previously approved equipment compounds. All requirements of subsection (5)b of this section shall apply to any site plan so amended. This exemption shall not apply to applications seeking placement of antennas or other facilities or transmission equipment on towers constructed pursuant to the exemption set forth in section 48-3(2). 
(Code 1985, § 22-173)
 
Sec. 48-200. Satellite television antennas and dishes and other receiving antennas.
No antenna or satellite television antenna or dish shall be erected, constructed, maintained or operated, except in conformance with the following regulations: 
(1)	Location.
a.	In any commercial, industrial or multifamily residential district, satellite television antennas or other antennas may be located, subject to applicable setbacks, anywhere on the lot or buildings thereon. 
b.	In a noncommercial or single-family district, subject to the provisions contained in this section, such antenna shall be located only to the rear of any principal structure. If usable satellite or communication signals cannot be obtained from the rear location, the antenna may be located in the side yard, subject to applicable setbacks. 
c.	If usable satellite or communication signals cannot be received by locating the antenna in the rear or to the side of the principal structure, such antenna may be placed in the front yard or on the roof of the dwelling structure, provided that a satellite reception permit is obtained prior to such installation. Such permit shall be issued upon a showing by the applicant that usable satellite signals are not receivable from any location on the property other than the location selected by the applicant. A satellite reception permit shall not be required for installations complying with subsections (2)a. and (2)b. of this section. 
(2)	Size.
a.	In a noncommercial or single-family district, a satellite television antenna or other antenna shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter, and a ground-mounted satellite television antenna or other antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height, including any platform or structure upon which the antenna is mounted or affixed. 
b.	Radio antennas shall not exceed 35 feet in height without compliance with the standards contained in section 48-199. 
c.	If usable satellite signals cannot be obtained from an antenna installed in compliance with the height limitation imposed by subsection (3)a. of this section, such antenna may be installed at a greater height, provided that a satellite reception permit is obtained prior to such installation. Such permit shall be issued upon a showing by the applicant that installation at a height greater than 20 feet is necessary for the reception of usable satellite signals. A satellite reception permit shall not be required for installations complying with subsection (3)a. of this section. 
d.	Except in a commercial, industrial or multifamily residential district, satellite television antennas or other antennas shall be located and designed to screen and reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from public streets. 
e.	Antennas shall meet all manufacturer's specifications, be on noncombustible and corrosion-resistant material, and be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner. 
f.	Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning. 
(Code 1985, § 22-174)
 
Sec. 48-201. Erection, installation and use of factory-built buildings and dwelling units and manufactured homes.
(a)	Class I manufactured homes.
(1)	Zoning. No manufactured home, Class I, shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in the city, except one zoned MHP or MHP/S or on a site for which a land use permit for such use been issued by the city, except that such units may be located for sale upon a site properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity. 
(2)	Notification to purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the zoning requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section, and this notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser at the time of any sale that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller for a minimum of three years from the date of sale and shall be produced for inspection by the city at any time during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays established by the city, through the community affairs department, upon request by the city for inspection. 
(b)	Class II manufactured homes.
(1)	Zoning and permits. No manufactured home of this class shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in the city, except one zoned MHP or MHPS or on a site for which a land use permit for such use has been obtained from the city (except that such units may be located for sale upon property properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity), unless the following requirements are met: 
a.	An application shall be filed with the city, through the community affairs department, for a permit from the mayor and council to allow such installation, use and occupancy for single-family purposes on any site zoned for single-family use, and a permit must be obtained prior to transportation to such site. Such application shall be on forms specified by the city and shall include such information as is reasonably necessary for evaluation of the application. 
b.	The following, as a minimum, shall be filed with the application: 
1.	A complete set of design plans as approved by SSBCCI, which should also include a drawing depicting each elevation of the exterior appearance of the unit. 
2.	A plat of the proposed site prepared by a registered surveyor showing, at a minimum, the exterior boundaries of the site, proposed location of the unit upon the site, and side, front and rear setbacks of the unit as proposed to be located, as measured from the exterior boundaries of the lot. 
3.	A fee in an amount determined by the mayor and council and on file in the office of community affairs. 
4.	A certificate from an inspector certifying that the unit was manufactured in accordance with the SSBCCI approved plans and the building codes in effect for the city at the time of filing the application for a permit, for example, building, heating and air conditioning, plumbing, electrical or other codes. 
c.	The permit required in this subsection shall be in addition to all other permits or requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
d.	No action on a request for permit shall be considered by the mayor and council until a sign is posted on the proposed site for a period of not less than ten days stating the requested action and the date, time and place for the hearing, and a hearing is conducted by the mayor and council. 
e.	No such permit shall be granted unless the unit, when completely installed as a single-family dwelling unit, will be compatible with the adjacent and surrounding area, especially in size, exterior appearance, front, rear and side setbacks, and will have no adverse effect upon the value of adjacent property and the surrounding area and will not otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city. No unit shall be installed upon any site unless and until any permit required in this section is granted and unless and until all permits for any on-site work to be performed (such as site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the city. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the city, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections required for on-site work. Such fees shall not exceed the amount charged for similar inspections and permits on conventionally built structures. 
f.	In addition to obtaining the permit required by this subsection, and prior to occupancy, every such unit which is installed shall be installed on a permanent foundation, which is permanently enclosed, and shall have all wheels, axles and hitches removed. 
g.	No unit shall be installed upon any lot or parcel of land which forms a part of a platted subdivision for which a plat has been approved by the city and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(2)	Notification to purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the requirements of zoning or the necessity to obtain a permit as set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser at the time of closing that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller and subject to inspection in the same manner as such statements are required to be retained for Class I units. 
(c)	Industrialized buildings.
(1)	Permits required. No industrialized building shall be installed upon any site unless and until all permits for any on-site work to be performed (such as site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the city. 
(2)	Permit fees. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the city, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections or permits on conventionally built structures. 
(3)	Insignia requirements. No industrialized building shall be installed or occupied in the city unless it bears an insignia of the department of community affairs of the state indicating state approval pursuant to the acts of the general assembly. 
(4)	Zoning. No industrialized building shall be erected upon any site in the city, or used for any purpose, unless the site is properly zoned for the intended use or a land use permit has been obtained for the intended use, and unless all other requirements of zoning (setback requirement, building size, etc.) and other ordinances of the city are met which are applicable to the zoning classification for the site or for the installation. 
(5)	Applicability of city regulations. This section does not eliminate the necessity of complying with any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city which relates to matters addressed, investigated and approved by the state through its department of community affairs resulting in the issuance of its insignia. 
(6)	Notification to purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of any industrialized building to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the requirements of this subsection. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each at the time of completion of a sale, that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained and open for inspection the same as for a manufactured home, Class I, as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)	Minimum square footage per occupant. Each mobile home must consist of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family (as defined in section 48-1) and two or fewer persons who are not family members. 
(1)	A mobile home may be occupied only by a family and up to two persons who are not family members. 
(2)	A mobile home shall have an interior bathroom and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed. 
(3)	A mobile home shall have at least 250 square feet of total square footage (as determined in the records maintained by the Cobb County tax assessor) per each adult occupant. 
(4)	No more than one vehicle per 250 square feet of total square footage may be parked regularly overnight at or within a paved parking area as required by the MHP and MHP/S zoning districts. The term "regularly" means a majority of nights in any 21-day period. Exceptions to this subsection may be considered as part of a land use permit processed in accordance with section 48-35. 
(e)	Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by loss of the business license of any seller. In addition, any manufactured home or industrialized building erected, constructed, parked, occupied or used in violation of the terms of this section shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued, and such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this state, and the industrialized building or manufactured home shall be instantly removed from the site. In addition, the terms of this section may be enforced by the city, or proper city authority authorized by the mayor and council, by injunction or otherwise. This right to injunctive relief is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the rights of any resident, property owner or other person regarding enforcement of this section or of such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the city in pursuance of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 22-178)
 
Sec. 48-202. Self-service storage facilities.
(a)	Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for use, site development, construction and placement of self-service storage facilities and allow service convenience that satisfies the needs of the citizens of the city. Self-service storage facilities shall be permitted within the light industrial and heavy industrial classification. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dead storage means storage of goods partly not in use and not associated with any principal commercial or manufactory use. 
Self-service storage facility means a fully enclosed facility containing independent bays, which are leased to individuals exclusively for dead storage of goods or personal property. 
(c)	General regulations.
(1)	Use limitations. No wholesale or retail sales are permitted. A self-service storage facility included within a planned industrial development shall have a minimum of one acre devoted exclusively for such use. The only commercial activities permitted exclusively on the site of a self-service storage facility shall be rental of storage bays and pickup and delivery of goods or property in dead storage. Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate or process goods, to service or repair vehicles, boats, small engines or electrical equipment, or to conduct similar repair activities, to conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind, to rehearse or practice utilizing band instruments, or for conversion to an apartment or dwelling unit, or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activities on the site. 
(2)	Security quarters. A residential quarters for security purposes may be established on the site. 
(3)	Fencing. The self-service storage facility shall be enclosed by a fence or wall a minimum of six feet in height. The fence or wall shall be constructed of either brick, stone, masonry units, wood, chain link, cyclone or other similar materials to be approved by the building official or his designee. The fence or wall shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the side and rear property lines. Fences and walls shall adhere to the required front yard setback. This requirement will be inapplicable should the facility comply with subsections (f)(6)a and b of this section. 
(4)	Storage bays not to be used as legal address. Individual storage bays within a self-service storage facility shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal address in order to obtain an occupational license or any other governmental permit or licenses to do business. 
(5)	Prohibited storage. Except as provided in this section, all property stored on the site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited. 
(6)	Minimum lot size. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the minimum lot size for a self-service storage facility shall be one acre. 
(7)	Building setbacks.
a.	The front setback shall be: 
1.	50 feet on arterial streets. 
2.	40 feet on major or minor collector streets. 
3.	40 feet on local nonresidential streets. 
b.	The side setback shall be: 
1.	20 feet adjacent to residential and O&I zoned property. 
2.	Ten feet on the side where all doors face internally adjacent to commercial or industrial zoned property. 
c.	The rear setback shall be 30 feet. 
(8)	Access. A self-service storage facility shall be located on a lot that gains access to a local nonresidential, major collector or arterial street as defined in the major thoroughfare plan. 
(9)	Outside storage. Open storage of recreational vehicles and dry storage of pleasure boats of the type customarily maintained by private individuals for their personal use shall be permitted within a self-service storage facility provided the following conditions are met: 
a.	Such storage shall take place only within a designated area. The area so designated shall be clearly delineated upon the site plan submitted for approval by the mayor and council when applying for a special land use permit. 
b.	The storage area shall not exceed 25 percent of the total buildable area of the site. 
c.	The storage area shall be entirely screened from view from adjacent residential and office areas and public streets by a building or by the installation of a six- or eight-foot-high wall or fence. If existing vegetation or topography provides the required screening, then this wall or fence requirement may be eliminated upon approval by the building official or his designee. 
d.	Vehicles shall not be stored within the area set aside for minimum building setbacks. 
e.	No vehicle maintenance, washing or repair shall be permitted on-site. Pleasure boats stored on-site shall be stored upon wheeled trailers. No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on-site. 
(d)	Development regulations.
(1)	Separation between storage buildings. If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum ten-foot separation between individual buildings. Buildings shall be situated or screened so that overhead access doors are not visible from public roads or residentially or office and institutionally zoned property. 
(2)	Maximum bay size. The maximum size of a storage bay shall be 450 square feet. 
(3)	Maximum building height. With the exception of the structure used for security quarters, the maximum height of a self-service storage facility shall be one story unless additional stories are approved by the mayor and council upon issuance of the special land use permit. The height of the building shall not exceed 20 feet. Roof-mounted air conditioning and other equipment, if utilized, shall be screened from view. The combined height of the building and the parapet wall shall not exceed 25 feet. All self-service storage facility shall utilize gable roofs with not less than a two and 12 slope. 
(4)	Exterior architectural treatment. The exterior facade of all structures shall receive uniform architectural treatment, to be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(e)	Parking requirements.
(1)	Generally. Designated customer parking is not required; however, a minimum of five parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the facility's leasing office, if a leasing office is located on-site. 
(2)	Interior parking. Interior parking shall be provided in the form of aisle ways adjacent to the storage bays. These aisle ways may be used for both circulation of traffic and user parking while using the storage bays. The minimum width of these aisle ways shall be as follows: 
a.	If aisle ways permit two-way traffic, minimum width is 24 feet. 
b.	If aisle ways permit only one-way traffic, minimum width is 20 feet. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the traffic flow patterns in the aisle ways shall be clearly marked. Parking shall consist, at a minimum, of the use of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows. In order to ensure appropriate access and circulation by emergency vehicles and equipment, the turning radii of the aisle ways shall be approved by city staff and the fire marshal at the time of plan review. 
(f)	Landscape requirements. A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted with the development plans at the time of plan review for approval. Landscaping shall be provided in the areas between the property lines and the required fencing. This area shall be designated as a perimeter landscape strip. Landscaping shall be designed, placed and maintained in such a manner not to interfere with traffic visibility. A landscape strip of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided along all street frontages. The side and rear yard setbacks shall remain in their natural state or be re-landscaped when the self-service storage facility adjoins residentially or office and institutionally zoned property. If the existing vegetation is inadequate to buffer adjoining office and institution or residential development, an eight-foot-high wall shall be installed along interior property lines and street setbacks. The following minimum planting requirements shall apply as follows and shall supersede the landscape buffer and screening requirements of the GC zoning districts: 
(1)	A minimum of one tree shall be planted for each 20 feet of perimeter landscape strip. 
(2)	Immediately upon planting, trees shall be a minimum of ten feet in height. 
(3)	The provisions outlined in subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section do not negate the requirements outlined within the city tree preservation and replacement ordinance, or any additional requirements that may be required by the mayor and council. 
(4)	If a hedge is to be installed in the perimeter landscape strip, the hedge shall be 24 inches in height upon planting, with the material planted every 24 inches on center. All planting shall be maintained in good condition by the property owner. 
(5)	If the perimeter landscape strip is to remain undisturbed or natural, utilizing existing vegetation, then the requirements of subsections (f)(1) through (4) of this section can be eliminated, except for the landscape plan. The landscape plan shall indicate the limits of the perimeter landscape strip. 
(6)	In the absence of adequate vegetation, in addition to a perimeter landscape strip, an eight-foot-high wall is to be constructed between a residential or office and institutional property line and the storage bays. The wall may be omitted along that portion of the perimeter landscape strip when all the following are met: 
a.	The exterior facades of the storage buildings present an unbroken, wall-like appearance when seen from adjacent residential or office and institutional properties or rights-of-way. Storage bay doors shall not face towards adjacent residential or office and institutional properties or rights-of-way. This shall not prevent the installation of fire access doors, if mandated by the fire marshal. 
b.	The exterior facades of separate storage buildings are joined by walls to give appearance of structural continuity. 
c.	The resulting area between the outer face of the buildings and the property line or right-of-way is maintained and appropriately planted as a landscaped buffer utilizing berms, plantings and existing vegetation and approved by the building official or his designee. 
d.	There are no aisle ways or other vehicle access ways located in the area between the building and adjacent residential or office and institutional property lines or rights-of-way. 
(g)	Dumpsters and trash receptacles. Dumpsters and trash receptacles shall be located where they are not visible from adjacent residentially zoned properties, and adequately screened from view from all other adjacent properties and streets. Dumpster locations are to be approved by the staff during the plan review process. 
(h)	Signage.
(1)	Maximum number. One freestanding sign shall be allowed for each lot frontage on which a self-service storage facility has access to a public dedicated street. In addition, one flat wall-mounted sign may be utilized. 
(2)	Maximum height. The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(3)	Maximum sign area. The maximum total sign structure area for a freestanding or wall-mounted sign shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
(4)	Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited on the site: 
a.	Off-premises outdoor advertising signs. 
b.	Signs placed on the doors of individual storage bays. 
c.	Roof-mounted signs. 
Signs attached to a required wall or fence are also prohibited, but may be approved by the building official or his designee. 
(i)	Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lights shall be shielded to ensure that light and glare are limited to the premises and are directed away from adjacent properties. Lights shall be low intensity. If a self-service storage facility abuts a residentially zoned property, outdoor lighting shall be limited to a maximum height of 15 feet. 
(j)	Use of loudspeakers. No exterior loudspeakers or paging equipment shall be permitted on the site. 
(Code 1985, § 22-179)
 
Sec. 48-203. Automobile and scrap salvage yards and scrap metal processing.
Automobile and scrap salvage yards may be permitted in the HI (heavy industrial) zoning district, but only after application has been made for a special use permit and the permit has been granted by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1985, § 22-180)
 
Sec. 48-204. Landscape enhancement strip.
(a)	In all nonresidential zoning districts, no vehicular use areas shall be constructed adjacent to a public street, publicly approved street, or publicly maintained street without a landscape enhancement strip. For the purposes of this section, a vehicular use area shall be defined as a parking lot with more than five parking spaces, a vehicular drive running parallel to the street or a loading dock area. 
(b)	The landscape enhancement strip will extend along the entire road frontage, except for approved access drives and shall extend from the right-of-way line into the property a distance of eight feet. 
(c)	The purpose of this strip is to enhance the landscape between the right-of-way and the vehicular use areas from the public streets. The strip may only include trees required to be planted to meet tree ordinance street yard requirements, evergreen shrubs, grasses, berms and the combination of such, except for the following exemptions: 
(1)	Vehicular access drives placed approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way; 
(2)	Foot and bicycle paths; 
(3)	Walls and fences less than six feet in height; 
(4)	Landscaping sculpture, lighting fixtures, trellises and arbors; 
(5)	Utility transformers; 
(6)	Signage; 
(7)	Public utilities, including stormwater detention facilities, provided that they are placed approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way. After installation, the landscape enhancement strip shall be restored. Where existing lines or planned lines/utilities must run parallel to the right-of-way, an equivalent amount of landscape enhancement strip may be required beyond the eight feet. To the extent possible, such lines should be consolidated with vehicular access routes. If stormwater detention facilities must be located within the landscape enhancement strip, an equivalent amount of landscape enhancement strip may be required beyond the eight feet. 
(d)	All plantings, berms and walls must meet state department of transportation or city standards for sight distances, irrigation and right-of-way obstructions. All standards for planting in a public easement apply as well. A corridor through the plantings must be incorporated in the design between a fire hydrant and the building. 
(e)	The redevelopment of a site utilizing all or parts of an existing building shall not be required to meet the above landscape enhancement strip standards, except as follows: 
(1)	When the orientation of the building changes to face another street frontage. 
(2)	When new loading docks are proposed. 
(3)	When new parking or drives are proposed. 
(f)	Existing vegetation which is preserved may be applied toward meeting the intent of this section with the approval of the building official or his designee. The landscape enhancement plan shall be included with the civil plans submitted for land disturbance permit review. The plan shall include the following: 
(1)	The, type, surveyed location, trunk diameter and critical root zone of any existing trees and the type, location and crown diameter of any existing shrubs that are proposed to be preserved. 
(2)	The type, location and size of all street yard trees to be planted per development standards. 
(3)	The type, location and size of all shrubs, grasses, berms, etc., to be planted. 
The owner/developer of the property shall provide performance or maintenance surety for materials in this landscape enhancement strip. After the prescribed developer maintenance period, it shall be the responsibility of the landowner to maintain and replace as needed all plant materials in the street buffer. The landowner shall also keep the area free of trash and debris. 
(Code 1985, § 22-182)
 
Sec. 48-205. Timed parking.
(a)	Business district. No vehicle shall remain parked on any street within the business district within the city's corporate limits for longer than 12 hours at a time. This does not apply to time-limit parking. 
(b)	Time limit parking. No vehicle shall park any longer than the posted time on the signs indicating the length of time allowed to park. 
(Code 1985, § 18-7.8)
 
Sec. 48-206. Business district.
All businesses must have either concrete or asphalt parking. No vehicle will be allowed to park on grass or gravel. 
(Code 1985, § 18-7.9)
 
Secs. 48-207—48-235. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS
 
Sec. 48-236. Purposes.
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)	Provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)	Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(4)	Permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)	Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)	Promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the city. 
(7)	Promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)	Encourage interaction in the city by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)	Encourage street designs that reduces traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)	Promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)	Conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)	Preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(1), § 5-87)
 
Sec. 48-237. Ownership of development site.
The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(1), § 5-88(b))
 
Sec. 48-238. Housing density determination.
The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
(1)	Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.	Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.	The 100-year floodplain; 
c.	Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.	Wetlands that meet the definition of the United States Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.	Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)	Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(1), § 5-88(c))
 
Sec. 48-239. Application requirements.
(a)	Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
(1)	Property boundaries; 
(2)	All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)	Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
(4)	All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 48-240; 
(5)	General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)	General soil types; 
(7)	The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)	Existing roads and structures; and 
(9)	Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)	Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 48-241, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)	Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 48-240 shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)	Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the city development standards. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(1), § 5-89)
 
Sec. 48-240. Open space.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Open space means the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)	Standards to determine open space.
(1)	The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)	The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.	The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.	Buffer zones of at least 75-foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.	Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.	Wetlands that meet the definition used by the United States Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act; 
e.	Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.	Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)	The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.	Important historic sites; 
b.	Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.	Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight-inches-caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.	Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.	Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.	Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)	Aboveground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)	At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)	The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)	Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)	Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)	Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)	Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)	Passive recreation areas; 
(5)	Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)	Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)	Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)	Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)	Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)	Prohibited uses of open space.
(1)	Golf courses; 
(2)	Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)	Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(4)	Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)	Ownership and management of open space.
(1)	Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)	Management plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities (plan) that: 
a.	Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.	Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.	Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the city; and 
d.	Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)	Failure to maintain open space. In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners' association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners' association and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(f)	Legal instrument for permanent protection.
(1)	The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.	A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.	A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
2.	A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement; 
b.	A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.	An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city. 
(2)	The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. of 3-1-2004(1), § 5-90)

